Tuesday, 26 April 2005

Parliament met at 2.42 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: I want to welcome the First Deputy Prime Minister, Gen. Moses Ali.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER
QUESTION 19/05 TO THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT

2.44
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): “The Electricity Regulatory Authority recently approved the increase of tariffs for domestic use of power from Shs 171.40 to Shs 212.50 per unit. In light of the above facts:

(a) Will the Minister tell the nation why such a step has been taken before the electricity tariff petition report, which is expected to address the issue, has been presented in Parliament?

(b) When does the Minister intend to amend the Electricity Act 1999 so as to address the issue of increased consumer involvement in the determination of tariffs?

(c) Why is Uganda’s electricity tariff rate the highest in East Africa?” 

2.45
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Syda Bbumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, hon. Members of Parliament. It gives me great pleasure to respond to the questions, which have been raised by the hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, Member of Parliament, Lubaga South. My response is as follows: 

The utility companies make annual applications to the Electricity Regulatory Authority, which is the body mandated to review the tariff and approve them. They make applications for renewal of their licenses, as their licenses are valid for only one year, so every year the regulator looks at the tariff. The applications, among other things, detail out the plans, which the companies have for the sector development for the following year. These plans have revenue requirement implications and, therefore, have a bearing on the tariff. Therefore, tariff reviews have to be carried out on an annual basis and have to be done early in the year to permit utility companies to operate. 

Mr Speaker, the tariff review in question had to take into account the prevailing situation in the power sector. In particular the review had to be effected on a timely basis to address the following: 

Because of the power shortage in the country, we suspended export of power to Kenya. We used to export power to Kenya at night during off peak hours, but because we want to accumulate whatever little water there is to generate power during the day, we have suspended this export.

Mr Speaker, the revenue requirements for the emergency thermo plant, which is being installed to address the current energy crisis, required an increase in the tariff because it uses diesel and we know that diesel prices have globally gone up.

The other consideration was the revenue requirements for the investments to be made by the new concessionaire into the distribution network. One of the problems we have today, apart from the inadequate generation, is that even the system is dilapidated. Because of that state of the system, we are losing a lot of energy. So, among the requirements for the concessionaire is to invest money to rehabilitate those systems.  

A combination of the above factors resulted into an upward review of the tariff. Regarding the emergency power supply, the Government has made interventions to pay for both the fixed capacity charge and the taxes on fuel to be used by the generators. This intervention has helped to reduce the level of the tariff increase.  

The second question was, “When does the Minister intend to amend the Electricity Act of 1999 so as to address the issue of increased consumer involvement in the determination of tariffs?” My response is as follows: 

Substantial work has been done in the process of reviewing the Electricity Act of 1999. A number of key stakeholders have been consulted and the report of the outcome of the consultation process has been compiled. The next stage would be to formulate a Bill using the outcome of the consultation process. We anticipate that this Bill will be ready in the new financial year. 

I also wish to point out that the review of the Electricity Act is not limited to consumer involvement in the tariff determination but rather on a broader spectrum of issues including the following: the tariff policy in general, the Electricity Disputes Tribunal, way leaves acquisition issues, the single buyer model, regulatory powers of the local authorities and other transitional issues.

I also wish to observe that the Electricity Act of 1999, under its present form, permits consumers and other interested parties to participate in the tariff setting process. Once the Electricity Regulatory Authority (ERA) gets a tariff application from the utility companies, the application is advertised in the public media and the public is invited to examine the application and also submit views on the application to ERA. The public has not been very active in responding to these media issues but the advertisement was made, objections and views were called for but the response was not as high as one would have expected.  

For example, the following process was followed in respect of the last tariff review:

During 2004 intensive discussions were carried out by the Electricity Regulatory Authority with ESKOM and Uganda Electricity Transmission Company on the problems caused by the deteriorating hydrological conditions at Jinja and the impact on effective capacity and hence the tariffs. 

In September 2004, ERA held a half-day consultative forum with Members of Parliament of the Sessional Committee on Natural Resources, to update them on the current limitations in capacity and the possible consequences on the tariff in the short-term. At the same time, Mr Speaker, the progress on negotiations with the concessionaire was highlighted and the fact that the application was imminent was also brought to the attention of that forum.  

During November 2004, license renewal applications were submitted by the utility companies to ERA for 2005 revenue requirements and tariff review. These were placed on the public desk for scrutiny, observation and comment by interested stakeholders.

On the 1st and 2nd of December 2004 advertisements were put out in the media calling upon interested stakeholders to submit their comments on the tariff applications. No responses were received and that invalidated the possibility of a public hearing.

I now wish to move on to the third question and respond as follows. Uganda’s electricity tariff is competitive compared to the tariffs of other countries within the region. Of course as government we would have wanted it to be much lower and we are working towards achieving that, but if you are looking at regional numbers, I would say they are competitive. For example, Uganda’s industrial tariff is the lowest in East Africa. Our industries, therefore, should take advantage of this, exploit it and produce competitively.

If I can give a short comparison of the tariffs; on the domestic tariff, Uganda is at 12.1c, Tanzania, which uses natural gas with minimal transport, is at 10.8c, the current revised tariff is 12.1c. Kenya, which has got the advantage of the coastline, is at 11.4c. The difference between Uganda and Kenya is only a few points, it is about 0.6c, but the Kenyans are in the process of revising the tariff upwards. There was an announcement from the Permanent Secretary of the Energy Ministry of Kenya - I think last week - that they are soon going to have a tariff review. In Rwanda the domestic tariff is at 16c, Uganda is at 12c, and they are in the process of revising it upwards. 

Mr Speaker, on the heavy industrial tariff, the kilowatt/hour for Uganda is 4.1c, Tanzania is at 5.2c and Kenya is 7.3c, so of the three, Uganda is lowest. 

On fixed charges for heavy industries Uganda is at US $17.5, Tanzania is the lowest at US $5.2 and Kenya is at US $45, which is two and a half times that of Uganda. 

On the fixed charges for light industries, Uganda is at US $11.5 and Kenya is at US $36.3. On the KVA demand charge, Uganda is at US $2.9; Tanzania is at US $2.7 and Kenya is twice that at US $5.95.  

Other tariff categories would also be comparatively lower if we were not to experience the current electricity supply deficit, which has necessitated the installation of the expensive thermal electricity. Thermal electricity is expensive. We have had to introduce it because of the serious economic problems we are going through by not having energy to run the industries and also to provide the basic social services.

The combined impact of the reasons I gave for raising the tariff have affected the tariff as outlined below:

The impact of suspension of exports to Kenya is that we used to export 11 percent of our hydropower to Kenya and we were getting 28 percent of the total revenue from that 11 percent because we were selling it at a higher tariff than the one at which the domestic consumers were accessing it. As a result we are losing Shs 20.4 billion. This revenue would have helped to reduce the rates for the local market but now it is not available. In fact, in the past that was the revenue that was helping us to keep the domestic tariff as low as it was.  

Mr Speaker, 50 megawatts of thermal generated power is being installed to meet part of the current deficit and we are told that early next week –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me; are you not combining two subjects? I know that was raised by hon. Bright Rwamirama. We should dispose of this question then we can come to that statement, which should have been made some time ago, at another time. Unfortunately, the person who raised it is not here, but let us separate the two.

MRS BBUMBA: Mr Speaker, thank you very much for the guidance. However, I was discussing the thermal plant in far as it impacts on the tariff because it is one of the main reasons why the tariff has gone up. But I have also prepared a statement to respond to the question, which was raised by hon. –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: When the issue of thermal generated power was raised, it was raised in the sense that you made a wrong choice; you should have had a cheaper arrangement than that. So, if you combine the two it will cause a problem. Let us deal with this question then we shall come to that issue.

MRS BBUMBA: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. I will now move to the next issue, which is affecting the tariff. The concessionaire is required to invest US $65 million to improve the current distribution system, which is dilapidated, and which is the cause of loss of energy. Currently we are losing almost 30 percent of the generated energy due to the dilapidated system. It is, therefore, important as we try to save on energy, to rehabilitate this system, and of course any investment has a cost. They have got to invest this money and there is certainly a cost to it.  

It is important to note the following in tariff setting:

The tariff is not only one number. It is a structure having different components, and looking at the numbers from the region some components have lower numbers, others have higher numbers, depending on government policy and the source of energy. So a straight comparison between countries can be misleading.

Secondly, it is important to take into account the energy resources. Tanzania is relying on natural gas for their thermal power generation. There are no huge transport costs associated with this resource; they are using a pipeline. Naturally the resultant tariff is much lower. And for Kenya, investment in their thermal plants, which were installed some time back, are fully depreciated, so they are no longer paying loans on those. Since Kenya is not as landlocked as Uganda is, their fuel transport costs are less than those to Uganda. 

Finally, it should be noted that the other regional countries are also in the process of reviewing the electricity tariffs. It is not only Uganda, which has been hit with the shortage of hydropower. Many of the African countries have been hit by the prolonged drought. But of course that is not to exonerate us, and that is why right now we are exploring alternative sources of energy so that we do not rely on hydro alone any more. We are exploring thermal, we are looking at the possibility of using municipal waste to generate power; we are developing smaller hydro stations to make sure that we do not have to repeat what we are going through now.

The situation we are having today is mainly because the new power plant, which was envisaged at Bujagali to come on stream in September 2004. The allocation of Bujagali has more advantages than the current Nalubale and Kiira Power Station because it is downstream. Even if the water level goes down, it would still get sufficient power to run it. Because of that we have resorted to more expensive power generation options like thermal, to meet part of the current deficit. In that regard, Mr Speaker and honourable members, I wish to advise that all us leaders should support government plans to deliver the least cost power supply options.
In conclusion, I want to say that yesterday the electricity transmission company signed an agreement with the thermal operator and we expect to start getting power from the thermal plant either late this week or early next week. By the end of May we expect that that plant will be in full operation. 

The effect of that on the day load shedding is that it is going to be cleared completely. From the end of May there will not be anymore day load shedding. That is a big advantage because of our industries, which bring in revenue for government, which employ our people and which give to the peasant in Nakaseke access to electricity. Even if he does not have a wire, through the bar of soap or the kilo of salt, he will now be able to operate full time.
On the evening load shedding, Mr Speaker, currently we are load shedding 120 megawatts in the evening, but we are introducing 55 megawatts –(Interruption)
MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Mr Speaker, aware that you have already warned the minister over talking about the thermal plant since it has not even started producing any single unit of electricity; and the minister has already told us the tariffs are high because of the high fuel prices particularly diesel, is she in order to confuse this House and continue confusing it when the thermal power has not taken off? At the same time she is telling us that one of the reasons why the prices have gone up in the tariffs is the high prices of fuel. Is she in order to continue confusing this House?
THE SPEAKER: What I can say is that this item was answering specific questions, and I rather advise that we concentrate on the questions. After that then if there is a general statement to be made on the policy, it can be made. So, let us concentrate on the questions. And those who are going to ask supplementary questions, do not debate. Just ask questions.
MRS BBUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. I would, therefore, now want to conclude by saying that the present tariff structure as approved by the Electricity Regulatory Authority is a realistic one given the circumstances in which we are operating. I call upon the honourable members to support the new tariff as we struggle to improve the performance of the power sector. I thank you.
THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. 
3.06
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Permit me to raise the following supplementary questions:
Is the minister aware that the management of the energy sector has a constitutional provision intended to direct her, namely that government shall implement an energy policy, which is in consonance with people’s living conditions as well as the environment? If so, is the Minister aware that the current speculative electricity tariff rise is a negation of the said objective and is, therefore, unconstitutional? That is my first supplementary question.
Would the minister like to admit that she has no answer for question No. 1? I was very attentive. If so, why? Is that not a sign of accepting defeat? Is she aware that in the absence of an answer that is why I am still on the bandwagon to organize a demonstration on the 13th of next month in accordance with Article 29(d) of the Constitution?

Mr Speaker, is the minister aware that the domestic tariff rise from Shs 94 in 2001 to the current one in four years, of Shs 212, is totally unacceptable? May I put it to her that the new tariff was a move to pre-empt the recommendations in the Electricity Tariff Report, which we are waiting for? What explanation has the minister put in front of us to tell us why she could encourage the Electricity Regulatory Authority to get the tariff raised before the Natural Resources Committee could deliver its report on the petition? This is a very serious matter. 

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, your question is not clear. Are you saying the Electricity Regulatory Authority approved the increase in tariffs? Do you want the minister tell the nation why a step has been taken before the electricity tariff petition report, which is expected to address the issue, has been presented? Do you want to say that the report has not been presented? 

MR LUKYAMUZI: Yes, Mr Speaker, the report has not been presented.

THE SPEAKER: Therefore you are saying that the minister should not perform her functions because of a pending report?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Yes, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. (Laughter)

MR LUKYAMUZI: I am saying so, Mr Speaker. Much as that sector is autonomous, even Makerere University is autonomous but we recently had to intervene over the fees rise. We said, “No, we are the spokespersons of -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But how long will this report take before it is presented?

MR LUKYAMUZI: This report has taken almost a year; we have been waiting.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. 

MR LUKYAMUZI: So, there is a justified case for the presentation. 

As I conclude my questions, why would the minister expect the public to turn up for the public hearings she was talking about before a report on the petition has been received? They took trouble to walk on the street - numbering over 10,000 people demonstrating at the Parliament of Uganda – and they were assisted by an order that a report be written. The report was written, it has been waiting. How do you expect them to get courage to report at those meetings the minister was referring to? 

Finally –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: These should be supplementary questions arising from the answers.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Yes, I am concluding, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank you for giving me time to supplement. If Parliament could intervene over the rise of fees at Makerere University, why can it not do the same in the issues related to ERA over the tariffs? The minister has referred to –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honorable member, are you asking the minister to answer for Parliament?  

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, you know how concerned I am about this matter. I could even organise a demonstration if my constituents –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, honorable member, the question was a bit unfair. You said if Parliament intervened over the fees at Makerere University, then you asked the minister to answer for Parliament: “Why it is not intervening over this”? 

MR LUKYAMUZI: Absolutely so. 

Finally, the minister has referred to the stakeholders who are supposed to be consulted. Whom did she consult before carrying out the emergency energy rehabilitation programme? Why has she not consulted the Uganda Institute of Professional Engineers and the custodians of water, namely the Ministry of Water and Environment? We have not heard any mention of the water sector and yet they are supposed to know the ideology of the water, which generates electricity.  

And -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honorable member, we have to limit you.

MR LUKYAMUZI: This is the last question, Mr Speaker. What is UMEME? The minister has never come here to explain to us what UMEME is or who the main shareholders in UMEME are. Many people say that this is a speculative organization, which was recently founded –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honorable member, just ask, “Can you explain to us what UMEME is?”  You finish this and then we proceed to another question.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Can the minister explain to us what UMEME is? Does UMEME pay rent to the Uganda Government? If so, where does that money go? Can that money not be used to offset the high tariff? I need an answer. 

3.14
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (Bunyole County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the honorable minister for the attempt to answer the questions, but I would seek some clarification on the issues that she has raised. 

First of all, she has mentioned in her statement that the electricity tariff in Uganda is the cheapest in the region. However, I do not know whether the honorable minister also took trouble to find out about per capita income in the respective countries, because the per capita income impinges on the ability to pay. It might be cheaper but in comparative analysis to the per capita income you might find that people in Uganda are being subjected to a greater pain. I do not know whether you have done that study to find out what the reality is.  

The second one is, does Uganda still have a comparative advantage in the production of energy, especially the hydro electricity energy, in the region? And how does this comparative advantage, if it is still there, help the people of Uganda? How do we benefit from it?  

Finally, how does government look at electricity? Does it look at electricity as a commercial product that must be sold at the supply and demand price, using the economics? Is it not time for government to look at electricity as part of infrastructure that enhances production so that government directly invests in electricity like they do in the roads of Uganda? Honorable minister, can you let us seek a clarification on that? 

MR ARUMADRI: Mr Speaker, mine is a procedural matter. As we wait for a substantive statement from the honorable minister about the ever escalating fuel prices, I thought it would be prudent for the minister to also make a small statement about fuel prices - even in passing - because Ugandans are holding their breath. Every other day you do not know how much you are going to pay at the pump. That is my humble request. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: No, I would not encourage the minister to make a statement in passing in respect of a different subject from the subject in question.  

3.17
MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for her statement, but is she aware that we are being cheated by meter readers and they are part of the hiking tariffs? 

Coupled with that, is the minister aware that the poor infrastructure, the loss of electricity and the thefts are all billed to the customers of UMEME? That is one of the major factors in the increase of the tariffs, and I have got evidence on this. 

3.19
MR WILLIAM SITENDA-SEBALU (Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to know from the honourable minister whether the introduction of Umeme to replace the Uganda Electricity Distribution Company was done in good faith. Mr Speaker, we thought by the introduction of Umeme people would have peace of mind, but it seems right now Umeme is using estimates instead of getting the actual meter readings. I want to know why they are using estimates yet we have our meters in place. I thank you.

3.19
MR DAVID WAKIKONA (Manjiya County, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like the Minister to assure us that the method she has chosen for installing generation depending on fuel or diesel or whatever is much cheaper than it would have been to repair the generators, which are not functioning in Jinja, to increase the electricity supply.  Thank you.

3.20
MR PATRICK MWONDHA (Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Minister has said that one of the reasons for the increase in tariffs is to be able to take care of investments that are required to rehabilitate the distribution system. Do we pay for the investments in advance? Isn’t that speculative? I thought the concessionaire would have first put forward some money into the system and then billed us. But now they are asking us to pay well in advance. What money have they come with themselves? Have they only brought their passports? 

Hardly before these people could even unpack their baggage, they were already raising tariffs. So, who is actually investing? Do we need someone to come from South Africa to ask us to put up investment in our own system? We talk of thermal generation, but estimates put our geo-thermal potential at 450 megawatts. Wouldn’t it be cheaper for us to develop this geo-thermal potential? Thank you.

3.22
MS KIYINGI NAMUSOKE (Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Speaker I have –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But I advise that you should give one question because there are many of you. 

MS KIYINGI NAMUSOKE: I have two questions, and I want first of all to thank the hon. Minister for her answer. On page five, the last paragraph, the hon. Minister talks about the Bujagali Plant, which was supposed to give us electricity. I listened carefully and I noted that she missed out a sentence, which is very important. In the written document she says some leaders in the country frustrated this plan. 

I wish the hon. Minister could clarify who these leaders are because I know that this matter was discussed in the Sixth Parliament, and there was a lot of exchange of bad words. Now, when it appears in the Minister’s statement that some leaders in this country frustrated this plan and she conveniently, I should think, omits this statement in what she said, I am concerned. Therefore, I am seeking clarification from her whether she still owns this sentence or she is omitting it completely or she wants to explain to us who these leaders are.

My second question is, does the Minister agree or doesn’t she agree with the fact that we have different authorities and bodies handling electricity - We have the producer, the distributor, the regulator, and each of these bodies are depending on the electricity user to run their business, to service their service to us.  So, does the Minister agree or doesn’t she agree that, that in itself has led to an increase in electricity tariffs?  Thank you.

3.24
MR STEVEN BAMWANGA (Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The honourable Minister has said that the reason why the tariffs have gone up was because of the suspension of the export of power to Kenya, which required about UgShs 20.4 billion, and that because we are going to import electricity from Kenya at Uganda Shs 17.9 billion; this money will be raised from the consumers in Uganda. Does this mean that the economic market forces of demand and supply and the cost benefit analysis that goes with it was not considered? 

Assuming that we continued exporting power to Kenya and we got back the Uganda Shs 20.4 billion, wouldn’t we have been much better than having to import power from Kenya at Uganda Shs 17.9 billion?  Was there any economic analysis to see whether the benefits whether we continue importing or exporting? Does that make any economic sense?

Secondly, how sure are we that since power has been increased now after suspending our export of power to Kenya, which Kenya was using partly thermal generation and Uganda’s comparative advantage in hydropower generation, which I assume will be cheaper, when we bring in the installation of 50 megawatts, will the rates go lower or they will go up? If we add on power by thermal generation, which is supposed to be more expensive than hydropower generation, will that have any positive impact on the tariffs?  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, according to our rules we spend one hour on questions and we have another question to answer. Don’t you think the Minister should respond and then the matter be taken up –(Interjection)- we are going to deal with your question on the other one; it is separate from this.

3.26
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Syda Bbumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I would like to thank the colleagues, who have raised issues, comments and observations. I also thank hon. Lukyamuzi in a special way, especially for the supplementary questions.  But I would also like to point out that some of the questions he asked, I am not the appropriate party to respond to them. 

On why the report on the petition has not come to Parliament, I am also asking the same question; I am not responsible for bringing that report. I think he should ask the appropriate party for that. 

Mr Speaker, on the consultation, we consulted the relevant parties. You directed me not to discuss the thermal and I leave that out for discussion when I present my response to hon. Rwamirama’s question. He wanted to know who Umeme is.  Umeme is a Swahili word meaning electricity. But the concessionaire, who has taken over the distribution company, is a consortium between CDC GLOBEK of the United Kingdom with ESKOM of South Africa.

Mr Speaker, the response by the public to the advertisements: I do not think they had to wait for a petition to be here because they were requested to give their views on the applications, which had been made by the utility companies. So, I think the two are not really related.  

Moving to the questions raised by hon. Dombo -(Interruption)

MR ERESU: Can you allow me to give some clarification? Mr Speaker, as far as I know, when Uganda Electricity Board (UEB) was disbanded, ESKOM took over the generation. Now, the Minister is informing the House that a consortium of the distributors is Umeme, in which ESKOM is a shareholder; it is a part of it. Now the clarification I am seeking is, aren’t we gradually moving towards getting another UEB in place?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, it is wrong for the Minister to disassociate herself from a national outcry, which took place through a demonstration on tariffs. The clarification I am seeking is, how could she have got the courage to let Electricity Regulatory Authority (ERA) go ahead with determining new tariffs before hearing from the people through the petition report? That was my question. 

MRS BBUMBA: Mr Speaker, hon. Ken Lukyamuzi was a Member of the Sixth Parliament; he participated actively in the Natural Resources Committee and in the House here when we were enacting the Electricity Act. The Electricity Act under section 76 requires the regulator to review the tariff annually. The utility companies are supposed to submit their budget to the regulator annually, and the regulator is supposed to examine them, see whether their applications are appropriate or not, and approve or reject them. The Minister is not the one who encourages the regulator to review the tariff. But this is a requirement in the law, whose enactment hon. Ken Lukyamuzi participated effectively in.

Mr Speaker, on whether Government takes electricity as a commercial good, my answer is no; that is why from time to time Government borrows money to invest in the electricity sector. But of course our requirements are many and our borrowing limits are sometimes fixed, so we cannot borrow the money we need. That is why we have partially opened up the sector for private sector participation to come in with money to supplement what Government is putting in.

Mr Speaker, I did not say our tariff is the cheapest, but I said it is comparatively cheap. In quite a number of areas, it is cheaper than other countries and in some few areas, it is slightly higher. But the countries I examined here are almost in the same per capita GDP bracket.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, I am standing on a point of order. I have carried out a lot of research in the electricity sector in the East African region. It is not true that electricity in Uganda is relatively cheaper than any sector in East Africa. What is true is, electricity in Uganda is relatively higher, especially the domestic aspect of it and these are aspects, which are scientifically correct.  Otherwise, I did not refer to the sector of industry, say in Kenya or Tanzania. So, is it in order for the hon. Minister of Energy, who is supposed to be sufficiently well informed, to deceive the House that electricity in Uganda is relatively cheaper? It is not, and these are dimensions of science.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, many times people have been standing on a point of order when it is in order, but simply because he wants to halt the proceedings; point of procedure when there is no procedure; point of information when one is expressing opinion. It is not out of order for people to differ on the assessment of a situation, so a person not agreeing with your assessment or situation is not out of order. Proceed.

MRS BBUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. Mr Speaker, I appreciate the concerns raised by some Members on the efficiency of the utility companies. It is true that Umeme, who has been in operation for hardly a month has not yet had any impact, but that is expected. They took over a sector, which was in a very bad shape and they have been just settling in for one month.  So really, it would be over expecting to see clear results within one month. 

I would like to assure the honourable members that the reason why we brought in a private operator was to create efficiency and also to inject in more money to improve the system; and within a reasonable time, according to the requirement of the concession agreement, I am sure the efficiency will be created and it will be seen because Umeme is required to show efficiency within 12 months. The billing must go up, the collections must go up, and within 18 months the energy losses must be reduced by almost 50 percent. So, we have got the performance indicators in the agreement and we are going to monitor them according to that, and failure to fulfil them, there are severe penalties fixed in the concession agreement.

Mr Speaker, hon. Mwondha was asking; “Are we going to pay returns on investment or non-existing investment?” From the day Umeme took over, they were supposed to start rehabilitation of the system; and the tariff is revised once a year, it is examined once a year.  So, they are going to be investing throughout until they achieve the performance benchmarks, which have been set.

THE SPEAKER: I think, hon. Minister, the question was, yes, Umeme has come to invest; is it by collecting money from us to invest it or they have their own capital, which they invest and then bills us?  

MRS BBUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for that clarification. Umeme is coming with their money, but you know when an investor invests money there must be return on investment certainly –(Interjections)- why does he invest?  They are not on charity here, and the return on investment has been fixed below the generally acceptable rates between 10 and 14 percent. Normally return on investment in infrastructure projects is fixed at 25 percent.  

Mr Speaker, I want to wind up by responding to the issue, which was raised by hon. Sarah Kiyingi that some leaders participated in frustrating the Bujagali project. This is on record, the leaders were going through environmental groups and other lobbies, and through those the project was frustrated.  Mr Speaker, that is what I am saying –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, again the problem was, when you say leaders - she is a leader, I am a leader - is it an umbrella leadership, or there was some categories of leaders?  We want the details.

MRS BBUMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Mr Speaker, this is an umbrella leadership.  

Lastly, Mr Speaker, Members of Parliament on quite a number of occasions have expressed concern about the many parties participating in the sector and whether they do not have an impact on the tariff. Some of these are a result of the law. For example, the regulator was created through the law, to have an independent regulator policing the sector because the companies can no longer fix their tariffs without the approval of the Electricity Regulatory Authority. 

The Electricity Regulatory Authority also assists to link the public with utility companies, and their sources of revenue are well enumerated in the law. They get money from grants, and get allocations from the Consolidated Fund and other sources. 

Mr Speaker, whereas many bodies were apparently created, the cost of administration was substantially reduced. The labour force was reduced by over 40 percent, and these bodies are skeleton bodies. Some of them are transitional like the Uganda Electricity Board, which is handling residue issues, and the Uganda Electricity Distribution Company, which is handling the assets, which were not sold but concessioned; those departments are manned by less than ten people.  

So really, Mr Speaker, those numbers of companies have not created any extra burden to the electricity consumer. Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you and the honourable members for their contribution. I thank you.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, there are questions, which were asked, that were not answered. One of them was the question raised by hon. Mwondha. Mr Speaker, before Uganda Electricity Board was divested, tariffs were hiked up so that when the investors come in, they do not need to have to tussle with the public.  As we prepare for thermal, unfortunately we went for a very expensive option, tariffs are being raised, and hon. Mwondha was asking, is it an art that every time there is an anticipation of an investor you raise tariffs, and she did not answer it.

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, I raised an issue that when Uganda Electricity Board was disbanded, the transmission, generation and distribution were separated; and in generation we had ESKOM, but the Minister also mentioned that in the distribution there is Umeme in which there is also ESKOM. My question has been, are we not gradually moving back to create another monopoly like Uganda Electricity Board?  My question was not answered.  Mr Speaker, I seek further guidance as to whether this question is going to be answered or not.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are not going to start the session again on this question, but one person can be in two businesses under different names. You could have ESKOM in transmission, but ESKOM combines with another to deal with another business, this is what you should have concluded with. Yes it is there, but then it has formulated a company with another person to run a different business. There is nothing wrong about it, is there?

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, one of the questions that was asked by hon. Sarah Kiyingi was requiring the Minister to specifically name the leaders who frustrated the Bujagali project, because she has given this statement to this House. 

Mr Speaker, one of the senior leaders of this country is the President of Uganda, and we have heard him on many occasions working hard to ensure that Bujagali dam is built. Now, when we get a general statement from the Minister of Energy, which she is not willing to substantiate, we would rather that she either names the leaders and how they specifically undermined Bujagali dam, or she withdraws the statement from the Floor of this House.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think the reaction is that Members being leaders themselves, they are feeling embarrassed by lumping them together under one umbrella of people who undermined the process.  Are you in position or you may not be in position today to give us the details of the leaders that frustrated that project?  

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, my colleague asked about investment, and the Minister said that the investor has brought money. May we know how much money Umeme has brought?

MRS BBUMBA: Mr Speaker, I will start off with the last question. What I can say is that there are requirements under the concession agreement for Umeme to come with money. They are supposed to invest US$65 million in the distribution line.  As to how much they have in their pockets now, I do not know, but according to the agreement they are required to invest that amount of money.

THE SPEAKER: I think what you do, honorable minister, is to avail us with the document shortly and deposit it here for whoever wants to see to see it.

MRS BBUMBA: Mr Speaker, tariffs are revised once a year. It is like when anybody else is doing a budget; that is when the utility companies are submitting their budgets. So, we are not being speculative, we are basing these on the budget, which have been submitted.  

Mr Speaker, going back to the question of hon. Sarah Kiyingi, I would lay the list of some of the leaders on the Table here who participated in the frustration of the dam. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Rwamirama, yours is a different statement, it is not part of the question. So, let us exhaust the question then we can see what to do with the statement.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 20/05 TO THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS

3.45
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (Ngora County, Kumi): “Is the honourable minister aware that the officers and men of the Uganda Police Force and Uganda Prisons Services in the whole country are living in dangerously dilapidated houses/huts?

II) If so, what plans are in place to solve the crisis?

III) Is the Minister further aware that most Police Stations/Posts and Prisons in the country lack both transport and communication equipment, and how is the ministry addressing this problem?”

MR ELIJAH OKUPA: Mr Speaker, my constituents want to know whether I am on that list or not, so it is very important that they get to know whether I am on that list or not because this tantamount to economic sabotage.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this document belongs to you; you will have free access to it and then check.  

3.46
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Epetait, Member of Parliament, Ngora County, has asked the Minister of Internal Affairs a number of questions regarding the living and working conditions of the officers, men and women, of the Uganda Police Force and Uganda Prisons Service.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members the simple answer to these questions is, yes, the Minister is aware, and something is also being done to solve these problems. However, given the financial constraints that we have, we cannot move as fast as we would have wanted to do.  

Uganda Prison Service: 

Over the last three years, the Ministry has conducted the following studies:

• An Operational Needs Assessment was conducted in the year 2002. The main objective was to inform Government of the operational needs in prisons.  

• A census of prisoners in all Central Government prisons was conducted in august 2003, and in June 2004 we carried out a baseline survey on conditions in both Central and Local Government prisons. The objective of these exercises was to determine the state of living and working conditions in prisons and to identify areas that required immediate attention. The exercises also helped to identify possible areas of support from our development partners.  

• A baseline survey on conditions in both Central and Local Government prisons was conducted in June 2004; this was done so as to identify areas also of additional support.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the above-mentioned actions clearly indicate that the Ministry of Internal Affairs is indeed aware of the living and working conditions in prisons. This is why our policy statements for the previous years have always made reference to these problems. Our colleagues in the Ministry of Finance have picked up these issues. In the national budget framework paper for the financial years 2005/2006 - 2007/2008, construction and renovation of prisons is taken up as a key policy issue during financial year 2005/2006.

Mr Speaker, despite the financial constraints we have been able to do the following, and I will quote a few. We have constructed a low cost housing block of 10 two-roomed units at Kigo Prison. Two other similar blocks will be ready for roofing next month; plans to start construction of similar houses at Luzira are in progress.  

We have instituted efficiency saving measures whereby Prisons staff make bricks and Government contributes iron sheets, cement and other essential inputs. The construction, based on approved plans, is done by competent technical staff.  

We are also implementing a phased construction/renovation programme for prisoners’ accommodation, water and sanitation. So far, the following renovations have been completed: 

• Construction and equipping of eight female prison units in Kigo, Tororo, Bushenyi, Arua, Fort Portal, Jinja, Lira and Mbarara.  

• Reconstruction work has also been done in Masindi Prison, Masaka Prison, Mubende and Kotido prisons. 

• Namalu Prison is being renovated while the gravity water system is being worked on.

• Construction work on both Rukungiri and Apac prisons will start next month.  

• Rehabilitation of water and sanitation systems have been done in Kabale, Mbarara, Tororo, Luzira, Kigo and Mbale prisons.  

Uganda Prisons Service have recently acquired 17 mini trucks, one Isuzu bus and three 10-tonne Tata lorries. The mini trucks have been distributed throughout the country. 

Under the Justice, Law and Order Sector arrangement, the service plans to acquire four mini trucks each year. This, we hope, will help alleviate the problem of transport.

Mr Speaker, on transport and communication, the problem of taking prisoners to court when required is being handled. Uganda Prisons Service however, given the fact that we currently have 48 prison units under Central Government control, hon. Members will appreciate the fact that we still have a problem because of the fact that there are many prisons. We cannot at the moment adequately cover all these units the way we would have wanted to do.  I, however, want to take this opportunity to inform the House that during the financial year 2004/2005, we were able to get three HFB radios for upcountry remote stations.

Mr Speaker, honourable members will recall that I tabled the Prisons Bill in this House; the Sessional Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs is considering the Bill. The Bill seeks enactment of a new law that takes on board new developments in the Penal system and improves on the organization, administration and functions of the Uganda Prisons Service. One of the specific proposals is to bring Local Government prisons under the umbrella of Uganda Prisons Service. It is hoped, honourable members, that the enactment of this law will result in a better organised and better managed Prisons Service.

Mr Speaker, a few comments on the Uganda Police Force. Officers, men and women of the Uganda Police Force live and work under similar conditions as those of their colleagues working in prisons service. Similar action has also been taken to improve their working conditions. In the year 2001, a housing census in the police force was carried out. This was to support development of a medium term investment plan. The census revealed inadequacies in staff housing. This led to the institution of a programme under which new staff houses are being constructed while old ones are being repaired.  

To supplement the meagre resources provided through the budget, police management has instituted a number of measures intended to help alleviate the problem. These measures include the following:

1. Allocation of 70 per cent of the construction budget to barracks construction. This has been the case since the year 2001.

2. Building of permanent blockhouses at police district headquarters or stations, which do not have any accommodation. The intention is to ensure that in the long run, there will be some accommodation at all police district headquarters and stations. A minimum of four blockhouses, housing at least 32 junior officers at a station, are being built.

3. Carrying out major repairs, for example, re-roofing is being done in case of dilapidated barracks.

4. There are situations where there is no police land. In some of these cases, land has been bought. This has been the case in Busembatya, Kaberamaido, Soroti, Busia and Bushenyi. Funds permitting, construction of police facilities on this land will be done.

5. Community policing methods have been introduced. This encourages local communities to support the Police at the local level.  Successful implementation of this method will contribute to easing the accommodation problem.

6. We have a number of senior officers who reside in barracks and in Police pool houses. An arrangement whereby they pay for the accommodation has been instituted. The proceeds are used to set up unipots at police posts. So far 120 unipots have been bought using these resources. The unipots so acquired are distributed in the region by the respective regional police commanders.  

Implementation of these measures has yielded the following results: 

1. 18 accommodation blocks for 144 officers have been constructed at Ntinda, Ntungamo and Bundibugyo; Katakwi, Apac, Rakai, Busia and Mayuge are on the programme.

2. Some old barracks have been renovated, for example, the water and sewerage systems in Jinja, Masaka and Fort Portal have been worked on.  

3. Some local authorities have given land to the force. This has been the case in Hoima, Kamwenge, Kiboga, Kalangala, Katakwi, Sironko, Namasale, Dokolo et cetera.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, despite these achievements, the situation is still bad. We need more resources to get to a level where we will be comfortable.

On Police transport, Mr Speaker, the situation is not any better. In May 2002, an analysis was carried out; this analysis revealed the fact that at the time the force required 576 vehicles in order to operate effectively, Police then had only 265 vehicles, 105 in good condition and 160 requiring frequent repairs. To help alleviate the problem, the following measures were instituted: 

• Prioritising operational units’ transport needs, for example, for the highway and urban motorized patrols, district transport and transport for operational deployments.

• Purchase of mini-lorries for use in operational deployments.

• Purchase of motorcycles for rural operations at police stations, for example, for the CID and special branch work.

• Purchase of traffic highway patrol vehicles and motorcycles for speed control.

• Introduction of bicycles at police post level, for example, to do detective work and

• Encouragement of community policing methods.  

Mr Speaker, as a result of these measures, four mini-lorries of capacity 4.5 tonnes each were bought. In addition, 80 pick-ups have been purchased.  

Mr Speaker, the force is grateful to Parliament when Members of this august House contributed to the purchase of a vehicle when the Inspector General of Police appealed to the House for contributions. Parliament’s contribution went some way in helping alleviate this problem. Similarly, we thank the United States Government, who recently gave us 26 motorcycles and 120 bicycles; and Caltex company, which donated fully equipped four highway patrol vehicles to the force.

Regarding the issue of communications, government has provided the following facilities and, Mr Speaker, on page 12 there is a list of the facilities provided, which honourable members can easily look at up to the beginning of page 13. 

Mr Speaker, implementation of this programme has enabled us to equip 80 out of 116 police stations, and 218 police posts out of 917 with communication systems. In addition to the 116 police stations, 92 police stations have telephone lines, 10 have fax lines. Of the 917 police posts, only 13 have telephones.  

Honourable members, the Ministry of Internal Affairs is not happy with this picture of inadequate communication equipment to the force. Resources permitting, we intend to improve. We, therefore, call upon everybody to help the police so that the Police can help us.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, and in answer to hon. Epetait’s questions, the Minister of Internal Affairs is aware of the living and working conditions of officers, men and women of the Uganda Police Force and Uganda Prisons Service. However, given the financial constraints that we have, we cannot move as fast as we would have loved to do in order to solve these problems. I appeal for your continued support and I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Now I will limit it to just four questions.

4.05
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank, hon. Ndugu Ruhakana Rugunda, for coming up with these answers to the questions I raised. I would like to particularly thank him for being honest with himself –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Do not thank him, just put your questions, please.

DR EPETAIT: I have a few supplementary questions to rise. You have accepted that, yes, the officers, men and women in those forces are living in dilapidated houses and huts. May I now put it to you that in case a family of a police officer or prisons officer gets buried in rubble on account of staying in dilapidated house - because some of those houses really have such gaping holes that even a python could easily take cover in them. In case such a family is buried in such a house, who is going to be held responsible?  

Two; I would also like to ask about the issue of sanitation in the various barracks. Really, the situation is so bad that I would not like to go on naming all the types of barracks that we are talking about; you know the situation in the whole country is so bad. We are worried about disease outbreaks on account of poor sanitation in the barracks. Honourable minister, you said in your report that a housing census was done in the year 2001 to help develop a medium-term investment plan and that something is being done, but arising from the MTEF report right now before Parliament, it does not show me any move towards addressing the situation. 

If you may allow me, Mr Speaker, to quote for the past years that the minister is referring to. In the financial year 2003/04 a mere Shs 2.01 billion was allocated for domestic development to the Police force. As for the prisons, only Shs 480 million for a whole financial year was allocated for domestic development. This current financial year I did not see any fundamental difference, it was only Shs 3.42 billion for the Uganda Police Force and Shs 0.89 billion for the Uganda Prisons Services. What is being proposed for the next financial year is just about the same. 

Following that census that was carried out in 2001, is the allocation now going on to Ministry of Internal Affairs in consonance with the outcome of such a report, or if the report is not out, when do we hope to get it here? Otherwise, dear colleagues, I would like us to join the minister in the lamentation and really to urge a bigger allocation to these departments. In fact, it is for your own good, you know what would happen after here. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Please, you put a question; there should be no debate but a question.

4.07
MR JOHN WAGONDA-MUGULI (Buikwe County North, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is it a government policy to make the communities pay for accommodation of policemen at police posts? If not, why are the people of Konko in North Buikwe being treated differently, where they are being required to maintain policemen at Konko police post at their cost?  

Two; is it government policy to retain the outdated bucket system in prisons? If not, when will the minister modernize sewage handling in such prisons that still use the bucket system?

4.08
MRS ROSE MUNYIRA WABWIRE (Woman Representative, Busia): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Is the honourable minister aware that in Busia, plans are underway by the landlord to evict the present police station there? And is the honourable minister aware that some of the units that have been housing his policemen got burnt down? If so, what plans does he have to arrest this situation?  Thank you.

4.08
MR HENRY BASALIZA ARAALI (Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to find out what plans the ministry has to set up new police posts, and what are the criteria followed in setting up a new police post? I would also like to know when these community-policing methods are likely to cover the whole country? Thank you. 

4.09
MRS TEOPISTA SSENTONGO (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My question is about the changes that were effected in payments of salaries of policemen and policewomen. I understand there were some changes and some of them have started getting some loans from Stanbic Bank, but it seems it is taking too long for people to get their salaries and it starts right from the office where the cheques are being prepared. It seems there is some kind of negligence and people are complaining about the pay -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable member, the main question was not dealing with that particular subject; it was about living conditions by way of houses and so forth. Now, this is salary, maybe that is a different subject.

MRS SSENTONGO: Mr Speaker, there is something to do with working conditions, yes, it is mentioned here and that is why I have brought this point out. So, I am wondering whether there is any strategy put in place to modify the payment system for these policemen and policewomen. Thank you.

4.10
MS ERIYO JESSICA	(Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his response, but I want also to thank him for visiting Adjumani and he saw the sorry state in which the Adjumani prison is. Currently, core criminals even escape from the prison farm. The accommodation of the prison staff is also in a very sorry state, but particularly where the women prisoners are accommodated is really terrible. So, I do not know what plans the minister has. He is talking of a phased construction and so forth and he is not even mentioning Adjumani prison, and yet it is one of the biggest prisons producing a lot of foodstuff and other cash crops for this government. Thank you.

4.11
MR AVITUS TIBARIMBASA (Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mine is a brief question to the Minister of Internal Affairs. I would like to know from him whether he gets some time to go around the barracks and see for himself how these policemen and prison warders live? Or if he does not, whether his minister of state does? If that one does not, whether the permanent secretary has that chance to go around? What I would expect him to have seen is the total congestion of prison officers or police officers and prison warders in the houses where they live. Surprisingly, you find four families sharing a house! I think that situation is still prevailing.

Secondly, whether he has been able to visit this estate around Naguru? When you are passing around, you wonder how a human soul survives living in such conditions. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.12
MR ODONGA OTTO (Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, I would want to know if this policy of officers laying bricks for their houses is part of building their personal houses or government houses? 

Two; the statistics from the prisons headquarters shows that for some prisons like in Rukungiri where the carrying capacity is 23 is currently carrying 289 prisoners. In Luzira, where our colleagues are, the carrying capacity is 668 and it is carrying 2,646 inmates. Have you made provisions to ensure that our colleagues get a decent arrangement given this excess carrying capacity? Thank you.

4.13
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask the minister, when you go to page 10, a lot of issues have been outlined in how to alleviate the problems of the police force, but actually there is nothing mentioned as far as water transport for the policemen is concerned. 

On that note, I would like to ask the minister, is he aware that almost everyday fishermen lose out boat engines and nets through pirates on the water? And is the minister also aware that suspects on the islands, while bringing them to the mainland, they use the same transport with other people, and in most cases these suspects jump off when the boat is about to land on the mainland, and some have lost life and at the end of the day the policeman who was in charge is again questioned? Are you aware of that, honourable minister?  Thank you.

4.14
MRS EUGENIA MINDRA (Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am asking the minister whether officers living within the barracks rather than rent houses outside is for administrative convenience because I have witnessed in one of the police barracks around Kampala, these officers may occupy about three rooms with their families thus pushing the rest of the other staff to a one room being shared by two families. Is that convenient for the lower officers? Are the higher ranking officers more human than those who are of lower rank? I think it is a very pathetic situation, and I do not think it is really economical for them to pay a small rent claiming that that money will be used for acquiring unipots. Can the minister clarify that to us?

4.15
MR SAMUEL	ABURA PIRIR (Matheniko County, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to find out from the Minister of Internal Affairs whether he is aware that Moroto prison is as old as 1950 something, was built during the colonial times, and the buildings are so far cracking. At one time actually the inmates broke the wall and they escaped, and they can also organize with their colleagues outside to come at night and break the walls and remove the inmates. I do not know whether there is anything in plan to ensure that the new construction can be made in Moroto prison.

Then secondly, even Moroto police is the worst of all. Surely, if you went in there, you would not believe human beings live in such buildings, even unipots could do better for such categories. I wish you could even arrange for some unipots to assist the people in Moroto police barracks.

4.16
MR SAMMY OGWEL LOOTE (Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I am glad to hear that the minister has answered the question partly. But nevertheless, I would like to say that the Uganda police and prisons, are the two state organs/institutions that have been let down for a long time. Now that the minister has come up with a plan of renovating and rehabilitating, he has not mentioned three paramount issues. I would like to start with the sports and recreation. You know very well that the Police –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would encourage you to ask questions -(Interruption)

MR OGWEL: I am raising a question, Sir. I have not heard from the minister the provision for sports in the force. Secondly, the provision of fire brigade, I have not heard because these days there is a great alarm of fire breaking everywhere, and the current fire fighting engines with their appliances and equipment are outdated. What measures is the minister putting in place to rescue this department of fire and sporting activities? 

He has not talked also about the welfare. I would like also to remind the minister that, could you get another way of reinstating the prison farms because prison industry actually was the pioneer of all industry in this country, which has now collapsed, and that is why the welfare in the prisons service and elsewhere in other departments is failing. So, could the minister do something to address the issue of farm industries and prison industries? Thank you.

4.18
MRS SARAH NYOMBI (Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Sanitation is an important aspect of welfare that our police officers need to do their job well. I would like to ask the minister, is he aware that some police stations do not have pit latrines? And I would like to know what measures the ministry has put in place to address that situation for the hygiene of our police officers and their families?  Thank you. 

4.19
MR SYLVESTER WANJUSI WASIEBA (Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wanted to ask the Minister of Internal Affairs whether he is aware that a maternity ward that had been constructed in the barracks in Mbale Municipality collapsed a few years ago, and it caused some patients to even suffer more and since then that building has never been touched.

Secondly, I wonder whether the minister cannot initiate discussions with his colleague in the Ministry of Labour and gets some funds from National Social Security Fund, just like some million shillings on Mugoya Construction the one which had been initiated recently, so that they can be able to provide the police officers and the prisons some better housing so that the government can find away of how it can gap up rather than leaving them in such a bad condition. Thank you.

4.20
MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA (Mwenge County South, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My supplementary question is hinged on page 4 of the minister’s statement, and this is in respect to construction and equipping of eight female prison units. I would like to congratulate him on this, and I would like to ask whether the minister is aware of any construction of units in respect of the issue of remand homes as well as rehabilitation centres for children, because as you know, we have very many children and who are under 18 years and it seems that the capacity to retain them is limited. I would like some response on this. 

Mr Speaker, I have another question and this is on page 9. The minister says some local authorities have given land to the force, and he has pointed out the districts, which have given land. I am confident and aware that Kyenjojo District would be more than willing to provide land. How have these areas been approached? Should we approach our respective areas if this in any way would assist in alleviating the plight of police and prisons? I would like to know the criteria or the methodology that was used in order to get this?

Finally, Mr Speaker, my third issue is on attracting quality to the Police. When you look at the very first page, it talks about working conditions of officers. Is the minister aware that most women are not very attracted to the Police, taking into account the living conditions in that the crowding also attracts domestic violence, and that there was a recent newspaper article where policewomen were not promoted because some of them were expectant and had not been notified of the training, which would have enabled them to be promoted? Are you aware of that, Mr Minister? I would like to hear these issues, and I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on other issues and queries, I suggest that you forward them to the Chairperson of the Defence and Internal Affairs Committee to handle comprehensively and report to us. Please, hon. Chairman, take up this issue in your committee. (Mr Amuriat rose_). Is it a local issue?

4.23
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (Kumi County, Kumi): It is a local issue, Mr Speaker. Thank you. I know probably no one else would ask this question, and I wish the Minister of Internal Affairs paid a little bit of attention to what I am saying. 
 
Mr Minister, are you aware that the central government prison is occupying structures in Kumi more or else illegally? They occupy what is supposed to be a local administration prison, and as far as I know, no rent is being paid to the district. Ever since they began using this structure, several years ago when Kumi became a district, no money has been remitted to the district account and I think this is a serious matter. They occupy a whole prison and four staff houses.

Mr Minister, I would also like to find out from you whether strategically it is correct to continue building new structures in the prisons around the country instead of saving the old structures that are falling apart? By building new structures and forgetting about the aspect of maintenance and renovation, I believe technically you have got it wrong. Your strategy on the issue of housing for Police is certainly correct –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to ask a question?

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: No, this ends the question, and I have said direct your queries to the Chairman, Defence and Internal Affairs Committee.  

4.25
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I do generally appreciate the comments that have been made and the general support, because many of the questions were really giving general support and asking for improvement of the conditions of our brothers and sisters that serve both in the police and in the prisons departments.

I will just make reference to a few of the issues that were subsequently raised. Are we getting more money in order to meet the requirements as highlighted by the baseline studies? Yes, the Minister of Internal Affairs is actively discussing this with the Ministry of Finance. We do acknowledge the fact that the resource envelope has its own limitations. 

But as and when resources would be available, the Minister of Finance assured us that they will continue to support the programme of both rehabilitating the dilapidated structures, construction of new barracks and Police stations.  So there is general support from Government, and more specifically from the Ministry Finance to improve the conditions of our brothers and sisters working in the two departments.

Is it a policy of Government that the community should pay for the maintenance of the Police?  Well, Government deeply appreciates the generosity of the people of Kayunga to come and support the Police and recognize the good work that the Police is doing.  So, hon. Wagonda Muguli should convey this deep appreciation to the people and tell them to keep supporting the Police and Prisons departments.  The question of –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Minister, for yielding the Floor. Mr Minister, when you say that you appreciate the assistance of the community in supplementing scarce Government resources for the Police, do you also imply that you can accept donor gifts such as we received from DANIDA last time. 

I recall, Mr Minister, when you got US$10 million from a donor, DANIDA, to improve on the living quarters of the policemen at Nsambya, it was turned down by the Ministry of Finance that it would destabilize the macro economic situation. 

Mr Minister, are you aware that some of the gifts you receive are not compatible with their requirements, especially if they are donations?  As an example, you are mentioning 26 motorcycles received from a certain donor, and yet if you check those motorcycles there are 1000 cc engines; those are monsters, each one costs nearly US$10,000.  Do you have the capacity to ask the donor- to say that instead of giving us one motorcycle worth US$10,000, they give us small motorcycles of 250 cc.  These monsters I see here, even the policemen are complaining that there are too powerful to maintain. They did not come with a supply line. Why are you accepting donations of this nature?  Last but not least, what happened to our helicopter?

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Well, hon. Awori’s about the helicopter, it had an engine problem and we have in this coming budget requested the Ministry of Finance to make provision for acquisition of that engine so that we can be operational.

With regard to huge motorcycles that have been donated- thank you for that information- if it is a problem we are going to look at it and if they do not serve the interests of Uganda then an appropriate action will be taken.  But as far as we are concerned they have so far been performing very well.  

Now you did raise another issue concerning DANIDA making available a substantial amount of money, which was rejected by Government.  I do not have ready information on that rejection.  I am sure that this might have happened some years ago. It cannot have been in the last financial year.  I have just been discussing with the Minister of Finance as you were asking the question. The Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Internal Affairs will look at this matter and an appropriate response will be made.  

The question of maintaining the bucket system that was raised: We talked of general improvement in sanitation, and in this general improvement that archaic system will be eliminated.  

Plans for establishing Police posts: There are a number of criteria, but basically it depends on both the demand and the perceived need. The Inspector General and his team assesses the availability of resources, manpower, the need and then decisions are taken accordingly.  

The question of cheques being delayed by Police: This is news to me, but it will nevertheless be followed up and investigated and if that is the case, corrective measures will be taken.  

The prisons in Adjumani, Ragemu. I must say they do very good work and they produce a lot of cotton. We would like - the big prison near Adjumani town- it is true there is a lot of land. The prison service is expanding its capacity to be able to use it. 

In fact this morning we discussed with prisons authorities. They have good plans for Adjumani prisons land. We shall share these plans at an appropriate time with the honourable Member of Parliament from Adjumani.  When time comes for rehabilitation of the prisons in Adjumani, you will again be informed.  

We are carrying rehabilitation in a phased manner because of limitations of resources. The time for Adjumani will be coming.  Whether we are visiting prisons and police barracks. Yes, my colleague, the Minister of State and I, the Permanent Secretary and other officials both in the Police headed by the Inspector General of Police, and in prisons headed by Commission of Prisons, regularly visit these institutions. We actually exchange notes on what we find in these areas with the view to correcting the very significant shortcomings and inadequacies that we find.

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you, hon. Minister for giving way.  Honourable Minister, I would like to know, because you have said you visit various Police cells, whether you are aware that all the Police cells in Kampala district were supposed to accommodate 20 prisoners.  But as we talk now they accommodate about more 120, are you aware about that?

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Well, Mr Speaker, in fact I had already mentioned- it is actually hon. Odonga Otto who did mention these statistics that some prisons are now carrying up to 13 times the original intended capacity of people who are in custody.  

So, the point is known that our prisons are currently heavily congested.  That is why we are doing all we can, both expand and repair. But even more importantly to introduce community service so that we do not have to put everybody who requires sentencing inside the prison.  He or she can remain in the community, serve on community projects, remain with the family and at the same time get the sentence that they require.  So, Government is doing all it can to ensure that these concerns are adequately handled.

Mr Speaker, are our colleagues who are in Luzira getting better conditions?  Well, our duty is to ensure that we improve conditions in prisons as much as possible for all those who are resident in those homes. I think the conditions now are reasonably bearable and that our colleagues are being looked after as well as the colleagues they found in that area, but they are okay.  

On the question of the lake, the suspects jumping and swimming and running away: Yes that is a problem, which is appreciated, except that also those who are travelling on the road occasionally do that.  So, we just need increased vigilance both on the water and on the road. It is true that if we can get specific boats to carry the suspects that would be even better, but it is a question of resources as I have already said.  

 Was Moroto Prison built in the 1950s’? Many of our prisons in the country were built a long time ago. Luzira was built in 1927 and Arua in 1912. They are really in a very bad shape.  That is why we are saying let us mobilize more resources to improve the conditions of our prisons.  

The comment made about sports: We fully support sports in our prison services. Fire brigades, more engines are being bought. Prison farms, three more prison farms are being opened in the next financial year, hoping that the necessary resources will be made available. I am happy to say that prison farms are now producing food at least worth Uganda Ugshs 1.5 billion, which is feeding the prisoners.  

The question of female units: Yes, effort is being made to improve the conditions under which female prisoners live. It is true eight prisons have been put up for women.  Their conditions are in fact much better than the older prisons.

I am extremely happy that Kyenjojo district is ready to offer land.  My Ministry will without any delay follow up this offer and we deeply appreciate. We hope that other areas will emulate the Kyenjojo example.

The question of the Police ladies being discriminated against; this is not the case.  What is true is that some of the exercises during training are too rigorous and actually dangerous for both the mother and the foetus. As a result women who are pregnant are medically advised not to undertake those rigorous exercises.  However, when they are through with their biological and physiological function of procreation, they are of course more than welcome. In fact as much as possible they are compensated in the training programmes.  After all, they are doing the process of procreation not only for themselves but also on our collective behalf -(Applause)  

The question of the prison in Kumi where Government may not be paying due rent. This is a matter that we will administratively follow up to ensure that if there is that anomaly it is subsequently corrected.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY (Mr Kafabusa Werikhe): Mr Speaker, I thank you for giving me the opportunity to say something about the report or the statement we were supposed to make.  

I remember last week I was informed our Ministry communicated to you about our preparation in terms of presenting the statement. I think we are not yet ready, Mr Speaker, we can do that in the next two weeks.  I beg to request.  

THE SPEAKER: It was a bit urgent in the sense that hon. Bright Rwamirama said that the choice of the person to supply you with the gadgets was not the right choice. We would have got a cheaper one for the benefit of the country.  That was the essence of his statement and he was ready to substantiate. We resolved that the Minister should come and tell us what exactly happened.  

But apparently something has happened because we have been told next month, or this week we are getting power from the same system. What will be the point of the statement?  He is there, maybe he can substantiate what he really wanted to find out.  

So, I would advise, honourable members, when there are important matters you do not go away because they may decide a matter to your prejudice. So you should be around until business is exhausted.  

4.50
MAJ BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (Isingiro County North, Mbarara): Mr Speaker, I raised a point of concern regarding the energy sector.  It is common knowledge that the power we are producing is not adequate.  It is against this background that Government found short-term solutions and long-term solutions.  The immediate short-term solution was to boost our hydro electricity with thermal power. 

 Mr Speaker, it has come to my knowledge that the generators the Government has gone for are to be run on diesel.  Diesel is very expensive.  At the time when I raised this concern, if you use diesel the output per unit would go to 26 American cents.  But if Government chose a more efficient alternative of using heavy fuel, the output per unit would be 16.5 American cents.

Mr Speaker, our country is a developing country, we are calling investors. The President is known for trotting the whole globe looking for investors and we are here choosing alternatives which are very inefficient.  

Mr Speaker, the implication of this alternative that has been chosen by Government, and it is actually re-emphasized in the statement made by the Minister previously. She admits they have chosen a very expensive alternative.  It is going to inhibit investors and our industries are going produce at a high cost. Therefore, our products are going to be less competitive to others in the region.  

Mr Speaker, it defeats my understanding why we do not learn from the past.  We were here when the power tariff was being raised and the divestiture of Uganda Electricity Board (UEB) was pending.  I was shocked today that actually the power tariff is being revised at the time when the generators are about to be commissioned.  This trend is related.  

Mr Speaker, consumers are suffering with electricity bills.  Rural electrification has been suspended. I want to assure members that even if you took power to the village now, people are not going to consume it.  It is against this background, Mr Speaker, that I wanted the Minister of Energy to explain to the whole nation why she chose a more expensive alternative.

Another dimension is that, because I believe the power problem is not going to end today, instead of purchasing and owning the machine, they have gone for BOO, Buy On and Operate.  What it means is that after three years of the agreement they are going to call this darling to negotiate with him for another contract.  

So, we would also like to know whether Government has run out of capacity to produce power for the investors for which we are crying and supply power for our industrial and our economic development.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much for yielding the Floor.  Mr Speaker, the information I wanted to give relates to the commitment that Government made on the Floor of this House. It points at a matter of mutual trust between the Legislature and the Executive.  

When my Brother, hon. Bright Rwamirama, brought this matter before this House, there was a commitment by the frontbench that the agreement between the company that was supposed to supply thermal energy and the Government of Uganda would be stayed until such a time that a statement would be brought to this House, and that statement was adequately debated.  

It, therefore, surprises me, and I think it even disappoints this House and annoys us when we learn from the press that Government has signed an agreement with that company and the company is preparing to generate power.  I know obviously the Ministry has assured us that this would reduce load shedding to once a week.  But I mean principally there is no mutual trust between us, the frontbench and Government.  

Is it correct, therefore, Mr Speaker, for Government to fool the legislature, to make a fool of this House, to tell us they would not go ahead with the signing of the agreement and then they go and sign an agreement?  How shall we continue to trust Government, Mr Speaker?

MR WERIKHE: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  It is not true that the Executive is trying to fool the legislature.  I remember when hon. Rwamirama had raised this issue that is when I came in. My understanding was that we should come as a Ministry with a statement over the issue of thermal power generation. I do not know whether my recollection is poor, but I believe it was a statement that we were supposed to give the House over that issue.  

I do not know whether there was any undertaking that the House wanted us to stop. I do not remember anyone from our Ministry standing here to say we were going to stop the process because in any case the process was on-going.  In fact by the time hon. Rwamirama had raised almost the process was coming to an end. Mr Speaker. I want to reiterate there is no fooling of the legislature.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, it is against this background that we have had people demonstrating because of power tariffs.  As a Chairman of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, I know we have so many investors reporting in our investment authority offices, but none of them is actually doing rural investment. One of the reasons is the power tariff and power fluctuations.  

Mr Speaker, is this the way we should behave as leaders, when you go to save somebody from dying you bring medicine that is actually going to make him more dizzy, or you first put him up, put on drip and then administer the strong medicine in small but incremental doses?  What we see here is failure to consider that as a developing country we need to choose the most efficient alternative for investment.  I would like to get a response from the Minister concerned.

MRS BBUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  We are committed to bring a full statement to this House following your guidance. We shall be here on Tuesday next week.  Thank you.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, when I raised this matter, there was a general consensus that they should halt the process of signing agreements.  But on Monday, last week, there were papers showing some investors with machines that the agreement is concluded.  I got disturbed.  Are they buying time that as they wait to bring the report, they sign the agreement and commit this country instead of saving so much money?

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, much as the Ministry is committed to bring a report here, at this stage after everything seems to be concluded, what will the purpose of the report be?  Is it meant to inform the country what steps the Government has taken to alleviate the power problem?  I do not see how much useful that report is going to be to us because this is like closing the gate after the horse has passed. Of what benefit sincerely to this House and to this country will this report be apart from informing us about the very unfortunate situation of a wrong decision that has been taken?  

MR WAMBUZI: I think, Mr Speaker - I am sorry to give an order to a fellow Engineer. However, I am constrained to do it because we are asking the Minister of Energy to give us accountability. Why she is ordering for the diesel engines instead of fuel oil or turbo generators to be able to generate 50 megawatts for this city.   Are you in order really to relegate the issue of the Minister coming here to give you accountability?  Are you really in order to push her off and say that you do not need the report if she does not do this?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, most of us do not know what has gone on. Therefore it is important that we get informed of what is going on.  As to the issue, which you raised, the Minister said by the time you said it things had already started. Therefore, if things had started they must have been started under an agreement.  

So, let us get the information and then maybe we can provide the remedy if we have one. Instead of declining, say, well what is the use, the use would be that we get the information and then after getting the information we shall be in position to contribute and advise what the next step has to be.  Otherwise, if we do not then we shall keep our wisdom with us when we can really contribute to the improving of the situation.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, you allowed the hon. Minister to come on the Floor to give the time span when she can provide a substantive report.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister has said Tuesday.

MR AWORI: Then what are we debating?

THE SPEAKER: There is nothing to debate, and because we cannot say bring the statement when the statement is not there - she has committed herself to Tuesday and the record has captured it. On Tuesday we shall get the statement.  Now, I think we have finished the business at hand. 

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether at this time we can meaningfully start a debate on this issue.  Let us see maybe tomorrow.  With this we come to the end of today’s Business.  The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.05 p.m. and adjourned to Wednesday, 27 April  2005 at 2.00 p.m.)



