PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTSECOND SESSION - THIRD MEETINGWEDNESDAY , 5 APRIL 2023PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA7855Wednesday, 5 April 2023 in time to answer. That helps in a way that we do not clog the Order Paper. Usually, we sort out the issues here and there, not asking for statements. Otherwise, we may start running a Parliament sitting full of statements yet we have a lot of crucial business from Members and Government to handle. We have committee reports to handle, but when, Members raise their issues, they also want them answered. It is as if the Speaker is not giving you space, but it is because they are many. Therefore, Government Chief Whip, please register my displeasure – which I believe is the displeasure of this House – that the bad manners have resumed, whereby ministers are not taking this House seriously yet they are Members of Parliament. If this continues, I will be forced to ask the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to summon these ministers and remind them that they are Members of Parliament. If you do not want to be here as a minister, then be here as a Member of Parliament. Even the Government Chief Whip and the Minister of Health have work to do too. The Prime Minister called me herself saying that she is still in Kyankwanzi, on duty. I have just finished a meeting with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and we agreed that he rushes to eat something and comes back here. In short, colleagues, I have tried to make all these statements expecting that some ministers can come and answer your issues, but it seems IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentSECOND SESSION - 23RD SITTING - THIRD MEETINGParliament met at 2.03 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I just want to remind you that the House sitting starts at 2.00 p.m. We do not have any other time or any other time scheduled apart from when I communicate officially that the House sitting is, for example, going to be late by one hour. Also note that the Speaker does not come to the Chamber to wait for Members to enter, especially the Government Chief Whip and the ministers. As you can see, the ministers-in-waiting have started filling up the Frontbench. However, also usually, I do not want to bother you a lot because I have ever been in that position and I know what it means to carry someone’s burden when they aren’t here to respond to their issues. Honourable colleagues, when you have issues of national importance, we insist that you send them to us in advance. The aim is for my office to be able to communicate them to the ministers responsible through the Government Chief Whip, so that the ministers can be here 7856 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO. 1 FOR FY 2022/2023 COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR [The Deputy Speaker]they are not coming. So, the Government Chief Whip will have to carry the burden of answering and we want answers, not postponements. (Laughter)2.08MR GONZAGA SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): Mr Speaker, I know that you are the custodian of the rules of this House and the rules are very clear that the Frontbench is for ministers. Whenever there are any changes, they are made officially in the House. There are two Members on the Frontbench yet they are full backbenchers, and there is a minister who is also on the phone in the House. She does not seem to know where she is supposed to sit. Therefore, is it in order for a backbench Member to masquerade as a minister in this House well knowing that the Frontbench is only meant for ministers and the Government Chief Whip is there? Mr Speaker, I beg for your indulgence.Otherwise, I am worried that the honourable minister may not be aware of her portfolio and she can seek redress from the appointing authority. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, it seems the two colleagues abhor a vacuum. In fact what is here is embarrassing. I do not know which kind words to use, but this is embarrassing. I think it is a matter we shall again raise with the appointing authority so that we get to know whether ministers are supposed to come here or not. If they are not, then we give up. Hon. Margaret Muhanga has a medical condition, which hinders her from sitting in a seat of that kind; the seat must have a firm back. It is a condition, which most of us know and we have been praying for her to heal and we continue praying for her. You need to withdraw your statement in respect of her. MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Although I have been seeing her running somewhere and moving very fast, but since you have told us, I will go with your statement. Even when she was coming in, she was moving very steadily, but since we have learnt of it, we accept it in good faith. Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, I am about to go to matters of national importance. Let me allow Hon. Kibalya and we conclude on that.2.10MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The cry of ministers not being here on time has become a disease to this Parliament. Mr Speaker, when preparing to come to the House, you spend about 30 minutes to one hour preparing the Order Paper and what you have to take the House through. I request, through your Office, that since the Government Chief Whip has a duty to whip the ministers, could you instruct him to always use the 30 minutes or an hour before coming to the House, to whip his ministers to come to the House, so that by the time he comes here, he is sure that the ministers he is supposed to whip are already in here other than whipping himself?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Kibalya, first for clarification, I do not use one-and-a-half hours to prepare for the House. If you ask some ministers and Members whom I have chaired, at 4.30 a.m., I was sending them some messages asking for some information regarding today’s Order Paper. So, I wake up at 4.30 a.m. to prepare for the House because I know I am going to handle complicated issues. I do not want to reach here and start getting information from here. So, it is challenging to come to the Chamber and the ministers are nowhere, yet I am here to conduct Government business. I really agree with you, but I also know – because I have ever been a Government Chief Whip. Do you remember when Gen. Moses Ali rose up on the Floor and said, “Rt Hon. 7857THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 5 APRIL 2023Speaker, these are old people. What do you want me to do? They know why they were elected and appointed.” (Laughter)So, really, I do not want to put the Government Chief Whip in a corner, but Government Chief Whip, I do not know whether you want to comment on this issue?2.13THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Hamson Obua): Mr Speaker, I would like to start with the bigger picture. This House has 529 Members of Parliament – and this is a statement of fact -(Interjections) - you have even varied it to the disadvantage of the point I am making, in principle. On our side as the Executive, Mr Speaker, you are aware – because you have been in the same place and you are on record as the sixth Government Chief Whip - these challenges still persist. Normally, the Office of the Government Chief Whip calls every minister who has a matter concerning them on the Order Paper and that is our standard practice. Secondly, we share – that is, through a notification on the Cabinet forum – the Order Paper in advance, for us to prepare. Mr Speaker, this House is guided by rules. Apart from specifically speaking about ministers, I believe that we must be asking ourselves: where are thee? This is because even if we did physical counting here – (Interjection) - fine, it is a statement of fact – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, point of order. THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): I am constrained to put my colleague to order, Mr Speaker, because he cannot use the absence or the poor attendance of the entire membership of the House to justify the conspicuous absence of the ministers. Mr Speaker, it is clear in the holy books that to whom much is given, much is expected. (Laughter) That you, who accepted those ministerial appointments in the NRM - I know you are doing this because of collective responsibility, but you must know that this House, as you have put it rightly, is guided by rules, practices and traditions of the Commonwealth. The truth is that the minister must be here in advance to answer or respond to the concerns of Members of Parliament. So, is he in order to justify the perpetual conspicuous absence of his ministers on the poor attendance of the Members?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, I remember when we were young, we used to go for a dance. When you asked a certain beautiful lady for a dance and she refused, the next question would be: “But you danced with Chris; why not me?” So, you would use Chris to justify your case. (Laughter)Now, the Government Chief Whip is using Members’ absence to justify the absence of ministers. (Laughter) Government Chief Whip, I think you can handle your case properly. This is not a matter of who is wrong or who is right. We are supposed to be here, but for ministers, Rule 50 of the Rules of Procedure specifically says they should be here. You made a rota; the ministries brought a rota. Clerk, I think we are going to bring that rota here each day and when I reach here, I will make a call and say, you submitted the rota as a ministry. On this day, honourable so and so is supposed to be here. This is because we agreed that since we have many ministers in the ministries and work must go on – so, I know, for example, that on a Thursday, for the Ministry of Works and Transport, it is Gen. Katumba Wamala who has to be here. So, tomorrow, I expect him here; something like that.However, what is very important, honourable Government Chief Whip and honourable colleagues, is: talk to your colleagues. It looks 7858 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO. 1 FOR FY 2022/2023ugly! Even if I have five Members behind, but I have around five to 10 Members in the front row, I can start. Also, if you are going to be late, just give me a call. For example, I told you that I was with Hon. Musasizi up to when I was leaving. I told him: “Do not collapse in the House. Rush and pick something to eat and then come and we handle your item.” I have been with him handling issues of the supplementary. So, Government Chief Whip, you can conclude.MR OBUA: Mr Speaker, I would wish to support you on the question of the rota because that is a new initiative that was introduced. In Cabinet, we equally agreed that at any sitting, we should have at least 30 per cent present. However, the rota was only laid; it was not made public. I believe that should be part and parcel of naming and shaming the minister, who should be representing his or her ministry here. This is because all ministries complied and made submissions that for example, on Tuesday, Ministry X will be represented by this minister. On Wednesday, it is so and so, and on Thursday, it is so and so.May I now request, with your permission, that this rota be made public such that like you have done it, you are also able to say: “On this day, this ministry should be represented by Minister A.” That should be part of naming and shaming before you invoke the provisions in the rules. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.MR OBUA: Honourable colleagues, we have a responsibility on behalf of the people of Uganda, because -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not have much time.MR OBUA: The only summary of Uganda can be found in Parliament because every part of this country is represented here. Therefore, Mr Speaker, I beg to support you on the rota although we will continue informing ministers as we always have done so. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Government Chief Whip, please, compile that rota properly, update it, and share it with the ministers for them to reconfirm. After that, bring it to us so that we upload it on our system. The other issue is that Parliament sittings start at 2.00 p.m., not 2.30 p.m. or at 2.10 p.m. In fact, today I was late by around three or four minutes because I was seated in my waiting lounge, trying to see if I could have a minister. When I saw two people volunteering to be ministers and I thought maybe they have been temporarily –(Laughter)– is when I moved in. Anyway, let us move on to matters of national importance. We are going to do it quickly - Hon. Sekabira, just take your time. I know your issue. If you speak to this one, I will not allow you to speak to the other issue – no, please. When the Speaker has guided you - because I will not allow you to speak twice and the other one concerns the constituency.2.21MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to raise a matter of national importance regarding the lack of essential medicines, health supplies and basic kits in lower health facilities. The last time we received these supplies in Buhweju District was in October 2022. If you went to our health centres now, you would find only ARVs and TB drugs – and these are from donors.Consequently, Mr Speaker, the health facilities are closing. This has also increased referrals to regional referral hospitals, which creates congestion and the burden of cases that could have been handled in the lower health facilities. We cannot take people’s health for granted. There is no other case we can handle that tantamounts to people’s health. Therefore, I request that we get supplies of essential medicines to our district. I am sure that even in other districts, the health centres are in the same situation. We can talk about roads and [The Deputy Speaker] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR7859THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 5 APRIL 2023any other services, but health is first. Health is wealth.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conclude, honourable.MR MWIJUKYE: Mr Speaker, I request that you direct the Minister of Health, who is here, to tell us when Buhweju will get these supplies. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Yes, honourable minister. Colleagues, I do not need to direct; this is public service. 2.23THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Ms Margaret Muhanga): Thank you very much, Hon. Mwijukye, for raising this matter of national importance. I thank you because we had even met and talked about it, but here we are. The problem we are getting, Mr Speaker, is stock-outs in our health facilities because they are overwhelmed by the numbers. The numbers are really too many in our health facilities because a lot of our people cannot afford private health services. The second issue is funding. We have a lot of funding gaps and I am sure if there are Members here on the Committee on Health, they can actually bear me witness that we have gone to that committee so many times requesting that the budget for National Medical Stores (NMS) be increased both for purchase of essential drugs and supplies; consumables. Sometimes they run out because we are overwhelmed and sometimes we do not just have enough funding. Nonetheless, we still appeal to you, Members of Parliament, that as we try to do this together with our partners, you also should support us so that we can have everybody access cheap healthcare. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I think this is a matter which – because the way the minister has put it, it looks as if Members of Parliament have refused to support that ministry. This is an issue that the Cabinet should give priority to because it is the Executive in charge of this. We can only come in where Cabinet has completely refused or failed, but also, they failed to explain the circumstances; the major prevailing situations. So, honourable members, it is very important, when budgeting, to take note of this and the priorities. These are very critical priorities that we need to look at. So, honourable minister, continue engaging the Members. Yes, Hon. Christine Ndiwalana.2.25MS CHRISTINE NDIWALANA (NUP, Bukomansimbi North County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. For your information, I was the first person to bring my matter before Hon. Mwijukye, but he was given my issue; I do not know how that occurred. Anyhow, honourable Minister of Health, I have the same problem in my district. Over seven health facilities are not getting medical supplies. This has led to increased numbers of maternal mortalities and morbidities. Even children have dropped out of school and are now at home because they are very sick. The same issue has led to increased unplanned pregnancies because the family planning methods have not also been supplied for seven months now. This has greatly affected teenagers; we have increased numbers of teenage pregnancies, let alone married women being unable to space their children; most of them are now pregnant. Thank you very much. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, on matters of national importance, we do not take points of information. I want to keep repeating this.Secondly, Hon. Christine Ndiwalana, you do not exclusively own problems in your constituencies. There are problems which are shared. In fact, you should be happy when they are cross-cutting in that now you fight from 7860 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO. 1 FOR FY 2022/2023 [The Deputy Speaker]many fronts. I think the answer previously given by the minister applies to this too and it is an issue I hope we are seriously taking note of. 2.27MR MOSES KAMUNTU (Independent, Rubanda County West, Rubanda):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding giving Rubanda District a hard-to-reach status.Mr Speaker, Rubanda District is found in south western Uganda, approximately 450 Kilometres from Kampala. Naturally, our terrain is harsh, surrounded by steep hills, forests and lakes. Mr Speaker, it is very hard for our teachers and nurses to move around the district because of the terrain. Lake Bunyonyi, which comprises 29 islands that are habitable with no means of transport and schools and health facilities, is also found in Rubanda District. Also naturally, Bwindi Forest covers almost half of Rubanda District, and since crossing it is practically impossible, people have to move around it to access some villages like Ruhija. If we are awarded –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what is your prayer?MR KAMUNTU: My prayer is that Rubanda District be added to the list of the hard-to-reach areas in the country. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. On that issue, I think we shall need Government to come and:1. Give us a list of the areas that have been gazetted as hard-to-reach; 2. The criteria used; and3. If there is any proposed review, because if you declare an area a hard-to-reach, then what affirmative action are you taking for it to be made easy to reach? Otherwise, it is not a status I would want people to start fighting for.4. Colleagues, I do not want the positivity of that status to drive us. It means they have needs. I know the areas he has talked about; I was born in Rubanda, and so, I know some of these areas. I visited them recently with the honourable colleague – really what they need is intervention. So, I do not want more applications to come here asking for areas to be declared hard-to-reach.  MR NAMBESHE: Mr Speaker –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition (LoP), you are hijacking the microphone; I have not allowed you. MR NAMBESHE: Okay, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And you have left it on, but okay, please, raise your matter. (Laughter)MR NAMBESHE: Mr Speaker, I am sorry, but you know very well that even Bududa has also been captured as a beneficiary of the hard-to-reach funds. Since the 10th Parliament, there is the famed 30 per cent hard-to-reach fund. However, up to now, I suppose, the Minister of Public Service, who has a list and even the criteria that he uses to select the beneficiaries of that 30 per cent hard-to-reach fund, should be here to furnish us with the information on how far he has gone to implement that 30 per cent hard-to-reach fund.Bududa is not only hard-to-reach; it is also hard-to-stay and hard-to-work. So, the delay of this 30 per cent, which is supposed to go to those people, particularly the public servants, working in Bududa is punishing Bududa twice. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Luckily it is not hard-to-deal with because you are a good man that we deal with easily. (Laughter)Honourable Minister of Public Service, did you want to say something or you believe what COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR7861THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 5 APRIL 2023I suggested is better? Does it only cover public service related matters of employment?2.32THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Muruli-Mukasa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. What you are proposing is better and I think we shall come back here with that list, the criteria used, and whether there is any move toward reviewing that criterion.However, before I sit down, I just have to sound one issue: that everything rotates around the treasury. So, the treasury should be prepared to grant the money that is required to effect the hard-to-reach and hard-to-stay policy. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. In the public gallery this afternoon, are students and teachers of Parenting Uganda, Mbarara Campus from Mbarara District, represented by Hon. Robert Mwesigwa Rukaari, Hon. Mwine Mpaka Rwamirama and Hon. Rita Atukwasa. They have come to observe the proceedings of this House. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) You can stand up for recognition. Thank you. Also, in the public gallery this afternoon, are students and teachers of Top Times High School in Busiro County East Constituency, Wakiso District. They are represented in Parliament by Hon. Medard Lubega-Sseggona and Hon. Naluyima Betty. They have come to observe proceedings of this House. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) Thank you.Equally, we have, in the public gallery this afternoon, pupils and teachers of Crown Junior School from Nsambya, Makindye West. They are represented in Parliament by Hon. Ssewanyana Allan Aloizious and Hon. Malende Shamim. They have come to observe the proceedings of this House. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) Hon. Abdallah Kiwanuka, do you have a procedural matter to raise? MR ABDALLAH KIWANUKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My procedural matter is in line with rule 49(1). I am finding difficulty regarding the way we tender in matters of national importance. I notice that the House normally considers a few matters yet I think that under normal circumstances, matters that came earlier are considered first, the following day. However, there is a scenario where sometimes the Speaker Chairing the House abruptly shifts the other side so we shift our matters to the other side as well and so, they end up not being considered. So, we are finding difficulties. One finds him or herself in a situation where for more than two months, he or she has approached the relevant agencies and ministers, but the issue is not handled. It is only left at this point when we raise them. Mr Speaker, isn’t it procedurally right that when we tender in matters of national importance - where you stop, for example, today, is where you begin from the following day so that these issues are handled. Or can we create a central point where we can tender these matters so Members do not need to rush to the Office of the Speaker or that of the Deputy Speaker, so that once it is tendered in, a Member can be sure it will be called? Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, I have been “singing” it here. The issues you consider as matters of national importance and the questions you complain about are asked out of my volition because they are part of my communication. They are not provided for under the rules.The rules give you room, under rules 41, 42 and 45, to ask questions for oral answer. You write, mark it and have a notice of three days, but it is written and marked. However, some of you send me questions on WhatsApp and I accept. In fact, some of you reach here and start sending me chits saying, “Honourable, I have a matter” yet I have business to handle. It is done that way to create order because we have an Order Paper to finish. I do not 7862 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO. 1 FOR FY 2022/2023want us, from 2.00 p.m. to 4.00 p.m., to have handled only two items: that is, Prayer and Communication from the Chair. If you are dissatisfied with what I consider to be urgent matters and how I am handling it, then I am going to remove it completely. We shall then apply rules 41, 42 and 45 where the questions are clearly provided for in the laws. Hon. Abdallah Kiwanuka, I received your question today. I told my people to mark it for tomorrow because I had already exceeded the number of questions I marked. It is actually my communication you are playing with, so, you better treat me well. (Laughter) Honourable members, let us move quickly.2.38MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga West County, Kagadi): I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the latitude to address you on this matter. Whereas you have ruled that it is within your prerogative to allow matters of national importance, in our previous practice, we would just go to the Office of the Speaker and they record, and when you come to the Floor of the House, you just raise the matter. Now, the practice has changed; we write. Last week, I wrote – because when you have a number of issues and you have the opportunity to write to the Speaker about them, you write all of them. I wrote two issues, but I was given the opportunity to raise only one. The second issue, which I think is equally very important, remained unattended to. It is on record in the Office of the Speaker. I wonder how I am going to raise this matter, which I brought to the attention of the Speaker. If you give me the latitude, I will jump at the opportunity to raise it. (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Raise your matter.MR TINKASIIMIRE:  Much obliged. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, whereas last week, I was given an opportunity to raise the issue of the chimpanzees, I want to report that the minister responsible for tourism responded with a team. They are now on the ground handling the matter I raised. (Applause)The matter I did not raise concerns land grabbers in my constituency. At the beginning of the year 2000, Kagadi District had some political turmoil, which settled down, but it has now moved from politics to land grabbing, where some people settled in a particular place are using GPS to title areas where people have settled, without their knowledge. We came to learn about these land titles when some people started selling them. We raised the matter to the Government because the people who were involved in getting these land titles were seen to be indigenous people and very “big” in Bunyoro. The President chose the option of talking and compensating them. There was an agreement that all the people who had obtained titles in the subcounties of Mpeefu, Kyaterekera and Ndaiga be compensated by the Government. Mr Speaker, as the Government is still preparing the process, the same group that agreed with the President for compensation are selling these land titles to the so-called powerful people in this land. Those so-powerful people move with Army men, for instance, there is one called Willy Rwomwojo. I do not know whether he is a soldier or a businessman -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But he is powerful.MR TINKASIIMIRE: Yes, he is powerful, Mr Speaker. (Laughter) He has bought almost all the land titles in Ndaiga subcounty.  Ndaiga Subcounty would ordinarily be the size of a town – because it is an island on Lake Albert. So, he is fencing off -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, conclude.[The Deputy Speaker] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR7863THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 5 APRIL 2023MR TINKASIIMIRE:  He is fencing off landing sites with the help of the Army and the police. And at the district level, he is being helped by the RDC. My prayers - because this is a big complicated matter - I felt I should raise it and seek your indulgence for a committee because if I ask - there is no Minister of Lands present to help me - a committee of Parliament to take up this matter, investigate and find out who these powerful people are, who are causing trouble to the people that I represent in this House. Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleague, I would like to first clarify on the issue of the practice, which has been there; yes, we have maintained the practice. But when I was a backbencher there, I remember we could have questions here, but no one would be ready to answer. Everyone would say, “Tomorrow, give me two weeks or give me this long.” Therefore, we introduced a practice to the effect that when you bringing a matter, whether verbal or written, give us some details so that by around midday or 1.00 p.m., we are able to communicate to the minister, from whom you expect an answer, but who might also need to consult technical people and the people on the ground so as to give you an answer that makes sense. Otherwise, when they bring weak answers, there will be dissatisfaction from the Members. Then also, you find sometimes ministers are forced to say, “I will return next week,” or “I will return after two weeks,” and we end up clogging the Order Paper. That is why we used that method. Secondly, sometimes we do not consider all the questions because in a day, I receive around 30 issues of national importance. So, some of them I refer to the Prime Minister, others I call the ministers to handle and we bring some here on the Floor. So, that is how we are trying to manage the situation. However, on the matter you have raised, from your prayer, I think it would have been easier for me if you had done a petition because then, I would then refer it to the committee. But since it is also a very critical matter, I will request the Minister of Lands to go to the ground - and she has been moving on the ground - and link up with the MP and in two weeks’ time, they will report back to the House. Now, I cannot send out a committee at this stage because we are processing ministerial policy statements yet I would need to send the sectoral Committee on Physical Infrastructure, which can interfere with the budgeting process. So, let us use that method. When the minister brings a statement here, we shall discuss it and when you are not satisfied, we can then involve the committee and other mechanisms. Hon. Dr Baryomunsi, did you want to say something about this?2.46THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In addition to raising matters of national importance on the Floor, I appeal to colleagues to find it easy to also approach the relevant ministers –(Laughter)– because –(Interjection)–  just hold on, because I do not want to believe that any minister would ignore a Member of Parliament –(Interjections) – because the standing instructions are that we should prioritise issues raised by Members of Parliament, especially urgent issues, which must be fixed. And, therefore, my appeal –(Interruption) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a point of order. MS NABAGABE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. A number of times we have raised issues here. For example, I raised the issue of Kassanda District not having a tarmac road anywhere, but when I followed it up with the relevant ministers, including the Prime Minister, who I also asked this particular question and gave me an answer - for a very long time, even when you follow up these ministers, including the 7864 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO. 1 FOR FY 2022/2023 [Ms Nabagabe]head of the ministers - the Prime Minister - we get no answers or responses. Therefore, is it in order for the honourable minister to stand here and say that we need to go back to the ministers yet when we go to them, we wait for a month? For example, it is over two or three months since I raised my issue here, but no answer has been given. The rains are here. People in Kassandra are getting accidents due to the terrible roads and the Prime Minister just told me, “That road will be worked on.” When? I have no idea. Thank you very much. So, is it in order for the honourable minister to come here and play around with us?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable colleague, maybe you should change the methods of following up; you need to deploy new tactics. (Laughter) But also, sometimes - and anyone who would be on this bench – really, when you come to the Floor and say, “My district has no tarmac road and that you need the tarmac road because the rains are killing people and so on, I can tell you that sometimes that can be difficult to answer. However, honourable minister, open your doors for - if possible, remove the doors. (Laughter)Yet I have seen some of you walking with ministers, especially in the canteen. Honourable minister, please conclude.DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Speaker, I spent the bigger part of my parliamentary life as a backbench Member of Parliament. So, I fairly know what I am talking about as a former backbencher. Anyhow, I was saying that there should be no reason for a minister to close their office doors to a fellow Member of Parliament. Therefore, the message to my colleagues is that we should not have doors for you because when you find us at the ministries, we can call the technical people to support you. I thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, when the matter is very critical and you are looking for a minister, but you cannot get hold of them, reach out to the Government Chief Whip. I remember when I was the Government Chief Whip, many MPs from the Opposition could reach out to me and I would arrange meetings with ministers. Or if you are uncomfortable, reach out to me. But I will not pay the bill, if you agreed –(Laughter)– I will just ensure that you meet and have your issues handled. Hon. Ogwari Polycarp. Colleagues, let us be quick.2.51MR POLYCARP OGWARI (Independent, Agule County, Pallisa):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. The ministers’ offices are open for massaging our psychology, but not action. Why? In -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that the issue you are raising?MR OGWARI: No, I am going to address the issue now. In 2015 -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a point of order.MR KAFUUZI: Mr Speaker, I do understand that colleagues have concerns about how we operate, but it is wrong to make blanket accusations. Secondly, there is parliamentary language. When you say that offices of ministers are there for massaging, you are in essence, imputing that we do not know the use or the purpose of the offices we hold.I humbly request, as you make a ruling on this, Mr Speaker, that the honourable member withdraws that statement and that it is expunged from the record of Parliament.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, honourable member, take your seat; there is a point of order against you. I gave you permission to raise the issue that you had COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR7865THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 5 APRIL 2023registered with my office, but you decided to use your time for other things. (Laughter) 2.52MR CHRISTOPHER KOMAKECH  (Independent, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The citizens of this mighty country welcomed the notion of using national IDs, but we have a problem around them. When one loses the national ID, they have to report back to NIRA. There are thousands of Ugandans who go to NIRA to get national IDs. The line there is as long as the distance from here to Pader. And now there are dubious officers who take advantage of the long lines to extort money from people. Mr Speaker, there are thousands of lost-and-found national IDs at police stations, whose owners the police has failed to trace. If you look at your national ID carefully, you only find the village, parish and zone. Police officers say there is no way they can trace the owners of these national IDs –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You prayer?MR KOMAKECH: My prayer is: can the Ministry of Internal Affairs present a ministerial statement on when they plan to redesign the national ID to include the telephone contact or email addresses of the bearer so that in case of loss of a national ID, they can easily trace the owner.Secondly, Mr Speaker, to access a bank account, one needs a national ID. To replace an ATM card, one needs a national ID. However, replacing a national ID at NIRA takes two to six months, which is very cumbersome. What is the ministry’s plan on easing Ugandans’ lives on the usage of the national IDs? Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Internal Affairs, come back with a report on that matter in a week. 2.55MS CAROLINE KAMUSIIME (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukiga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding health facilities in Rukiga District, especially Kashambya Health Centre III in Kashambya Subcounty.At this health centre, we have only one ward and it is being shared by women and men. There is no privacy and this makes life difficult, especially for women. The management there was forced to partition the ward using –(Interjection)–  yes, it makes life difficult even for men –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not know whom you are talking to. They are not on record.MS KAMUSIIME: Mr Speaker, in Rukiga, we do not have a district hospital. In the whole district, we have only two health centres IV . My prayer is that as we plan to have –(Interjections) – yes - two health centres IV –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, please, let the Member present her point.MR KAMUSIIME: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My prayer is for Kashambya Health Centre III to be elevated to the level of a health centre IV with more structures to make it easier for the people of Kashambya. Thank you. 2.57THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Ms Margaret Muhanga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank Hon. Caroline Kamusiime for raising this very important issue, regarding the health of our people. However, getting a district hospital has criteria. The first is that there must be 500,000 people in that district. The second is that there should be no nearby health centres like a national referral hospital or a bigger hospital. 7866 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO. 1 FOR FY 2022/2023The Ministry of Health would like to have a district hospital everywhere, but many of the districts we have formed, as Parliament, have smaller populations.  I can tell you, there is a district – I think called Kalaki, which does not have even a health centre IV . Therefore, whenever funds are available, we will be in your district to assess whether you really have 500,000 people in Rukiga and then we can look at the options of giving you a district hospital. I thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please assess Mitooma also; we do not have a district hospital there too. MS MUHANGA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Lematia, we do not have anyone on the Floor yet clarification can only go to the Member on the Floor and he or she is the one who can allow you, not me. 2.59MR SAMUEL OPIO (Independent, Kole North County, Kole): Mr Speaker, the matter of national importance I want to raise is in regard to a raid, last night, in Otuke District. I would like to beg your indulgence that you allow the Woman MP for Otuke District to raise the matter.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, Hon. Suzan Abeja.2.29MS SUSAN ABEJA  (Independent, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance on the raid carried out in Otuke District last night. An estimated six Karamojong cattle raiders, armed with AK-47 guns, came to Otuke last night and raided Ogwete and Olilim subcounties.The raids have been going on for the last two weeks. Very many people have been injured and an estimated 400 heads of cattle has been taken away. As of now, only 27 have been recovered. These Karamojong – they are really not just Karamojong raiders, but Karamojong thieves – are causing problems to the Government. The Attorney-General, seated there, is supposed to compensate for the last raids that took place. However, before he completes that, these same people are adding problems to the Attorney-General – the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development says there is no money to compensate our people. My prayers are:1. The Government should provide transport to the UPDF soldiers who are there to enable them respond during the attacks;2. The Government should improve on the security roads because when these people take off with our cows, it is hard to follow them; 3. Our ex-soldiers, who are on the ground, know all the corners where these people pass. V oices from the neighbouring districts of Alebtong, Otuke and others are that they should recruit these ex-soldiers to support the UPDF;4. The Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs should visit the area and see these corridors by himself, in the company of – mark my words, Mr Speaker - the former Minister of State for Defence and Veteran Affairs, Hon. Okello Engola tried to handle these people, and two, the Minister of Internal Affairs, since he is a General - I know the current state minister, but I do not want to say anything. 5. Lastly, Mr Speaker, Otuke is a very lovely district to H.E. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni –(Interjections) - yes, I am proud of him. He helped us during the days of the Kony insurgency on the side of Okwang. On the side of Otuke East, we also need his intervention. Thank you, Mr Speaker. [Ms Muhanga] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR7867THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 5 APRIL 20233.03THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DE-FENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (VET -ERAN AFFAIRS) (Ms Huda Oleru) : Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Member for raising the issue. One, I commit that the Ministry of Defence and Veter -an Affairs, together with the Members of Par -liament from Otuke, will be in Otuke to follow up on this issue –(Interjections)– honourable member, I will be with you in Otuke to follow up on the issue. (Applause)Two, I would like to state that we have already deployed the UPDF on the ground. I am aware that the number might not be enough, but there are already people on the ground; the army is following up on the issue. That is why some of the animals have already been recovered, but they are still in the process of recovering more. The issues of the lost animals that are normally raided by these Karamojong are not only in Otuke District. Therefore, almost every day, the UPDF is recovering raided animals. All recovered animals will be returned to the owners. Three, the current ministers in the Ministry of Defence will do the work that the former minister who was also in that ministry - they will do it. Please, put your trust in them; they will do the work. Thank you. (Applause)3.04MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Universal Primary Education (UPE) started in 1997. The Government gave a fee to particular schools, most especially those that are in municipalities, whereby a child from primary one to primary four was meant to pay Shs 18,000. From primary four to primary seven, the child was supposed to pay Shs 22,400. That was the practice from 1997 for the last 26 years. This money was supposed to cater for particular areas such as teachers’ accommodation, electricity, water and other utilities. Recently, we heard the Minister of Education and Sports on radio and at the Uganda Media Centre, stating that they are abolishing all the money that was being paid by parents in all schools, and that the Government is going to meet the costs for every child. Mr Speaker, I would like to know from the Government, where this money is going to come from. Has Parliament been briefed? Is it within the budget allocation? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Excuse me! Hon. Nandutu, I need the Minister for National Guidance to be alert and guide the nation. MR SSEWUNGU:  Mr Speaker, this is a matter within schools. We know that parents, because of the laxity of the Government, have been paying extra charges to schools. Where the Government comes in, I would like to know how much money is going to be paid per child per term per school in both secondary and primary schools. My prayers are: 1.  Can we be officially briefed by the Ministry of Education and Sports on where this money is going to come from? 2.  How much money is going to be paid per child beginning next term so that we do not get into the mess that is already taking place in the education sector? Thank you, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government, is this a concluded matter?3.06THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Hamson Obua): Mr Speaker, in the absence of a representative from the Ministry of Education and Sports, I want to state that this issue is not yet concluded. The Ministry of Education and Sports came to Cabinet with this matter, and it is a matter that we are yet to give a final position on, as Cabinet. Thereafter, the ministry will be granted the latitude to go public with the final decision of Cabinet. I beg to submit.7868 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO. 1 FOR FY 2022/2023MR SSEWUNGU:  Mr Speaker, I would like to give him first-hand information. This was confirmed by the Minister of Education and Sports at the Uganda Media Centre briefing. The minister said that there will be no more paying of fees by children in schools. Therefore, if you are not well informed, I am ready to give you information, including what was published in the Government newspaper, the New Vision, which ran the story.  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Deputy Attorney-General would like to volunteer some information. 3.07THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Mr Speaker, I have listened to my senior colleague’s concern. However, let say this: when a matter goes to Cabinet, Cabinet is a policy organ. If it is passed, then it will be embedded in the budget. There is no reason for you to pre-emptively be worried until this matter comes included in a budget for discussion by Parliament.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, please – on Wednesday next week, the Minister of Education and Sports should update the House on this matter. I see very many Members rising on matters of information and clarification. Honourable colleagues, I have business; I have an Order Paper to handle today.3.08THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Mr Speaker, for the benefit of Hon. Ssewungu and the other Members, like the Government Chief Whip has communicated, this matter was debated in Cabinet. In 1997, UPE and then USE were initiated with the view that there would be free and compulsory primary and secondary education. However, for various reasons, along the way, parents have been paying fees. Therefore, the discussion - and I communicated to the public as the Minister for Information - that beginning Financial Year 2024/2025, the Government shall be introducing free and compulsory primary and secondary education services. It will be for the other financial years as well. However, when the time comes, we shall come officially to the House and make that presentation through the Ministry of Education and Sports. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, let the Committee on Education and Sports follow up this matter with this very clear –please, Hon. Ssewungu, you are a member of the Committee on Education and Sports. Even in the Committee on Education and Sports, you can still raise this issue. I have taken note of your matter and I hope the responsible minister has also taken note. They will update the House at the appropriate time, but in the budget that we have, there is no money. Since it is starting in Financial Year 2024/2025, there is no way money should be in this budget - Hon. Ssewungu, you are going to take a lot of time.Yes, Hon. Sekabira. 3.10 MR DENES SEKABIRA (NUP, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. On 3 April 2023, in my constituency, Katikamu North, we had a heavy rain pour. To be specific, it was in Lusenke Village and 13 roofs were brought down and gardens were destroyed. I, therefore, pray that the line minister comes in to help these people because they have not been helped.Mr Speaker, since I have only used one minute of my allocated time, may it please you to give the remaining two minutes to my colleague, Hon. Polycarp Ogwari to perform his constitutional duty? This is because it is too difficult to challenge your ruling yet he has a very pertinent issue. Thank you so much. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Now, the time he would have used, you used it to explain –(Hon. Polycarp Ogwari rose) - please, COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR7869THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 5 APRIL 2023honourable, take your seat. That is not how we conduct business in Parliament. Parliament is not like a cigarette in the village where you smoke and pass it on to your colleague to also have a puff. That is not how we do business in Parliament. It is what we call “Mpandeseho” in our language. It means you puff and then you also pass it on. No, that is not how we do it.3.12MR PETER MUGEMA (Independent, Ig-anga Municipality, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, I heard about the unprofes-sional conduct exertions of immigration offi-cers at the airport. It so happened that I was at home when six of my voters called me in the wee hours of the night that they had come back to Uganda, but were denied entry because they were using the old passports. These are people who have been doing odd jobs in the United Arab Emirates countries; Saudi Arabia and Jordan. When most of them are being employed, they normally confiscate their passports. If I had not consulted one of the “big people” in Govern-ment - like Hon. Tinkasiimire said - these peo-ple were going to be denied entry.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought you were saying Hon. Tinkasiimire is “big”. (Laughter) MR MUGEMA: My questions are: when does one cease to be a Ugandan? Is it when I am coming back with an old passport, yet by the time I went, it was functional?Secondly, we are likely to witness many dead bodies of Ugandans working in the United Arab Emirates because most of them are they given back their passports on return and at en-try, they are told that these passports are no longer viable. So, they cease to be Ugandans. Attorney-General, guide us because we are go-ing to see very many scenarios of that nature. Had I not been influential, these people were not going to enter Uganda. (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Attorney-Gener -al, would you like to answer to this issue?3.13THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Mr Speaker, I am hap-py to note that Hon. Mugema is influential. My understanding is that when a passport is issued, it is given a timeline. As long as that passport is valid and not expired, there is no reason a Ugandan should be stopped. Therefore, what-ever was done was out of the law - and we shall go out of our way to correct it and make sure it does not happen again.3.14MR POLYCARP OGWARI (Independent, Agule County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In 2015, Agule County got a chance to get electricity through the Rural Electrification Agency. In 2017, two transformers blew at the trad-ing centres of Yakoyi and Omuroka. In 2019, another transformer blew at a trading centre called Akisim. In 2022, another transformer blew at a trading centre called Kameke. As we talk, many of the poles have fallen. I went to the ministry and met the state minis-ter and we talked. He managed to replace two transformers in Akisim and Kameke. Last week, in one of the big areas that has had no transformer since 2017, one pole fell and hit a 12-year old child. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, your prayers?MR OGWARI: Mr Speaker, I just want to interest you in one thing before I make my prayer. Uganda produces 1,346 –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prayers?MR OGWARI: My prayer is that the ministry should act and replace the transformers other than losing our citizens. Thank you very much.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon-ourable Minister of Energy and Mineral Devel-opment, please visit the honourable colleague and address their issue. I remember we also had a statement because it is a cross-cutting is-sue in the whole country. 7870 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO. 1 FOR FY 2022/2023I will crosscheck whether we sorted out that issue. There should be a report from the Com-mittee on Environment and Natural Resources. I will link up with the Chairperson, Committee on Environment and Natural Resources togeth -er with the minister to ensure that this matter – Government Chief Whip, coordinate so that this matter is sorted. It is a general problem.Hon. Sekabira needs help; he has a disaster in his area. Honourable, I do not know whether your chief administrative officer has written.MR SEKABIRA: Mr Speaker, we have gone through all the procedures. Unfortunately, these catastrophes have happened three times and each time we have written, there has been no response. This time, I am very sure that the iron sheets that have just been returned - Since there is a bonanza, I can also have a share of that. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, I know you are under the Office of the Prime Minister. They need support. Hon. Alice Kaboyo, would you like to give informa -tion?3.18THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (LUWEERO TRIANGLE) (Ms Alice Kaboyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have not heard about that is-sue. When such occurrences happen, we do not have to wait to bring them up in Parliament. Our offices are open. Please bring up that issue and we shall deal with it. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please help the honourable colleague. I know they go through – Sometimes, the budget is very tight, but they go through and look at the most urgent areas to support. 3.18MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Rep-resentative, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Last week on Thursday, I raised the issue of blackwater fever that is killing children in my district together with a disease that has been nicknamed “busy” by my people. The Minister of Health was directed to come and respond to this matter, as a matter of urgen-cy. Since the minister is in the House, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that she responds spe-cifically to when the ministry is going to move down to sensitise my people, but also resolve this problem of blackwater fever and the dis-ease called “busy”?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon-ourable minister, specifically respond on send-ing a team on the ground.3.20THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Ms Marga-ret Muhanga): Thank you very much, Hon. Opendi, for the question. I have never heard about a disease called “busy”. What is the name of the disease? (Interjections)  Even “un-cle Google” does not know it. I tried to look for the name of that disease nick-named “busy” that she talked about, but it is not there. Nonetheless, there is a problem with malaria right now. There is a new mosquito and a new strain of malaria that is resistant to the known drugs. Hon. Sarah Opendi, you know the Ministry of Health very well and you worked there for over seven years. I promise you that I will get the experts to come and check what exactly – we have a complicated type of malaria right now. The upsurge is real; we have many cases and many children are dying. Some of them have been blood transfused because of this new ma-laria strain. However, we are going to send a team to your district and you will take them where this new strain is. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon-ourable colleague, what the Member wants is that you send a team on the ground to verify what has been reported. I think you have end-ed on a good note. Otherwise, when we do not [The Deputy Speaker] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR7871THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 5 APRIL 2023send a team – Colleagues, just see where we are. Time is not on our side. Colleagues, when we become lenient, look at what happens. From 2.00 p.m. to 3.20 p.m., we are still on Communication from the Chair. We cannot run Parliament this way. Today, I left you, but I want to inform you that I will be strictly handling matters of national impor -tance between 2.00 p.m. and 2.30 p.m. Beyond 2.30 p.m., even if we have handled only one or two matters, that is where we shall stop and go on to the day’s Order Paper. Let us ensure that we are here by 2.00 p.m. Ministers should be here by 2.00 p.m. so that we handle issues quickly and then move to the day’s agenda.MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, please jump these items for now because I have not received them. I need to go to item No.4.LAYING OF PAPERSTHE PROPOSAL TO BORROW UP TO SDR 68.6 MILLION (EQUIV ALENT TO USD 96 MILLION) AND A GRANT OF SDR 74.3 MILLION (EQUIV ALENT TO USD 104 MILLION) FROM THE WORLD BANK TO FINANCE THE INVESTMENT FOR INDUSTRIAL TRANSFORMATION AND EMPLOYMENT (INVITE) PROJECTTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Finance?3.24THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLAN-NING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOP-MENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the proposal to borrow up to Special Drawing Rights 68.6 million (an equivalent of USD 96 million) and a grant of Special Drawing Rights amounting to 74.3 million (an equivalent to USD 104 million) from the World Bank to finance the investment for industrial transformation and employment project. I beg to lay.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. The proposal is referred to the Committee on National Economy to be processed in consultation with the relevant sectoral committee, as per rule 155 of our Rules of Procedure.MOTION THAT THE HOUSE RESOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY TO CONSIDER THE SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.1 FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2022/2023THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable ministers, I think it was last week when the Speaker informed the House of the meeting we had with the Minister of Finance, the PS/ST, the Speaker and I, where we discussed issues to do with the supplementary. We all  agreed that there is a very important national priority that should be considered as we come to handle this matter, and that was releasing money for Mulago National Referral Hospital, the Uganda Heart Institute and the Uganda Cancer Institute. Honourable minister, you are supposed to reassure this House that indeed, you have taken the necessary action because the money is provided for in the budget. Do you want to comment on the same, honourable minister?MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Indeed, we have had several consultations with you and other stakeholders about the need to release money for Mulago Hospital, the Uganda Heart Institute and the Uganda Cancer Institute totalling to about Shs 27 billion. The action we have taken is that we shall release it among the Quarter 4 releases, which we are doing this week.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that a commitment?MR SSEWUNGU: We raised this matter and it is continuous. A number of teachers were recruited and they have been waiting for deployment for almost a year. Schools have no teachers because districts are complaining that they have no wages. If you carried out 7872 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO. 1 FOR FY 2022/2023interviews on these teachers, why aren’t they being recruited? I raised the same issue to the Committee on Education - Why buy textbooks and teaching materials when there are no teachers going to teach children? I pray that in the same supplementary, they apportion this money as a priority. You recruited teachers, you interviewed them and children are not taught in Uganda. This is uncalled for; it is unfair - giving priority to other issues and leaving our children to die. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleague, that may be appropriate for debate on the report because there are issues to do with education. However, because the Speaker called the minister and they agreed, it does not mean Hon. Ssewungu should also do the same and say, “Before this item is passed, you must also first address A, B, C, D.” Hon. Ssewungu is still a small person. (Laughter)MR SSEWUNGU:  Mr Speaker, it was with your indulgence.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Anyway, it is a very critical issue. I think when we reach debate of the report, it is an issue that the minister will answer at that time. I do not want to open up very many issues at the same time. Honourable minister, can you move your motion?3.28THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move a motion that the House resolves itself into a Committee of Supply to consider the Supplementary Schedule No.1 for Financial Year 2022/2023 amounting to Shs 2.972 trillion. I beg to move, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by Hon. Asamo, Hon. Omara, Chief Whip, Hon. Mamawi, Hon. Komakech, Hon. Muhanga, Hon. Obama, Hon. Charity, Hon. Muwuma, Hon. Aleper, Hon. Okot - Majority of the Members have seconded.Honourable minister, can you speak to your motion?MR MUSASIZI: Mr Speaker, on 22 December, I laid before this House the Supplementary Schedule No.1 to cover a number of areas, among which are:1.  The expenditure that was not provided for during appropriation of the budget for Financial Year 2022/2023; 2.  The wage enhancement for UPDF staff and other scientists;3.  The unspent funds, which are mostly external financing from development partners that could not be incorporated at the time of finalising the budget for Financial Year 2022/2023;4.  Expenditure on security; and5.  Lastly, other Government commitments such as ongoing contractual obligations. Mr Speaker, this motion came into addenda 1, 2, 3 and addendum 4. All these addenda were referred to the Committee on Budget for scrutiny. I am well informed that the committee has considered the schedule and is ready to report back. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Chairperson of the Committee on Budget, can you present your report?3.31THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Wamakuyu Mudimi): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the committee considered Supplementary Appropriation Schedule No.1 and addenda - there are two addenda – for Financial Year 2022/2023. Before I report, Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the following documents on the Table: 1. A copy of the committee’s report.2. The minutes of the meetings. [Mr Ssewungu]SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO. 1 FOR FY 2022/20237873THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 5 APRIL 20233. Sectoral committees’ reports on the sup-plementary schedule.  4. A copy of Supplementary Schedule No.1 for Financial Year 2022/2023 and the addenda.5. The submitted documents from MDAs during the committee meetings.Mr Speaker, like the minister has indicated, on 23 December 2022, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development laid be-fore Parliament Supplementary Schedule No.1 for Financial Year 2022/2023, amounting to Shs 2.387 trillion.  Furthermore, on 2 March 2023, the minister laid addenda 1 and 2 to the Supplementary Schedule, and addenda 3 and 4, amounting to Shs 2.972 trillion. The supplementary schedule was referred to the Budget Committee and as per rule – Mr Speaker, I beg to make a small correction on that paragraph. Instead of “section” 153(4), it is supposed to be “rule” 153(4). It is not a sec-tion, but a rule –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we do not have much time. I can see you are very comfortable. (Laughter)MR WAMAKUYU:  Mr Speaker, we have talked of the legal framework – Members can read that:  Article 156(2) of the Constitution, the PFMA and the PFMA Regulations.Table 2 indicates the breakdown of the sources of funding: 1. Suppression within Government of Ugan-da budget2. Re-allocation (Local Government)3. Domestic revenue (Uganda Revenue Au-thority)4. Domestic borrowing5. Non-tax revenue (Local Government)6. Non-tax revenue (Central Government)7. External financing (World Bank, ADB and European Union).The amounts are indicated. Members can read the statement there – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, allow me to borrow a second from your time. In the public gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation of leaders and constitu -ents from Kiboga East in Kiboga District rep-resented by Hon. Dr Keefa Kiwanuka and Hon. Christine Kaaya Nakimwero. They are here to observe the proceedings of this House. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) You can stand up for recognition. (Applause) Thank you. MR WAMAKUYU: 3.0 Supplementary re-quests within the 3 per cent legal limitV ote 002: State House requested for Shs 210.545 billion to cater for classified expendi -ture and Shs 20 billion as subvention to Kiira Motors. Members can read that statement.On page 7, the committee:1. Declines approval of Shs 20 billion for Kiira Motors Corporation since Parlia -ment had appropriated funds within the Shs 77.09 billion budgeted for the pro-curement of parts and materials for pro-duction of electric buses.2. Recommends that a value-for-money au-dit be undertaken by the Office of the Au-ditor-General for funds advanced to Kiira Motors Corporation for the last three fi-nancial years.3. Recommends approval of Shs 210.545 billion to V ote 002: State House for classi-fied expenditure. V ote 003: Office of the Prime MinisterThe Office of the Prime Minister requested for Shs 1.5 billion to enable the Office of the Prime Minister to commence land preparation for a humanitarian base at Namanve, Mukono Dis-trict, which was given by the Uganda Invest-ment Authority. The committee recommends the approval of Shs 1.5 billion to V ote 003: Office of the Prime Minister for that purpose.7874 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO. 1 FOR FY 2022/2023V ote 004: Ministry of Defence and Veteran Af-fairs requested for Shs 90 billion –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable col-leagues, can we listen to the chairperson of the committee?MR WAMAKUYU: Shs 90.139 billion as sal-ary enhancement for UPDF senior officers. The committee recommends the approval of Shs 90.139 billion to V ote 004 for salary en-hancements to UPDF senior officers. V ote 006: Ministry of Foreign Affairs, request-ed for Shs 13.529 billion to cater for payment of outstanding arrears for 2022 and contribu -tion for 2023 African Union. This was provid-ed to enable it retain its right to participate and vote during the African Union meetings and summits. The committee recommends the approval of Shs 13.529 billion to V ote 006: Ministry of Foreign Affairs, for the payment of the out-standing arrears and contribution to the African Union. V ote 008: Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, requested for Shs 16.357 billion to cover shortfalls on critical activities, including the PPDA Appeals Tribu-nal, acquisition of land for a one-stop centre at Uganda Business Facilitation Centre in Kolo-lo, shortfalls under the PPP Unit and funding for EAC meetings and resource mobilisation travels.PPDA Appeals TribunalThe committee observed that the amendment of the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act, 2021 created additional responsi-bility that required regular sittings of the tribu-nal. Therefore, we recommend the approval of Shs 2.099 billion to V ote 008: Ministry of Fi-nance, Planning and Economic Development, to cater for additional statutory responsibilities by the PPDA Appeals Tribunal. Uganda Business Facilitation CentreUganda Business Facilitation Centre requires Shs 10.258 billion for procurement of land. Mr Speaker, the table indicates those plots of land in Kololo – the three of them – and their corre-sponding amounts. When we read through the evaluation report by a land valuer from the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, the com-mittee noted that Plot 3A Baskerville Avenue has encumbrances (mortgaged to Stanbic Bank Limited). The committee recommends:(i) Approval of Shs 6.788 billion for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for the purpose of procurement of land of Plot 4A and Plot 4B to expand the parking area.(ii) Deferment of Shs 3.927 billion for the procurement of Plot 3A pending clearance of the encumbrances on the property or title.Finance and Administration are requesting for Shs 2 billion to facilitate them to travel for resource mobilisation at the East African Community committee meetings. The committee recommends approval of Shs 2 billion support for resource mobilisation and travel-related expenses. The Private Partnership Unit has a requirement of Shs 2 billion. Initially, they have been surviving on a grant from the World Bank, which expired and the unit is critical. The request is to facilitate them for the activities. The committee recommends approval of Shs 2 billion. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is again requesting for Shs 2.473 billion to cater for Uganda Telecommunications Corporation Limited board expenses, and we recommend the approval of Shs 2.473 billion.[Mr Wamakuyu]SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO. 1 FOR FY 2022/20237875THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 5 APRIL 2023V ote 013: Ministry of Education and Sports, is requesting for Shs 20.1 billion as follows:(i) Shs 3.8 billion for Government of Uganda’s contribution to upgrading and reconstruction of Ndejje University Sports facilities in the preparation for the East African University Games, 2022. Ndejje University won the bid to host the East Africa University Games. So, this requirement is to uplift the sports facility. The committee recommends the approval of Shs 3.8 billion to V ote 013: Ministry of Education and Sports as a Government contribution to Ndejje University.Shs 3 billion is required for activities under the Education Review Commission. The commission was constituted by a minister and Legal Notice No.5 of 2021 and since that time, there was no budgetary provision. However, the committee observed that out of the Shs 3 billion allocated under the supplementary, Shs 600 billion is to be used to hire three units of vehicles to facilitate the commission’s activities for the remaining months for Financial Year 2022/2023 towards public hearings in at least two subregions. The cost of vehicle hire seems to be overstated and it would be more cost-effective to purchase the vehicles. The committee therefore recommends:i) Approval of Shs 3 billion to V ote 013: Ministry of Education and Sports, for critical activities under the Education Review Commission. ii) Shs 600 million planned funds for hiring three units of vehicles should instead be used to procure other than hire vehicles. iii) The request for Shs 3.3 billion is required to roll out a Dedication Management Information System. The committee observed that in the budget for Financial Year 2022/2023, Shs 2.86 billion has been allocated. However, there is need for additional funds to cater for the increasing number of learners. The committee, therefore, recommends approval of Shs 3.3 billion to V ote 013: Ministry of Education and Sports, for the rollout of the Education Management Information System. Shs 10 billion is required to clear outstanding commitments for the supply of instructional materials - There is a correction there. It is “instructional” not “institutional” materials for primary and secondary schools. Members will recall that there was an outstanding amount of Shs 43.4 billion and the request for Shs 10 billion is a partial settlement on outstanding bills to enable suppliers to deliver the materials. The committee recommends Shs 10 billion to V ote 013: Ministry of Education and Sports.The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives V ote 015: Shs 86.4 billion for the Government of Uganda’s contribution to Munyonyo Commonwealth Resort for the construction of a convention centre in preparation for hosting the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) conference in Uganda this year. Uganda is scheduled to host a NAM summit this year. However, there is no conference facility that can accommodate over 3,000 guests expected from the 120 member states and 17 observer countries. Accordingly, the Government of Uganda entered into a joint venture agreement with Meera Investments Limited as a feasible option for the construction and operation of the Convention Centre for hosting NAM G77 and the China summit.Honourable members may recall that we took note of our contribution to Munyonyo Commonwealth Resort. We have tasked the Uganda Development Corporation to inform Parliament of how much Government’s equity is in Munyonyo Commonwealth Resort and the dividends paid so far.7876 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO. 1 FOR FY 2022/2023Members, you can read page 13; the joint venture agreement and all the activities which have been done are there. On page 14, we made a recommendation:I) We recommend approval of Shs 38 billion to V ote 015: Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, for the Government of Uganda’s contribution as equity shares to Speak Resort Convention Centre Joint Venture for the construction of a convention. We have declined approval of Shs 48.4 billion being a loan amount to Speke Resort Convention Centre Joint Venture pending approval of the terms and conditions of the loan from the Government of Uganda as per Article 159, subsections (5), (6) and (7) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.V ote 015: Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives again requests Shs 302.255 billion as follows: (i) Shs 274.11 billion to Uganda Development Corporation for the purchase of Government shares in Atiak Sugar Factory. Members, I hope we are at table two. Members will read the progress so far done.On page 17, the committee declined approval of Shs 274.11 billion to Uganda Development Corporation (UDC) for purchase of the Gov-ernment preference shares in Atiak Sugar Fac-tory. We have given the reasons why we did so; Members can read that.The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooper -atives again requested for Shs 26.15 billion to UDC for purchase of Government of Uganda shares in Abubaker Technical Services and General Supplies Limited. (Interjections)  This is also in line with the Government’s industri-alisation policy and in particular, to support lo-cal firms that have a proven track record. The committee observed that the Govern-ment’s support for local companies has a good track record and is commendable. Support to Abubaker Technical Services is to strengthen the company’s financial capacity in road and bridge construction. The committee recommends approval of Shs 26.15 billion to Abubaker Technical Service and General Supplies Limited. This will trans-late to 14 per cent shareholding in the company based on its value of Shs 188 billion. That is the Government’s contribution. Shs 2 billion is required to meet the operation shortfalls under V ote 015: Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. We recommend ap-proval of Shs 2 billion for the trade ministry. V ote 016: Ministry of Works and Transport request of Shs 3.488 billion for completion of critical works at Uganda Martyrs Catholic Shrine in Namugongo. Members can read that. The committee recommends approval of Shs 3.488 billion to the Ministry of Works and Transport to complete works at Namugongo.V ote 017: Ministry of Energy and Mineral De-velopment - Shs 103.3 billion. This will be uti-lised as follows:a. Shs 57.6 billion to cater for the out-of-court settlement to Albatros. Members, you will note that the Government of Uganda’s energy policy is to reserve 10 per cent of the country’s power genera -tion capacity in the form of thermo plants to deal with emergency situations in the event of interruption on a national grid. In line with this policy, in the Financial Year 2014/2015, Government of Uganda entered into an implementation agreement with Alba-tros to establish a 50-Megawatt thermal plant in Hoima. This was to utilise heavy fuel oils produced locally from the country’s proposed oil refinery in the Financial Year 2018/2019.Members, due to the delayed production of first oil and development of the oil refinery, the project was unable to commence as planned. It was found costly and unsustainable to provide an annual subsidy of US$ 74.5 million for the investor to use imported oils. [Mr Wamakuyu]7877THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 5 APRIL 2023Subsequently, the Government of Uganda mu-tually agreed to discontinue the project and re-imburse the developer for expenses incurred in the development of the project processes and retain the land and other assets of the project. Albatros presented a claim amounting to US$ 16 million, equivalent to Shs 60 billion, in-curred on the asset acquisition and other oper -ational expenses of which US$ 4.768 million, approximately Shs 16.832 billion, has since been paid. Therefore, the required amount is Shs 43,167,000,000. Now the supplementary request of Shs 57.6 billion is in excess of Shs 14.33 billion. The committee recommends:a. An approval of Shs 43.16 billion for the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Develop-ment to cater for the out-of-court settle -ment for Albatros;b. Shs 14.433 billion to be recovered and deposited on a Consolidated Account and proof of this deposit be provided to Parlia -ment. Shs 45.7 billion for the buyout of Eskom con-cession at Kiira-Nalubaale power station. Hon-ourable members, you can read that. Eskom is ending the concession and the investment, which was done there, was factored in the tar -iffs. So, the amount that was determined by the Electricity Regulatory Authority was US$ 18.8 million. However, this is still subject to an on-going audit by the Auditor-General. It is a reliable estimate upon which resources were availed in the budget estimates. Failure to raise this buyout amount will mean extension of the concession until Eskom recovers its out-standing investments and returns. The committee observed that the supplementa -ry request of Shs 45.7 billion is a partial pro-vision awaiting the final audit by the Office of the Auditor-General on 21 March 2023, which is already done. The committee recommends as follows: i) Approval of Shs 45.7 billion to the Min-istry of Energy and Mineral Development to make partial payment for buyout of Es-kom concession. ii) The Office of the Auditor-General ex-pedites the final audit and evaluation to determine the total reimbursement to Es-kom. The Government should provide that in the next budget. V ote 018: Ministry of Gender, Labour and So-cial Development - Shs 2.59 billion for rehabil -itation of Gaddafi National MosqueThe committee recommends approval of Shs 2.59 billion to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development for the rehabilitation of Gaddafi National Mosque. V ote 020: Ministry of Information and Com-munication Technology -a requirement of Shs 39.2 billion as a shortfall to provide 50 per cent of Shs 113.75 billion on pension arrears to for -mer employees of Uganda Post and Telecom -munications Limited and Uganda Posta Limit -ed, in order to pay the pensioners over a period of two years. The committee recommends the approval of Shs 39.2 billion to clear the arrears.V ote 101: Judiciary - Request of Shs 1,653,000,000 for handling the security threats against judges and public officers. We recommend the approval of Shs 1.653 bil-lion to V ote 101: Judiciary, for the security of judges and officers as guaranteed. V ote 111: National Curriculum Development Centre - Request of Shs 6 billion for the de-velopment of the new Advanced Level curricu -lum. Honourable members, you are aware that there is a new curriculum.The committee recommends approval of Shs 6 billion to the National Curriculum Development Centre.7878 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO. 1 FOR FY 2022/2023V ote 117: Uganda Tourism Board - Shs 2.6 billion to cater for the wage requirement under the V ote. The committee recommends approval of Shs 2.6 billion to the board to cater for the wage requirement.V ote 119: Uganda Registration Services Bureau - request of Shs 1.337 billion as external financing from African Intellectual Properties Organisation. The committee observed that Uganda is a member of the organisation and they receive subscription fees. Honourable members, Section 18 of the Uganda Registration Services Bureau Act, Cap. 210, provides that all revenue collected by URSB should be paid into the Consolidated Fund. Accordingly, there are fees which went to the consolidated account. Therefore, the purpose of this is there is a request of US$ 350 million, equivalent to Shs 1.337 billion.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, five more minutes.MR WAMAKUYU: We recommend the approval.V ote 139: Petroleum Authority of Uganda - A requirement of Shs 11 billion to take care of the activities on EACOP and refinery development. The committee recommends approval of Shs 11 billion.V ote 144: Uganda Police Force – Shs 68 billion as follows:a) Shs 38.5 billion to meet contractual obligation on CCTV Phase II equipment.b) Shs 26 billion for maintenance of CCTV equipment acquired during the first phase and Phase II, andc) Shs 3.5 billion to purchase security vehicles for judges.We recommend approval of Shs 68 billion to Uganda Police Force.V ote 155: Cotton Development Organisation (CDO) - Requirement of Shs 9.5 billion of which Shs 7.5 billion is to take care of buffer stock fund and Shs 2 billion for transport rebate for Fine Spinners Uganda Limited. We recommend approval of Shs 9.5 billion.V ote 301: Makerere University - A requirement of Shs 8 billion for renovation of Lumumba and Mary Stuart Halls. We recommend approval of Shs 8 billion.V ote 307: Kabale University – Shs 3.213 billion non-tax revenue. This is to take care of the printing of examinations, repair of old buildings, facilitation of part-time lecturers and purchase of laboratory equipment. We recommend the approval of Shs 3.213 billion.V ote 532: Uganda Embassy in Somalia, Mogadishu – Shs 731 million. This is for shortfall, security-related issues and renovation. We recommend the approval.V ote 858: Kayunga District – Shs 837 million. These are unspent funds sent back to the Consolidated Fund at the end of the Financial Year 2021/2022 to enable the UPDF Engineering Brigade complete construction of health centre III. We recommend the approval.V ote 893: Mitooma District – Shs 2.628 billion for rehabilitation of roads; Kizinda-Rutookye-Bitereko. We recommend approval.V ote 924: Rukungiri District – Shs 1.795 billion as unspent funds for the Financial Year 2021/2022 for Uganda Inter-Government fiscal transfer reform for construction of seed schools and upgrade of health centres II to III. We recommend Shs 1.795 billion.Various central and local government V otes – Shs 402.401 billion to meet wage shortfalls arising from the new policy to enhance wages of scientists for the Financial Year 2022/2023. Honourable Members, see Annex III attached. We recommend the approval. However, on that schedule, we defer Shs 72 million for wage shortfall under V ote 112 – [Mr Wamakuyu]7879THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 5 APRIL 2023Ethics and Integrity. Therefore, we recommend approval of Shs 401.68 billion for those various V otes.Shs 1.627 billion as reallocation within the local government budgets. The table is as below:i) Butambala District – Shs 1.5 billionii)  Ssembabule District – Shs 127,469,171 The committee was informed that Shs 127 million was appropriated for V ote 926: Ssembabule District, for the Financial Year 2022/2023 to support health centres in the district. However, the accounting officer requested that the above funds be reallocated for the purpose of procuring land for a health centre IV . The Ministry of Health informed the committee that the said land was donated to the district by an individual.In light of the above, the committee declines the approval of reallocation of Shs 127 million for V ote 926: Ssembabule District Local Government, to procure land and recommends that this fund should be retained for its original purpose.The committee recommends approval of Shs 1.5 billion to Butambala Local Government.Part BThis is a supplementary request that requires prior parliamentary approval. Government is requesting for Shs 1.538 trillion under Schedule No.1 with the addenda. This is above the 3 per cent legal limit for both development and recurrent expenditure.The V otes are as follows:i) V ote 004: Ministry of Defence and Veterans Affairs – Shs 339.809 billion required to cover the shortfall on wage. This will be funded by a corresponding suppression in the classified equipment project. The committee recommends approval of Shs 339.809 billion.ii)  V ote 010: Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. A request of Shs 12.979 billion is required as external financing from the World Bank for Uganda Multi-Sector Food Security and Nutrition Project. Honourable Members, you will read that narration. We recommend approval of Shs 12.979 billion.iii)  V ote 011: Ministry of Local Government, Shs 13.978 billion is required as follows: a) Shs 13.179 billion as external financing from the African Development Bank for Markets and Agricultural Trade Improvement Project (MATIP 2). This is required to facilitate the completion of the activities. b) Shs 799 million is required as unspent external funding from USAID for Financial Year 2021/2022 for the coordination of implementation of Northern Uganda Development Enhance Local Governance Infrastructure and Livelihoods Programme (NUDEIL). The committee recommends the approval of 13.978 billion to the Ministry of Local Government. V ote 014: Ministry of Health made a request for Shs 208.825 billion as follows:Shs 176.943 billion was provided by the World Bank to UNICEF for the purchase of COVID-19 vaccines under the Uganda COVID-19 Response Emergency Preparedness Project. We recommend the approval of that request. Shs 31.882 billion for reimbursement of funds spent by the Government of Uganda on the procurement of COVID-19 vaccines also under the same programme. There is also a risk allowance of Shs 8 billion.There is also Shs 11.5 billion court award to Sino Africa Medicine and Health Limited.7880 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO. 1 FOR FY 2022/2023Shs 6 billion is required for maintenance of oxygen plants.Shs 2.7 billion is requested for supervision of the International Specialised Hospital at Lubowa.Shs 3.6 billion is required as counterpart funding for Busolwe General Hospital Project. Members can read the details. We recommend as follows: A total of Shs 5.9 billion, instead of the requested Shs 6 billion, be provided as follows: a) Shs 4 billion be availed to procure eight transformers and accessories for eight regional referral hospitals namely: Masaka, Jinja, Soroti, Gulu, Arua, Hoima, Kabale and Moroto.b) Shs 1.5 billion be availed for repair of oxygen plants in the regional referral hospitals. c) Shs 400 million be availed for van maintenance – for the workshop. The committee further recommends that recurrent expenditure should be incorporated in the subsequent budgets. In addition, we recommend that upon installation of the new oxygen plants, the current stock of oxygen plants should be evaluated and decommissioned since they have become more expensive to maintain. For the issue of Lubowa, the committee recommends that Shs 2.7 billion for supervision of the International Specialised Hospital at Lubowa –(Interjections)-  Members, listen. We decline the approval –(Applause)– because up to now, the Ministry of Health has not given accountability for what has been given so far. For the Shs 3.6 billion counterpart funding for Busolwe General Hospital - this is a grant from the Spanish Government – we recommend the approval of Shs 3.6 billion. V ote 018: Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development requested for Shs 21.6 billion for Generating Growth Opportunities and Productivity for Women (GROW) project. This project is funded by the World Bank.We recommend the approval of Shs 21.6 billion to V ote 018 for the GROW project. V ote 022: Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities made a request of Shs 1.359 billion as unspent NTR for Financial Year 2021/2022 for UWEC. We recommend the approval of Shs 1.359 billion. The same ministry is requesting for Shs 3.8 billion as non-tax revenue for emergency relocation of Uganda Hotel and Tourism Institute to rented premises and establishment of students’ accommodation facilities in Jinja to pave way for smooth construction. We recommend that Shs 3.8 billion be availed to the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities. V ote 120: National Citizenship and Immigration Control requested for Shs 46.784 billion for the directorate to procure more passport booklets. We observed that the demand for the booklets has increased and there is a shortage of 288,000 booklets. Once the money is given, the directorate will generate an additional Shs 65 billion in non-tax revenue. We recommend the approval of Shs 46.784 billion to V ote 120.V ote 122: Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) requested for Shs 34.446 billion as unspent balances for Financial Year 2021/2022 for the Second Kampala Integrated Infrastructure Development Project (KIIDP II) from the World Bank. We recommend that the Shs 34.446 billion be availed to KCCA. [Mr Wamakuyu]7881THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 5 APRIL 2023V ote 126: National Information Technologies Authority (NITA-U) requested for Shs 5.510 billion as external financing from the World Bank for implementation of the Regional Communication Infrastructure Project. We have a small correction on paragraph 3, page 34. Due to the delayed implementation, a request was made to the World Bank by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to extend the project closing date to 31 August 2022, not 2021. The request was granted. We recommend the approval of Shs 5.510 billion to NITA-U as external funding. V ote 302: Mbarara University of Science and Technology requested for Shs 1.660 billion as NTR for payment of living-out allowances for non-resident Government-sponsored students and management of third semester examinations. We recommend the approval of Shs 1.660 billion to Mbarara University. V ote 313: Mountains of the Moon University made a request of Shs 5.9 billion NTR to cater for provision of teaching and office infrastructure given the increasing pressure on the existing infrastructure resulting from high enrolment from 2,107 to 3,000. We recommend the approval of Shs 5.9 billion to Mountains of the Moon University. V ote 501: Uganda Mission at the UN, New York, requested for Shs 660 million to replace the old air conditioning circulation unit and associated ancillaries at the Uganda House in New York. The committee also established that the mission had requested for Shs 1.027 billion to do other associated works. We recommend the approval of those requests. Various central and local governments requested a total of Shs 10.752 billion as unspent external financing from Financial Year 2021/2022 under the European Union Budget support. These funds were meant to be disbursed to local governments and support activities under central government agencies as detailed below; the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Ministry of Public Service, Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development, Ministry of Local Government, Uganda Bureau of Statistics and Equal Opportunities Commission. So, we recommend approval of Shs 10.752 billion to various Central and Local Government V otes listed above. Various Central and Local Government V otes - Shs 408.967 billion to meet wage shortfalls arising from new policy to enhance the wages of scientists in the Financial Year 2022/2023. Members, you can read (annex 5) We recommend approval of Shs 408.967 billion for all the votes for salary enhancements. Central Government and Local Government V otes – Shs 11.070 billion is required as unspent external financing from the Financial Year 2021/2022 similar to what we have dealt with; the agencies are indicated. The committee declined approval of Shs 11.070 billion to various Central and Local Government V otes listed above as these funds were already provided in the approved budget for Financial Year 2022/2023. V ote 600: Local Governments – Shs 410.371 billion is required as follows:i) Shs 5.639 billion is locally raised revenue. This is required to facilitate the local governments, captured as unanticipated revenue at the time of budgeting. This was a surplus. We recommend approval of Shs 5.638 billion to various local governments. Members you will read (Annex 6A and 6B). ii) Shs 0.288 billion as unspent balances for Northern Uganda Development Enhanced Local Governance Infrastructure and Livelihoods Programme (NUDIEL), 7882 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO. 1 FOR FY 2022/2023benefiting districts are Kitgum, Lamwo and Nwoya. We recommend the approval of Shs 288,053,805. iii) Shs 150.601 billion is unspent funds for Financial Year 2021/2022 for USMID. Members, (see annex 7). We recommend approval of Shs 150.601 billion for USMID to facilitate Local Government V otes to settle contractual obligations. iv) Shs 225.233 billion is unspent funds for Financial Year 2021/2022 for the Uganda Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfer (UGIFT) reform for the construction of Seed Secondary School, upgrade of Health Centres IIs to IIIs, water projects and micro-scale irrigation projects (see annex 8). We recommend approval of Shs 225.233 billion to cater for all that.v) Shs 28.611 billion to cater for reallocation within the local Government budgets. This is required given that the funds were allocated to non-budgetary items and the requests for virement on these items are not in line with the 10 per cent threshold stated in the PFMA, 2015 (See annex 9 for details)We recommend approval of Shs 28.611 billion to cater for relocation within the Local Government budgets.Conclusion Mr Speaker, I request the House to consider the committee’s recommendations and approve the Supplementary Expenditure under Schedule No. 1, Addenda 1, 2, 3 and 4 for Financial Year 2022/2023 as outlined in the table below and the details in Annex 1 and 2 of the proposed supply schedules. Recurrent budget: Shs 1,714,590,568,914Development: Shs 883,184,203,925 Grand total: Shs 2,597,774,772,839. Mr Speaker, I beg to report. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairman.MR WAMAKUYU: Mr Speaker, I have seen a notification for a minority report on the Supplementary Schedule No.1 and the addenda for the Financial Year 2022/2023. It is provided for under our rules, but I have not seen a copy. I do not know why the author has not given me a copy and I do not know why he is smuggling it in now. So, I request one of the authors of the minority report to proceed and report.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Kivumbi, can you present the minority report?  4.28MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI (NUP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, I have just had a procedure. As you are aware, I have been unwell for about three months, I have had a procedure and I fear opportunistic diseases. That is why I am putting on a mask.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Omara, I request you to wear a mask because we have not yet stopped wearing masks.  (Laughter) MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: People are coughing here seriously. Mr Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity. I will straight away go to the areas of dissent. The rules and the procedures are known. They are well anchored under the law and we shall go to the areas of dissent.a) Illegal sources of funding for the supplementary. The sources of funding for this supplementary have been identified as;1. Suppression within the Government of Uganda’s budget.2. Reallocation. 3. Domestic borrowing. 4. Domestic revenue. 5. Non-tax revenue.6. Local revenue. 7. External borrowing. [Mr Wamakuyu]7883THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 5 APRIL 2023Let me go to the first one, which is suppression within the Government’s budget. Mr Speaker, I have combed the Public Finance Management Act, the regulations and I have looked at the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, and noted that suppression of a budget is not anchored in any law. Let me be very clear. Suppression of the budget is undermining the powers of Parliament to appropriate. The sole responsibility to pass a budget lies within Parliament. What the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has been doing is after passing the budget under the guise of 3 per cent, they all go out and begin to redo the budget and budget again. The full effect is to fund dubious things that we shall speak about later on. (Applause)Mr Speaker, unless this Parliament wakes up, takes a bold stand and finds a solution to the 3 per cent, we will be in this same debate every financial year. I would like the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to tell me what law he used to suppress a budget that was passed by the Parliament of Uganda. Under the Public Finance Management Act, there are only two avenues. You either do a virement, which is restricted to 10 per cent within a vote, or reallocation, which you bring to Parliament before you spend. Even under 3 per cent, the minister cannot suppress a budget, which was passed by Parliament. ReallocationMr Speaker, I will not be very elaborate on reallocation because the reallocation being sought in this budget was for districts where there were mismatches and the Shs 30 billion looks proper. But I will go to domestic revenue. Domestic revenueMr Speaker, they are indicating that they are going to generate Shs 587 billion under local revenue. URA reported a shortfall in the first two quarters of Shs 78 billion. The question is: if you have a shortfall, where are you going to get extra revenue? Under which law? Mr Speaker, you cannot budget for a supplementary under anticipation. So, there is no source of revenue for the budget you are about to approve because URA, up to now, has not performed 100 per cent. In fact, for the last five years, it has been registering a shortfall of nearly a trillion every financial year. Therefore, for anyone to come to Parliament and say I will generate extra revenue - from which source?BorrowingMr Speaker, they have not reported the source of borrowing. Is it going to be domestic? Is it going to be by Treasury bills? For domestic borrowing, we passed Shs 2.7 trillion, but we have already consumed almost Shs 22.4, which was approved and taken. So, under the borrowing in the domestic market, what we approved - and if it is new borrowing, and you went ahead to spend the 3 per cent before Parliamentary approval, then that is illegal. That is illegal by extension. You cannot borrow until Parliament has passed the terms and conditions of that borrowing. So, you are trading in illegality left, right and centre, honourable minister.External borrowingI have looked at the figures for external borrowing and they are okay. Mr Speaker, I will go to wasteful expenditure and I will be very elaborate. Let me start with a juicy one - Munyonyo Country Resort. Sometimes we can be conned as a country; but to what extent? I have just looked at the Auditor-General’s report of 2022 and this is what he wrote on Munyonyo. Mr Speaker, I will read this verbatim: “I note that there is slow progress on the takeover of Government interest as listed in Schedule 2 of the UDC Act, 2016, which identified seven Government undertakings that were to be taken over. I note that only two companies, i.e., Phoenix Logistics and Tristar Apparel Limited have been transferred to UDC. The remaining five, namely; Amber House Limited, Embassy House, Development House, Munyonyo 7884 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO. 1 FOR FY 2022/2023Commonwealth Resort and Nile Hotel International Limited were still outstanding…”THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kivumbi, you are raising very critical matters, but you are making it difficult for me. I am trying to be lenient, but you are making it difficult for me. Why? You are supposed to read the report since you did not sign it alone. Most of the issues you are referring to are not in the report. We are not debating because you are yet to present the report. Hon. Kivumbi, you are not only presenting your views, but also views of the co-signatories of the report. Can you limit yourself to the report and then maybe, at debate, you can find a way of bringing in your own issues?MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, you had given me 15 minutes only.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes. MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Reading the report may take longer, but if you want me to read the report, I have the report on Munyonyo in this schedule. I can read what is there. I was only elaborating -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That helps me. MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Munyonyo is number two on the schedule. I was being very fast, I think, for the apprehension of the House. I can go and read these dubious undertakings one by one.Mr Speaker, I am now on page nine. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, that that is much better. MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: I am now on page nine. Land Purchase for parking space for Uganda Bureau Facilitation Centre. What we have noted is an unforeseeable and unavoidable plan for the parking space. First of all, it should have been catered for at the initial stage. How do you make an architectural building, for heaven’s sake, without planning for parking space? Then, you come up after one or two years and you want Shs 10 billion in a supplementary expenditure? This is a nugatory expenditure. The committee has recommended the approval of Shs 6.7 billion, but we are saying the whole amount of Shs 10 billion is a wasteful expenditure. Illegal undertaking for equityMr Speaker, shares on behalf of Uganda, in any undertaking through UDC - I have seen in this report, shares for Atiak and Abubaker were channelled through UDC, but when it came to Munyonyo, which is always a dubious expenditure, money went direct. Yet, Munyonyo registered a separate company under Meera, which went to Munyonyo Resort, where the Government of Uganda is a shareholder, and cut a portion. It is like in your compound between the main house and the boys’ quarter, you lend a space to Uganda and the value of it is dubious. When you look at the valuation report attached, it is dubious. This is how we lost Shimoni Demonstration School in the name of CHOGM. Now under the name of this conference, we are going to lose another huge sum of money. I have asked the committee: “Why do you say the hand should be amputated?” Otherwise, they have failed to approve part of the money; they are saying the hand should be amputated yet the finger is fine. What kind of reasoning is that? You cut off the hand, but the finger remains? This is ridiculous. Let me go to the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development on Albatros. They are seeking Shs 57.6 billion to terminate our Eskom Company. The Auditor-General has not audited this, but we have gone ahead to pay Shs 57 billion in a dubious - yet, the Auditor-General is to fully audit. This is dubious expenditure. Mr Speaker, let me speak about what people do not want to speak about; the continued classified expenditure of State House. (Applause) The Government of Uganda needs to curb the appetite of State House and using [Mr Muwanga Kivumbi]7885THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 5 APRIL 2023classified expenditure at every turn of events to spend billions of money. This is becoming a haemorrhage of the economy and the Head of State should not be made to look funny because he is the Fountain of Honour. UDC purchase of Government shares in Atiak Sugar Factory. I want to thank the committee for speaking with us on this report. They have disallowed this expenditure and I thank them. However, for Abubaker in particular; why Abubaker? What criteria did anyone use to select Abubaker Technical Services and General Supplies Limited among the struggling companies? BMK is struggling and many other Ugandans are suffering. This cherry-picking of companies will breed unprecedented corruption in this country. So, why Abubaker? I am here to encourage you, honourable colleagues, to reject this expenditure because until Government comes up with proper criteria on how to bail out companies that are struggling – this cherry-picking by the ministry – Now on the judges: Judges wanted security cars, but being another arm of Government, I will leave them for another day.On CCTV cameras; this project – I was the Shadow Minister for Internal Affairs and Defence in the last financial year, when we borrowed billions of shillings for this project – complete project for supervision over the years, but they continue to come here and demand money in supplementary budgets and they are funded on three per cent. We are saying you need an investigation before Parliament clears out this. The good thing is that the agencies already have the money; so, let us clean and ensure that they have it properly. Otherwise Parliament’s hands will be tied into this dirty thing. Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities; reallocation of Uganda Hotel Training, Members can read that one. Office of the Prime MinisterNow, Office of the Prime Minister, couldn’t you budget for this money? I am afraid to laud over my sister and my friend, that is really embattled with many scandals –(Laughter)– but this Shs 1.5 billion, honourable colleagues, could be budgeted for. Mr Speaker, allow me, in a minute, to appeal to this Parliament. I think we must stop lamenting. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is usurping the powers of Parliament on our watch and every day, they bring here this one for rubber–stamping. See what they have done with the 3 per cent. They have even reserved some money for 3 per cent and went to prior. When you look at items for prior - none you can question - but all dubious expenditure is under 3 per cent. Three per cent is a special purpose vehicle for wrong things in this country. Until we make a strong stand and amend the Public Management Act and put stringent conditions on the 3 per cent or remove it, every single year I will stand here and make the same speech. I beg to move, Mr Speaker. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, I have colleagues who have been here since 2.00 p.m. Let us have a five-minute break. I suspend the House for five minutes. It is important that you stretch your legs. Those who do not want to move can remain here. (The House was suspended at 4.45 p.m.)(On resumption at 4.55 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable colleagues. Procedure, Hon. Opio?MR OPIO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise under rule 153, which talks about the supplementary estimates and provides for a supplementary to be introduced through a supplementary Bill. We approved the Appropriation Act and within that Act, there were key items that were 7886 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO. 1 FOR FY 2022/2023budgeted for – Shs 20 billion for the upgrade of health centres III, money for water, education, electricity and even Shs 30 billion for cattle compensation. Mr Speaker, what we are doing right now seems to be indirectly amending the Appropriation Act. For the items that had been approved, zero releases have been made to date. We are indirectly amending the Appropriation Act – in the name of a supplementary Bill – because we have been informed by the minister that there will be no releases for cattle compensation and no releases for the upgrade of those health centres III to become health centres IV . So, are we proceeding well, Mr Speaker?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable member, we are proceeding well. That is a contribution that fits very well within the debate, which we are going to have. Those are the issues you would raise during the debate. Otherwise, if you dismiss all items under procedure - so, we are proceeding extremely well, only that you are too fast for us. Honourable colleagues, the question I now put for debate is that the House resolves itself into a Committee of Supply to consider the Supplementary Schedule No. 1 for Financial Year 2020/2023. The item for debate is the motion for supply. It is in that motion that you have the report, which you debate. That is why I put the question for debate. You will consider both reports that have been presented and we shall debate for 30 minutes. Debate starts now and we shall take two minutes each. 4.58MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for its report and I also thank those who signed the minority report.It surprises me that we have issues that touch our people directly. I was on the Floor of this House, crying for just Shs 5 billion for the students loan scheme, to help those students who were about to drop out of school – some were in their final year. The Government could not find Shs 5 billion.However, here we are, appropriating all these trillions of shillings to things that are not urgent. When I look at this – we are talking of Shs 86.4 billion to Munyonyo Commonwealth Resort – it surprises me. The conference is supposed to take place this year. In the report, we are told they need 14 months to construct this convention centre. So, if you are supposed to have this conference in November and you are supposed to take 14 months, when do the 14 months end? It will be next year, after the conference.Is somebody trying to fool us? I propose that we reject this. There was land – you remember when the Prime Minister of India came here, he pledged to construct a convention centre in memory of the late Mahatma Gandhi –(Interjection)-  not even in Jinja; he preferred Kampala. Ten acres of land were got by the Ministry of Agriculture; why don’t we give the Prime Minister land where he wants and they build the convention centre for us? Now we want to invest money into something that is unclear – Munyonyo. Who owns it, Mr Speaker? –(Member timed out.)  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable, let us respect the microphone. Honourable colleagues, there are things that we shall need to sit down as Members of this House, and look at them objectively and even see which mistakes to consume or reject. Recently, I represented the Speaker in Bahrain, for the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) and on the side lines, we had the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM). I went with our own NAM committee, chaired by Hon. Kimosho. One of the things we were asked was the preparedness [Mr Opio]7887THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 5 APRIL 2023of Uganda to host NAM, which is in January and one of the conditions they gave was a convention centre. It was a condition, which we accepted as a host country. How we will build it is an issue we can debate. However, on the need for your convention centre for NAM, it is a commitment, which was made on behalf of Uganda, as part of our bidding process. We must have it or we cancel NAM. Do you get it? And you are having it in January. The NAM secretariat is supervising and monitoring our progress. So to me, that is the issue that we have to look at. Did someone make an expensive commitment or mistake on behalf of Uganda? And as a country, can you come out of it? That is what I want us to know. 5.02MR WILSON KAJWENGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County Kiruhura): Thank you. Mr Speaker, I have read the Constitution’s appropriate Article and the Public Finance Management Act. The spirit and letter of a supplementary, as referred to in the Public Finance Management Act, is to the effect that it caters for the unforeseen and unavoidable. The majority of what has been provided for in the report and in the supplementary is actually foreseeable and avoidable. It is better to understand why the ministry of planning was put under finance; so that they can actually realign planning and financing. This makes us look shabby. “Us” I mean, from this side of the Government. It is like we did not plan smartly. We look shabby; we are reading the National Budget, and we have not even finished it. Mr Speaker, it is not good planning. I belong to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and we just appropriated and finished financing for the construction of housing of the Uganda Registration Services Bureau (URSB); there has never been a need brought to us as a committee. We oversee them - it is now coming under a supplementary schedule. It is not fair, maybe once a supplementary schedule comes on board - (Member timed out.)5.04MR FERIGO KAMBALE (NRM, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The supplementary budget being presented to us is around Shs 2.7 trillion. It is high time this Parliament enforced budgetary disciplines. Shs 2.7 trillion not being foreseen during the budgeting and planning process - budgeting which begins with the budget framework paper, we receive here ministerial policy statements, we discuss them and at the end of the day during implementation, we get such big figures of Shs 2.7 trillion for supplementary approval. Why are we spending time budgeting and planning? This is indiscipline of the highest class. What is happening with our Ministry of Finance and Planning? It is true when it comes to supplementary budgets, we should only look at the unforeseeable. When you talk about wage shortfalls, really, can’t you foresee wages that we are supposed to spend in the following year? Mr Speaker, the chairperson of the Committee on Budget indicated that certain areas were declined; they did not approve them. I want to request our Committee on Budget that next time, even before they present, they should first outline the areas where you said no, and tell us the total amount because to us, during that Budget, it means that is the savings now - where you have said no -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you do not switch on the microphone by yourself; you need my permission. MR KAMBALE: Noted.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are also breaking the law. MR KAMBALE: Okay. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just conclude.MR KAMBALE: Where there is a saving; where have you allocated that money - because you said no, but after saying no, where did you put the money? 7888 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO. 1 FOR FY 2022/2023Lastly, regarding the issue of investing, Mr Speaker, when we hear certain figures are going to be invested when we still have shortfalls in providing essential services, I get worried. You hear of a health centre III that has not been upgraded and certain teachers have been recruited, with no salaries. However, at the same time, you are talking about money to invest. To my understanding, you only invest when you have a surplus. During this critical economic situation that we are in, we do not have a surplus. Where are we getting this money to invest when we have a deficit on essential services? Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable. That advice you have given about investing when you have a surplus, never apply it to your business. That business of eating and then you invest the balance - you first save and then you –(Laughter) I picked Hon. Okwi. Honourable colleagues let us use two minutes each.5.08MR SAMUEL OKWIR (NRM, Moroto County, Alebtong): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I want to thank the committee for their report and I also appreciate the minority side that gave the report. What is our priority as Government? We have schools which need support. The Microfinance Support Centre, which is targeting the active poor in this country, who are willing to do business, is only given Shs 26 billion in the Budget for the entire country. And we are bailing out Abubaker Technical Services; one enterprise, one company - Shs 26 billion. However, the entire population of the country that is the active poor - the 36 per cent that we say we are targeting –(Interjections)-  the 39 per cent. Mr Speaker, look at the promises that the Government has made to the Wanaichi , the people who have lost their cows, the business community in this country who have done work for the Government have not been paid. We have budgeted only Shs 200 billion out of the Shs 7 trillion in demand. What is our priority? This is the question that we must answer here. All these that have been raised by finance can wait. We are budgeting and planning now, but what is the priority?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, the issues being raised for the last six years I have been in Parliament are the same issues you raise every financial year. Why? It is because you focus on figures. Listen; you do not focus on the principle. For example, if our focus had been that the Government gives us the criteria of saving companies that are doing badly, there is a defined criteria. Table it here so that in future when you say so and so –If I presided over a House here and we gave ROKO Shs 202 billion and you say Abubaker cannot get Shs 26 billion – a local company - and all jobs are going to Chinese and foreigners, how are you –The demand should be: if you have been able to save Abubaker, how can you save BMK? How can you save Bulambuli Construction Company? Do we have criteria for everyone to apply? If you do not look at the bigger picture, today you will stop Abubaker, tomorrow you will allow someone for Shs 300 billion in this same House. The issue is the principle. Can we define it clearly? You have companies, which have taken much bigger amounts and approved by this House without a big quarrel. If we have talked about local content; can we support it? Hon. Okwir, if companies from Moroto Municipality need support, how can they be supported? How can we benefit from this? Is it about knowing someone or is there a criterion that everyone can follow? Once we put our debate at that level rather than picking out one company, then it will be much easier for us. It will be more constructive. We can then make demands whether it means amendment of the law or coming here and giving clear information on how to follow up on all this; then we would move much better. To me, that is more constructive. Honourable colleagues, in the VIP gallery this evening, we have the Most Rev. Dr Stephen [Mr Kambale]7889THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 5 APRIL 2023Samuel Kazimba Mugalu, Archbishop of the Province of the Church of Uganda. Thank you for coming, Your Grace. (Applause)He is accompanied by:1. Rev. Can Dr Rebecca Nyegenye - Provost of All Saints Church Nakasero.2. Rev. Christine Shimanya – Chaplain, Parliamentary Anglican Chaplaincy. I do not know whether Rev. Johnson Kansiime is here. Others who might be accompanying His Grace, we welcome you. He has come to witness proceedings of this House, but like I announced yesterday, we are hosting him as the Anglican Chaplaincy for prayers. I want us, after here, to join His Grace for the prayers. (Applause)5.13MS CHRISTINE NAKWANG (NRM, Woman Representative, Kaabong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the two reports submitted. First, I want to comment that the finance ministry is presenting the supplementary at the wrong time because we are now moving to the end of the financial year. After this approval, we are not sure what steps the ministry will take to ensure that all this money is utilised. Particularly, I want to talk about the unspent funds worth Shs 225.2 billion that was returned under the UgIFT programme. I speak as a member of the Committee on Public Accounts (PAC) (Local Government). Across the country, where these UgIFT programmes have been - the Seed secondary schools, elevation of the health centres II to III - there has been a very big challenge. I want to find out why the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development delays to revote money when it is sent back to the Treasury, so projects are completed. Aware that this UgIFT is coming to an end soon, what can they tell us? We want assurance. If these projects are not completed, then we shall not achieve what we intend to achieve as Government.Regarding micro projects, the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government) discovered that on the micro-irrigation projects, the conditionality of cost sharing is affecting the projects. Most farmers are not able to give the Shs 2 million and above to have the projects implemented. Therefore, even as we approve a supplementary - on my side, I support this –(Member timed out.) – may I?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us go to another colleague I had picked. 5.16MR HENRY KIBALYA  (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As my colleagues have hinted, the objective of a supplementary is to cater for areas that were unforeseeable and currently unavoidable. As we speak, the CT scan at Mulago National Referral Hospital is not working. If you get an accident, you must be referred to a private hospital. There is no water at Mulago. They ration water at times at night. The lifts are down.Instead of looking at areas that really cater for the current welfare and life of Ugandans, we are here appropriating money for Kiira Motors. I was here in the last Parliament, but for all the budgets, we were appropriating money for those vehicles. This is an area that we can –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has been rejected by the committee. MR KIBALYA: Very good. (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In fact, honourable colleague, if you read through, it is very clear. This money is already provided for in the budget. We are saying, “Why are you charging the supplementary when you have it in the budget?” That is what the committee said and declined approval.7890 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO. 1 FOR FY 2022/2023MR KIBALYA: As I conclude, we need to look at areas that really matter and make sense to Ugandans. Every Ugandan here knows that ROKO did not complete the structures of Mulago National Referral Hospital. Instead of bringing us a supplementary to cater for the completion of the structure to ensure we save lives, someone is coming here to say we build Munyonyo.In the last supplementary, when they allocated money for Munyonyo, we rejected it, but the finance ministry went ahead and appropriated Shs 80 – (Member timed out.)5.18MR ALFRED EDAKASI (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to agree with the report of the committee, especially on Horyal Investment Holding Company Limited. The people of Acholi have not benefited from Horyal. This House should know that Horyal has already received over Shs 482 billion since the Government started investing in it, twice the amount of Horyal’s own equity. Its own equity is Shs 201 billion. Therefore, the people of Atiak and those who surround that factory, as we speak, it is at standstill. I applaud the decision of the committee not to give that money and I think this House should affirm that. I have a slightly different view on both Abubakar and the conference. Whereas I have listened to Members, I think the House should note that we competed to get the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) to come here. We could not have foreseen that. We competed. We won. We were given NAM; so, we cannot say that we would have seen that. However, it is also something we cannot avoid. With all its difficulties, we should be able to gain from it. I think this House should agree with the committee to fund that conference. I am aware that the shareholder agreement exists; I am aware that the certificate of title exists, and some other. I think, based on the current condition it is in, it only benefits us to invest and make sure we secure money so that we can host those numbers of people here and facilitate our hotels that in our – (Member timed out.)5.20 MR STEPHEN MUGOLE (NRM, Kabweri County, Kibuku): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I agree with you in regard to the issue of t h e Non-Aligned Movement (NAM). Whereas we had issues with giving money to Munyonyo, whose director had even refused to come to our committee to explain the 25 per cent share capital that Government has with them, a convention is not a standalone aspect that you can do within one year. Building that facility as a standalone was impossible. I suppose Government was correct because even the structures that are being put up in Munyonyo are connecting to some of the structures that exist today, in order to manage that convention. The spiral benefits of having NAM in Uganda are enormous and we cannot avoid them. Therefore, I suppose that it is correct that we should invest, but what we must emphasise this time is to raise our share capital, as Government, into Munyonyo and follow it to the letter. The Ministries of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Trade and Industry must fast-track this because this is the area where we are facing problems. It was difficult - in fact, it would be very expensive for Uganda to do a standalone convention. It cannot be possible within only one year. I wanted to allude to that. Lastly, on the issue of Abubaker Technical Services and General Supplies, even in our committee, this is a company that we have seen do very good work - which we suppose - and it is a local company. It must be supported. We have been supporting the others –(Member timed out.)7891THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 5 APRIL 20235.22MR BOSCO OKIROR (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to commend the committee for the elaborate report that has been given and also the dissenting one. It gives a bit of a strange feeling. I agree with my colleagues on the other submissions when it comes to issues which are a priority for our country. Teso, Acholi and Lango Subregions have only requested for Shs 30 billion for cattle compensation, which was approved. The first quarter is gone; the second quarter has gone; the third one has gone; and on the fourth one, we are under the category of “unfunded priority”. Mr Speaker, it hurts, as a legislator, and it pains that we stand on this Floor to approve monies going to certain institutions, but the majority of these people from all these three subregions are not a priority. They lost these items; they have been impoverished because of these cows being taken from them. It hurts. These are subregions that are predominantly crippling with lack of health facilities. The roads - I expected this supplementary budget perhaps to even cover the aspect of - the rains are back. Teso sits at the lower part of Karamoja. If the rains come from Karamoja, the floods are continuous. To date, there is no solution that Government has given to avert the issue of floods. We are soon going to go to the Prime Minister asking for tarpaulins. Where is the planning in our country, Uganda, the Pearl of –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, I am in a very tight spot. It is very rare for the House to host the head of the church in the country here, and yet we gave him a programme of 5.00 p.m., for Easter Carols. His Grace came on time; he is here. I have just been reminded that why don’t we be considerate enough? Therefore, I adjourn the House to tomorrow at 2.00 o’clock, and we shall continue with the debate.(The House rose at 5.25 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 6 April 2023 at 2.00 p.m.)