Thursday, 12 April 2012
	
Parliament met at 2.03 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

 The House was called to order.

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker, Deputy Leader of Government Business, Members of Parliament, we are gathered here today to pay tribute to a fallen hero whose contribution was officially recognised by the Uganda Constitution and is enshrined under Article 8. He is also a holder of the national Independence medal, the late Professor George Wilberforce Kakoma. 

He was a great patriot to whom we owe our country’s anthem. His outstanding composition which crosses and holds Ugandans together with a stronger identity will be engrained in the annals of history of this country. Uganda has indeed lost a great man who contributed enormously to the development of art and music not only in Uganda, but East Africa and Africa as a whole.

On behalf of the Parliament of Uganda and on my own behalf, I wish to extend our sincere condolences to Mama Theresa Kakoma and family who are here in the Chamber, relatives and friends, upon the loss of this great Ugandan. May his soul rest in eternal peace!
  
2.06
(Entrance of the late Professor George William Kakoma.)

National Anthem (one Verse)

Laying of wreaths.

THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Lt. Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Professor George Wilberforce Kakoma under Rule 43 of the Rules of Procedure. The mover is the Prime Minister and I am doing it on his behalf:

“WHEREAS Parliament has learnt with profound sorrow the demise of Professor George Wilberforce Kakoma, which occurred on the 8th day of April 2012 at the age of 89 years after being hospitalised for a period of two years;

AND WHEREAS Professor George Wilberforce Kakoma was born on the 27th day of July 1923 in Mengo Hospital and hails from Wakiso District in Uganda;

NOTING THAT Professor Kakoma received his primary education at Mengo Primary School and secondary education at Kings College Budo, and education in music from the then Nairobi Conservatoir of Music;

FURTHER NOTING that Professor Kakoma attended Trinity College of Music after which he proceeded to the London Royal School of Music. He later pursued graduate studies at the Durham University in the United Kingdom where he distinguished himself as an icon of music;

AWARE that in the 1960s, he was the inspector of schools in charge of music and he shortly joined the then Ministry of Culture and Community Development from where he organised several music festivals;

RECOGNISING that Professor lectured in Kenya, Kyambogo and Makerere University from where he authored several books and wrote many songs;

COGNISANT of the fact that Professor Kakoma was reknown for his musical talent, which he ably put to use enabling him to compose the Uganda National Anthem in 1962; the anthem which remains the national symbol of Uganda as a sovereign state;

APPRECIATING that Professor will be remembered by all who interacted with him because of his sociability, humility, politeness, smartness, foresight, punctuality, patriotism, extreme intellectual capacity and above all for his composition of the National Anthem;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows:

1.	That it collectively conveys its deep condolence to the bereaved family, friends and the nation as a whole upon the loss of this illustrious son of Uganda.

2.	That it takes cognisance of the distinguished services rendered and contribution made by the late Professor George Wilberforce Kakoma both at local and international levels in the academic and musical spheres.


3.	That the Almighty God sustains the bereaved and grants Professor George William Wilberforce Kakoma eternal rest.

May the Almighty rest his soul in eternal
peace!” 

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have received from the Chair of the East African Legislative Assembly, Uganda Chapter the following letter:

“The family of the late George William Kakoma.

On behalf of the East African Legislative Assembly, Uganda Chapter and on my own behalf, I wish to extend our condolences to Mrs Kakoma, the children, relatives, friends, in-laws and all Ugandans upon the demise of our national hero, George William Kakoma, who passed on 8 April 2012.

The late George William Kakoma, the composer of the National Anthem, will always be remembered by Ugandans with pride and honour for his outstanding contribution to the formation of the national state of Uganda.

As the East African Legislative Assembly, we recognise, respect and honour such outstanding East Africans who have made distinguished contributions to their respective partner states. In that regard, therefore, Uganda in particular and East Africa in general have lost a distinguished son whose works will forever be remembered. 
      
  
May the good Lord grant him eternal peace.” 
Mike Kennedy Sebalu, 
Chair, East African Legislative Assembly, Uganda Chapter.”

May I invite the seconder, hon. Leader of the Opposition.

2.21
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Madam Speaker, I rise to second the motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Prof. George Wilberforce Kakoma. I came to know of the Professor when I was in P.3 during the subject that was called civics, as we were being told of the important events in the country and Prof. Wilberforce Kakoma was introduced to us as the composer of the beautiful Uganda National Anthem. When the teacher told us of his date of birth, I realised he was born the same year with my late father whom he has gone to join. 

The late professor was admitted to Nsambya Hospital on 22 February 2011, before being transferred to Nakasero Hospital in April and later discharged. In August 2011, the late suffered a stroke. 

Like you have all heard, he was a student of Trinity College of Music at Durham University. All these were prestigious universities in the UK for the middle and upper class. So, the professor we are saying bye to today is a distinguished Ugandan of that class then. 

He is the composer of our dear National Anthem, which brings all Ugandans together. When I read properly and rehearse the wording of the National Anthem, internalise and think about a Uganda the professor thought about when he was composing this song, I find that he looked at a Uganda which was all accommodative, all embracive; a Uganda and a country where all Ugandans would be treated with dignity; where all Ugandans were free politically, socially and economically. In his composition, he looks at a Uganda where all Ugandans are economically empowered, where he said, “O Uganda the land that feeds us...”

He looks at a Uganda that looks forward to a peaceful co-existence amongst ourselves as Ugandans and together with our neighbours where he says, “In peace and friendship we will all live...” I look at his composition as a composition that unites us all Ugandans irrespective of our political inclination even today. It is still applicable in our current situation. And I see a real hero in the professor. That is why I stand here to say that it is right and fitting for us as the Parliament of Uganda, a nation that is really endowed with this beauty that he talks about in his composition; to say that he needs to be recognised as a hero and to really pay this tribute, and the reason for which I have stood here to second the motion. 

I wish to pay special tribute to him for acting as a guide and a torch where all hope seems to be gone, even in times of sorrow, and in times of bitterness, that all Ugandans have found a point under which we can all assemble; the National Anthem. Whether in Opposition, or in Government, at all our functions, we have all found refuge under the National Anthem. What a hero you are, Prof. Wilberforce Kakoma. 

Many heroes have been remembered in this country, but yours will be a special remembrance for all Ugandans because even our grandchildren will come to talk about you. They will all sing the composition you made. Many singers have composed songs, but none of them has had a song that has stood the test of time. Yours is a special one, Prof. Kakoma.

This world is a stage where we all come and play our part. Kakoma played his part and may your soul rest in eternal peace. I thank you Madam Speaker. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let me invite the Prime Minister to second the motion.

2.27
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the Government of the Republic of Uganda, and on my own behalf, I wish to convey our heartfelt condolences to the bereaved family and all the people of Uganda on the passing on of the late George Wilberforce Kakoma. The late Wilberforce Kakoma can be rightly referred to as the most famous musician, the man who gave the country her musical identity because nowhere in this country have any lyrical notes been sung so loud and wide as the lyrics of the Uganda National Anthem. The late Wilberforce Kakoma passed away on Easter Sunday after a year of ill-health. He has passed on 50 years since that musical creation that etched his name into the walls of history took form. It is a pity that the country will not celebrate with him the half century of its Independence. 

I am informed that he was originally from Masaka, but later settled in Wakiso District. The late Prof. Kakoma studied at Mengo Primary School, King’s College Budo, and later joined Nairobi Conservatoire of Music where he spent two years. He was a graduate of Trinity College of Music at Durham University in London.

In the 60s Prof. Kakoma worked as Inspector of Schools in charge of music. In 1966/1967 he was among the first technical officers to be appointed when the Ministry of Culture and Community Development was created. When serving at the ministry he organised several musical festivals successfully. He also lectured at Kyambogo and Makerere universities in Uganda, and Kenyatta University in Kenya. More importantly, Members are informed that the late Prof. Kakoma is credited for composing the Uganda National Anthem in 1962, a contribution that has brought immeasurable honour to this country. The contribution of the late Kakoma can be seen after close examination of what a national anthem means to the state. A national anthem promotes patriotism. When people sing the national anthem or listen to it, they feel uplifted as one nation and they identify themselves with the words of the anthem. A national anthem promotes unity and makes people embrace oneness on account of sharing the same motherland. It promotes tradition when it points out the traditional legacy and values of their state. 

In singing a national anthem, there is a proud feeling of oneness and solidarity, that is why the anthem is sang during football matches, traditional gatherings, political rallies and at war fronts. 

For the past 50 years and for generations to come, until probably when the anthem is changed if ever it will be changed, Ugandans have been and will continue to identify themselves with the brains, the thoughtfulness and the nationalism of George Wilberforce Kakoma in concurrence with what he composed about their National Anthem.

There are acts that cannot be paid by money. There is no amount of money that can pay for the contribution of the late Kakoma. We can only pay Kakoma by observing the words in the lyrics of his composition and strive to keep those words alive and meaningful.

For that matter, Government decided to accord an official burial to the late Professor Kakoma in accordance with Circular Standing Instructions No.3 of 2005, Paragraph 2.2(g) on personalities whose contribution have brought honour to the country. 

From the time of his demise, Government has been working very closely with his family to work out the requirements for his funeral all of which have been fully met by the State. Government also set up a Cabinet sub-committee comprising political heads of the ministries of Information and National Guidance, Gender and Social Development, the Presidency and the Public Service, to oversee the programme and funeral arrangements for the late Professor Kakoma. 

As part of his deserved honours, we decided that his body is brought to lie in state here at Parliament for public viewing and signing of the condolence book today. Subsequently, there will be a funeral service tomorrow, Friday, 13 April 2012, at Namirembe Cathedral starting at 10.00 a.m. Thereafter, the burial will be on Saturday 15th April at his ancestral home in Wakiso district.

Burial ceremonies will start with a service at his home at Kavumba at 10.00 a.m. Thereafter, the casket will proceed to the family burial site three kilometres from the later Professor Kakoma’s home starting at 3.00 p.m. At the burial, Professor Kakoma will also be honoured with a symbolic gun salute deserving of a truly distinguished son of Uganda.

Therefore, on behalf of the Government of Uganda, I wish to reiterate our heartfelt condolences to the family, relatives, friends and in-laws of the late Professor Kakoma and the country at large about the passing of the Professor. You will always be remembered in post-independent Uganda as an outstanding citizen and scholar who gave Uganda its priceless identity by composing our National Anthem. May God grant eternal rest to the late Kakoma’s soul and also sustain the bereaved. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now invite hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi to be followed by hon. Mugume. Today, I do not want to use my other switch, but can we just use three minutes each.

2.36
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I hope you do not use your switch.
I rise to pay tribute to one of the greatest music composers of our time, Professor George Wilberforce Kakoma. I came to know him when I was still fretting with studies at St Henry’s College in Masaka, where he visited us in a celebrated manner and we rejoiced after he had delivered a lecture on the significance of the National Anthem. 

The life of Professor Kakoma has come to an end through a cessation of his biological functions. He has not come to a total end. He is still a beneficiary of a blessed resurrection; so let his soul continue to be blessed because he deserves it.

The conception of death is a very terrifying experience. Once, William Shakespeare, the writer of a book called Julius Caesar had the following to say, “Cowards die many times before their death”. 

Professor George Wilberforce Kakoma was not a coward, because his great work continued to excite everybody; this generation and the generation to come. 

“The valiant never taste of death but once. Of all the wonders that I yet have had it seems to me most strange that men should fear”. Shakespeare continues saying that death is a necessary end let it come when it wills. 

George Kakoma has won on earth; he will still win ahead. Death will come when it finds him ready because he is already ready in view of what legacy he has left behind. We as Ugandans feel proud about that successful music composer. Death has robbed us of an irreplaceable music giant. He was a simple person, a man of joy; he was a patriot and a music composer of excellence. 

The depth and melody attached to his lyrics in the Kakoma Anthem is a rare occurrence in ceremonial music. He was a great hero in Uganda and Africa at large. Within three stanzas of music, he could capture the attention of the state, talk to the stars, talk to the cultures of a glorious nation and communicate to all Ugandans about the significance of the Ugandan nation. The words are richly chosen and they flow environmentally with significance. (Laughter)

For example, Madam Speaker, it is unfortunate that when we sing the Uganda National Anthem, we observe only one stanza because there is a standing convention that you can only sing all of them when the President is around. 

The time has come for us to demystify that to enable the young generation master the lyrics prevalent in the stanzas because the two stanzas that are left out are so important to our Ugandan environment. I propose that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister at Cabinet level demystifies the convention so that the President does not have to be around for the entire Anthem to be sang, after all, globally, it is one of the shortest national anthems on earth. I have done some research in terms of music composition. 

One of the most touching stanzas which I will beg to read is as follows:

“Oh Uganda! The land that feeds us
By sun and fertile soil grown.
For our own dear land,
We will always stand:
The Pearl of Africa’s Crown.”

It is not by coincidence that sometime back in 2009, I wrote an article on climate change in the journal called The Uganda Living Law Journal published by the Uganda Law Reform Commission. By coincidence, I echoed the words of wisdom expressed in the Kakoma anthem: 

“Uganda, Uganda, Uganda
Uganda is the land of the sun
It is the Pearl of Africa
It is the source of splendour
It is the land of the waterfalls
It is the land of the zebras
At the Murchison Falls when the waters flow, the lions roar, the giraffes yawn and the rains fall....”

What a spectacle of relevance in connection with what Kakoma narrated in stanza three.

I would like to propose the following: That after losing Professor Kakoma, we should not lose courage because of the words of Martin Luther King Junior who said: “Our lives begin to end the day we become silent about things that matter.” Prof. Kakoma had never been silent even at the sick bay. He continued to talk about the need for him to be compensated adequately about his research in music. So, he is still talking and he continues talking through John Ken-Lukyamuzi, the man. (Laughter) 

Under Article 4 of the Constitution, it is stated and I am ending: “The state has a duty to translate the Constitution of Uganda in local languages.” As it endeavours to begin translating the Constitution, she should equally translate Professor Kakoma’s National Anthem so that this generation and the generation to come continue to master the lyrics of that great song, the National Anthem.

As if that is not enough, the Leader of the Opposition is hereby requested equally to take into serious consideration the need to include the National Anthem in our next edition of the Constitution. When you look at the Constitution now, we do not have a National Anthem. We gloriously demand that the text of the National Anthem is included.

Lastly, Professor Kakoma should continue to be honoured by making sure that the family he has left behind is taken care of beyond the burial ceremony. 

There are many other things for which we will remember Kakoma. First of all, he was a Ugandan at heart. He loved his country. He came out with a design of a song which is scientifically interesting not only to the continent of Africa but the world at large.

God bless Professor Wilberforce Kakoma.

2.44
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I went to visit the family of the late Prof. Kakoma in the last days when he was seriously sick. I went there as a young politician. I wanted to go and see the man who composed the National Anthem for this country which we are still enjoying. By the time I went there, he could not talk, but I want to thank the caretakers. There was special care. On this note, I want to thank the family, especially Mama Theresa, whom I have been in touch with. I want to thank her. She has done a lot.

Colleagues, we need to change our culture of recognising a person who is already dead. It is a bad culture. That is why I want to ask Members that whenever you have a patient in hospital, go there early so that you can see that patient when he is still alive. I want to thank those people who have been going to check on the Mzee when he was seriously sick. 

As a Shadow Minister for Public Service, I have been touched because the late Kakoma was a civil servant who served this country diligently. I am told that when our country lacked a National Anthem towards Independence, Professor Kakoma was among the people who composed the wining anthem in a very short time to save our country a crisis. Distinguished civil servants also need to be recognised. For example, we have seen retired civil servants struggling to get their retirement benefits like pension and gratuity. In Uganda, it is still a problem and we need to solve it.

I, therefore, propose that the government streamlines the policy on retirement and memoriam. Just in Parliament here, we have Mr Tandekwire, who served as a Clerk for 26 years, out of his 39 years in Public Service. What is happening to him now? We may not know; some know, but we need to know because this is a person who served for 39 years as a civil servant in this country.

Professor Kakoma composed a very beautiful and guiding anthem for Uganda and if leaders understood the phrases there, our country would not be what it is today.

Right now, I know death is an equaliser. Everybody right now is listening throughout the country. I want you to listen to these words: “...We lay our future in Tthy hands;
United, free for liberty together 
We will always stand.

...Our love and labour we give...

...At our country’s call
In peace and friendship we will live.”  

These are wonderful words and I want to salute our comrade here. These are words of a true nationalist which we must follow if this country is to move on. 

In conclusion, let us find a way of genuinely assisting our people who have served our country and also put in place a policy on memoriam for Uganda, including all past leaders.

May the soul of the late Professor Kakoma rest in eternal peace. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Just before hon. Karooro comes, I want to correct the impression that Mr Tandekwire has not been taken care of. He retired formally, several years ago and got all his benefits. He came back on contract, three times. By the time you Members came, he was on contract. So, let no one mislead anyone that we have not taken care of him. Let us hear the poet.

2.49
MRS MARY KARORO OKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Bushenyi): Madam Speaker, when such an illustrious son of Uganda passes away; we fellow artistes break out in verse in farewell. So, this is why my message is in form of a poem.

“Erudite son of the nation, Prof. Kakoma,
Now you lie in motionless state
Your eyes forever closed in eternal sleep
The destiny of all flesh

But Prof. Kakoma, your soul goes marching on
With Uganda now at 50
We can never really tell the country’s story 
Without you in the tale
But though you now lie in state
This country’s tale, inevitably, your tale goes marching on

You gave us priceless identity
Our crown of prestige and honour
The true legacy of an icon
For when Uganda was in dire need 
You rose to meet the need 
You curved out a totem in primary colours of 
The umbilical code 
That unifying knot in our myriad nationalities 
The symbol of unity that has kept our nation glued together
And your soul goes matching on

Basiima ogenze; not for you son of the soil
For every time Ugandans in their millions sing
“Oh, Uganda, May God uphold thee”,
They pay a resounding tribute to you
An acrostic silent tribute 
That will live on until the end of time

Professor, you will always talk to us;
Through this priceless contribution,
Ugandans say thank you, for while you lived
You gave your best and it is only fair 
That you enjoy your eternal rest.
Fair thee well, erudite professor. 

2.52
COL PHINEHAS KATIRIMA (UPDF): Madam Speaker, I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to a decorated hero and as we know, heroes and heroines do not die; they just pass on to eternity. The late professor has now passed on to eternity. 

From the research which I have been doing, you can know a person by what they do, what they say about themselves; and you can know a person by what other people say about that person. I think at the end of this day, we shall have the totality of what this great hero has been. 

I want to limit myself to one area. I see in the late professor a great patriot. When you read and reflect on the National Anthem, which he composed when he was only 23 years old - honourable members think about it! These are some of our children at the university; others are just graduating at the university. At this tender age of 23 years, in a competition which we read about in the papers that took a very short time, you can see a great man; a great thinker. This late professor was a great thinker; a thinker about our future; a nation thinker and an “others” thinker. We can in brief say FON (Future Others and Nation). And I dare add that he was also an integrationist; and all these we get from his song.

He thought about the future which would accommodate us in peace, democracy and liberty as we moved on from where we were in 1963; a poor third world country into the future maybe as a developed country. He never knew we would get oil; he never knew we would make big economic strides to prosperity, but he thought about the future and he thought about all Ugandans.

He thought about the unity of Uganda; unity in diversity. He did not think about the Wakiso area he had grown in, the Kampala area, but he thought about the whole of Uganda. This is something we have been struggling for and we shall continue to struggle for in the future. 

I read in Uganda’s Anthem that he was a man who feared God at that tender age of 23. He says, “May God uphold thee”. Madam Speaker, a patriot loves his country and is ready to sacrifice for it. He worked for it selflessly as he also loved himself. It is not surprising that the late professor has been able to live up to the age of 89. I think to reach the age of 89 demands a lot of discipline, sacrifice and a lot of forward sight. He has taken this long servicing Uganda, guiding Uganda; teaching many Ugandans and many others abroad all these other ideals he believed in.

As a patriot, he also loved integration; he was an integrationist. He thought about regional integration and this is something we are grappling with and we shall continue to grapple with until it is achieved as insurance for our country into the future.

Over simple things like a car, a house, we go running for insurance. How much more are we doing as the people of Uganda to ensure that Uganda is secure in the future. Where is the insurance not to be re-colonised? We have seen great nations fall in modern times and that integration is one way of insurance into the future. 

He talked about fertile soils. If he had the space, he would have talked about the great scenery of Uganda and the economic geography of Uganda as you know it in detail. Uganda is talked about and loved by everybody in the world and is now taken as the best tourist destination of the world. He saw that at his early age of 23 and even before that.

Madam Speaker, the late professor has made his great mark and this anthem is with us forever as Uganda, and his words, wisdom and insight will live to eternity. I call upon the young people, the old people and everyone to emulate the patriotic spirit and foresight this great professor had even at that early age of 23 years. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

Allow me, Madam Speaker, to stand here and salute in the true military sense, this great hero – I cannot come closer because of the sitting arrangement, but I will stand here and salute him as he moves to eternity. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us hear from Commissioner Jalia, but let us use only three minutes, honourable members, otherwise I may have to put on my switch and this is not a good day for the switch. 

3.00
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion to pay tribute to the fallen hero of this country. I first interfaced with the late Prof. Kakoma in 1989 at Makerere University as a student of music. The excitement I had in physically interacting with the composer of the National Anthem, which I had been singing since my primary school time was so immense. 

Our interaction with the late Prof. Kakoma as our lecturer revealed a lot about his character. The late Professor Kakoma inspired us to love Mathematics, Music, languages and Performing Arts. 

Madam Speaker, the House would love to know that music cannot be performed alone without incorporating mathematics. It was at this time that I was introduced to mathematics within music. We were introduced to half beats, one and a half beats, quarter beats and three quarter beats by Professor Kakoma. 

He loved to see people happy at all times and ensured that learning took place with joy. Professor Kakoma helped students and worked extra time to ensure that students accomplished given tasks. He will be remembered throughout the life of Uganda because of producing one of the biggest aspects of identification of our Nation, the National Anthem.

The death of Professor Kakoma should guide us to reflect on the three stanzas of the National Anthem. The first stanza addresses the moral values of this country. The second introduces us and addresses democracy, justice and freedom. The third stanza talks about agriculture and hard work.

I now want to note at this moment that all the three stanzas throughout my life as a Ugandan – I have never heard the three stanzas being sung at any function. The three stanzas are being taught in schools, but they are never sung at any function. We only sing two stanzas when we have the Head of State and the visiting Heads of State. 

It is at this moment that I want to propose and I had recommended, and had put a question for oral answer to the Minister for National Guidance, who should actually guide us and tell us when should we sing the three stanzas? I know all the three stanzas have got meaning. I want to propose and move that as we commemorate our 50th Anniversary of Independence, this should be the beginning of the three stanzas of our National Anthem to be sung. We should start with 9th October, 2012. I know wherever Professor Kakoma will be, his spirit will be happy to hear the three stanzas of the National Anthem being sang. 

As a student of Music, I know that in other developed countries and in many countries, a professor who composes a National Anthem – actually, whenever the National Anthem is sung, he is supposed to be paid –(Interjections)- yes, I know – because it is his copyright.

I want to ask the government, because if we do not encourage our young entrepreneurs in Performing Arts, they will never be interested and yet this is one of the fields that I know most of our young students and people would be interested in. We need to motivate, especially, if somebody comes up with such a composition that we adore and we shall continuously sing throughout the life of our country. 

Madam Speaker, he wrote his story and we also need to write our story. We are remembering him because he composed the National Anthem. What are we going to be remembered for? You need to write your story. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, try to be brief. I do not want to use the switch today. 

3.06
THE STATE MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Animal Industry) (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion to pay tribute to Prof. Wilberforce George Kakoma who is here before us. In our culture, people are remembered and recognised for three things; the first is contribution to society, the second is what you have achieved; and the third is family. The late hero has all the three. 

I want to take this opportunity to say that as he is being recognised, it is not by accident because his contribution to society and Uganda is amidst us.  The commissioner who spoke before me was a student of the late professor. He taught the Nation and as an achiever, every time there is an official function, as protocol procedure, we sing the National Anthem, which is a product of the late professor.

The late professor lived as a fully decorated citizen. He had a family and, therefore, I take this opportunity to thank Government and the movers of this motion for recognising the contribution and achievement of the late professor. Recognition is a protocol procedure that we normally do not observe. 

I want to take this opportunity to thank you, Madam Speaker and your deputy. It is on rare occasions that we have both the Speaker and Deputy Speaker together in the House. Your being here is an inspiration to the citizens who excel in contribution to society. I thank you very much.

3.09
MRS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): I thank you for giving me the opportunity to go down in the annals of the history of Uganda that I paid tribute to the late Prof. George Wilberforce Kakoma. I support the motion of tribute. You are all aware that Uganda was under British rule between the years 1894 to 1962. By that time, we were hoisting the Union Jack and sang the British National Anthem. Uganda indeed struggled to get Independence and when it was granted, it needed us to have a National Anthem and a flag. 

A sub-committee for the creation of a national anthem was set up and Prof. Senteza Kajubi was the chairperson. That anthem had conditions that were set; it had to be an original composition, short, solemn, praising and looking forward to the future. 

I was watching TV and I saw Professor Kajubi narrating how he approached the late Professor George Wilberforce Kakoma at 11.00 p.m. to ask him to compose the National Anthem and he accepted. As a student of music, I can imagine the situation Professor Kakoma went through. An original composition requires total commitment. You sacrifice sleep because ideas are generated a lot at night when all is quiet and this is what happened to the late Professor Kakoma. Ideas came to his head at night disrupting his sleep. He decided to wake up and put pen to paper and he did this up to mid-day. You can imagine. His work was appreciated by a token of Shs 2,000 then. His copyright has never been bought. That is why I encourage and call upon the Government of Uganda to honor the late Prof. Kakoma’s wish and pay for his work, but not the Shs 5,000 that was proposed then. 

I have gone through the National Anthem that he composed and analysed it critically and noted the following; that every verse of the anthem begins with the words “Oh Uganda”. “Oh” is an exclamation expressing various emotions according to the tone and manner especially surprise, pain, sorrow, anxiety or a wish. It can be an emotional or impassioned exclamation expressing pain, grief, surprise, desire or fear. In this case, Prof. Kakoma, if I can read his mind, was looking at the pain Uganda went through to gain Independence. He shows the surprise that the British Government finally accepts to grant Uganda Independence after 68 years of British rule. He shows the desire for Uganda to stand and remain the “pearl of Africa’s crown”. Among the ancient, “Oh” was a mark of triple time from the notion that number 3 is the most perfect of numbers and was properly expressed by a circle, the most perfect figure. So, this is the most perfect song. 

The word “Uganda” follows the word “Oh” in every verse that we sing. This means he directly used it to address a personified object; the country of Uganda. Thank you very much, Prof. Kakoma, for addressing Uganda as a person. I would like to end by saying that Prof. George Wilberforce Kakoma, God bless your soul. 

3.15
MS ROSE SENNINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): I want to thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Wakiso District and on my behalf, I wish to express our condolences to the family and to the nation at large. I want to thank the almighty God for Professor Kakoma’s life and all the gifts he gave him that have made him a great man we are honouring and paying tribute to this afternoon. 

Madam Speaker and colleagues, you will agree with me that Professor Kakoma foresaw the integration of our region, when you analyse the message in the anthem. He anchored our country in God’s hands and this keeps our country strong and we thank him for that. Honourable colleagues, you will also agree with me that Professor Kakoma advocated for peace, for freedom, good neighbourliness and friendship, which characterise our country as a home of hospitality. 50 years of the anthem not being tampered with, to me, is a sign of consensus across the political, religious and tribal divide. This means everybody believes in it. He did a great job. Honourable colleagues, when you do good, even the good you have done lives behind you. He is gone, but the anthem will keep him alive through all the generations to come. 

Professor Kakoma has left a legacy. This is a question to all of us. What legacy are you leaving behind when you pass on? We must not burden people to look for words to talk about us when we reach such a situation. Dear colleagues, it is very important.

As I wind up, you will all agree with me that Chameleon the musician in his song Basiima Ogenze indicated that appreciation is showered when you pass on. But I think this is something we must learn. We need to develop a culture, dear colleagues and my dear friends, in this country, to learn to appreciate people when they still live. Professor Kakoma is in a coffin. He cannot even hear what we are saying. The nice and sweet words being talked of him, he cannot hear. We must learn to appreciate our people and to even tell them how important and how good they are so that they can also appreciate themselves when they still live. 
I want to pray for the family that God strengthens them and I want to pray for his soul, that he rests in peace. Thank you very much.

3.19
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, as I pay tribute to this gallant son of Uganda, I want honourable Members of Parliament to reflect on the history of our country. This is when you will understand the importance of the man who is before us today. In 1894, Uganda was declared a British Protectorate. It was a property of the British Government. In 1943, Ugandans wanted that time to own their own country and there was a rebellion called the Bataka rebellion in 1944. In 1949, the traders in Kampala here also wanted to control the business in the country, and in 1950s, great sons of Uganda who were educated at the Kings College Budo and other schools formed a party in 1953. Ugandans at that time were for Independence, were for freedom, and were for the love of their country and that is why when you read clearly, the anthem was reflecting the vision, the aspiration of our people at that time. They wanted freedom, love that must be expressed throughout the country with all neighbours and tribes united. I think that as a country we have betrayed the vision of our forefathers. Today, I see people in their small enclaves of tribes. I see the nation called Uganda divided. This keeps me at pain. We should read the National Anthem and internalise it. Are we united? Not at all! Ugandans believe so much in things like tribes, caucuses, A4C, FDC, NRM, UPC and so on. But at the time of Independence in 1962, when the late’s formulated National Anthem was sung, with the Union Jack being rolled down, there were jubilations. It was because at that time we knew that our country would be independent. That we would run and control our own destiny, but you realise that instead there have been coups and counter coups in the country. And as I talk, we need to do more if we are to emulate what our fallen brother had in his mind.

I, therefore, would like to urge Members of Parliament and the nation that today is the time for us to put the past behind us. Today is the time that we must be united. (Applause) Today is the time for us to fight for our freedoms. What I am saying is very important and I would like to ask my colleague, hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi, to listen to me and appreciate. (Laughter)

I have been told that this great composer of the Uganda National Anthem had not had his artistic work appreciated by this country. So, it is upon this Parliament to pass a resolution urging Government to adequately and urgently appreciate his work by doing something.

I also would like to appeal to this nation that we should declare the late a hero. I have been hearing about people being declared heroes here and there, but all of them being those who have either fought or used guns. Why should we always appreciate only violent people? (Laughter) Like tomorrow we might hear A4C wanting to be declared heroes. (Laughter) So, I would like to appeal to Government to have this great man honoured.

The other important thing is about music – let me talk about music because each time I visit many of the schools, I realise that it is no longer a subject that is important. But I can tell you – we have been told that the late lived for 89 years – musicians live for very long! My father is a musician and right now he is 93 years old. He still can ride his bicycle, which means he is still very strong. But that is because of him being a musician. Music promotes love and happiness. With those few words, I beg to end by saying that we should promote music at all levels of education. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

3.26
MS KABAKUMBA MATSIKO (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Prof. George Wilberforce Kakoma.

First, I would like to thank God for the gift that he gave to Uganda in the name of Prof. George Wilberforce Kakoma. Among other contributions, as it has been said, he composed our beautiful National Anthem. To have composed the anthem in less than a day, tells us the kind of person Uganda has lost. He has been an outstanding citizen, a patriot, distinguished scholar and a family man.

It is my sincere hope that some of Prof. Kakoma’s talents will be carried on for generations to come through his family line. And the good news is that much as he has gone to be with the Lord, he will forever be and live with us as long as Uganda still exists and as long as we sing this National Anthem.

I would like to extend my sincere thanks to the family, the wife, children, relatives, friends and in-laws for taking care of an elderly person of Professor Kakoma. This was not a simple thing, but I am happy to learn that they did what they could to carry on the struggle to the end. Thank you so much.

I also would like to thank Government for the contributions they have made towards the medical bills, for acquiring the life support machine for him and declaring to accord him a state funeral. However, I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for organising this special session, which is not an ordinary sitting of Parliament –(Applause)– but which has enabled us pay tribute to our fallen hero. Thank you very much.

I want to call upon Government to put a mechanism in place to support Ugandans, especially as far as copyright is concerned. It is not easy to get a copyright in the present Uganda. Copyrighting our artistic work internationally is a nightmare; it is almost impossible. There is a debate about the anthem that was composed by the now late Prof. Kakoma. The Prime Minister said here that there are things that we cannot attach a price to. I believe he meant that this is one of them. But I also think that if the late had a copyright, he would be paid without any price being attached to it. Therefore, as we wait for the government to help our local people to copyright their artistic work, I would like to propose – my colleague said that she has never heard Ugandans sing the three stanzas, neither have I heard it – that as a way of paying tribute to the late Prof. Kakoma, as we wind up this debate, we should stand and sing all the three stanzas of our National Anthem to its composer and author. At least, if you cannot give money, we can contribute in that way as Parliament. May his soul rest in peace. 

3.33
MRS ANNET NYAKECHO (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am humbled beyond description as we pay tribute to the great man, a distinguished gentleman who composed a song that has remained with a permanent mark in the history of Uganda. 

As we all know, this year the National Anthem is going to mark the 50th anniversary. In honour of the gentleman who brought this glory to this country – because as we have heard from the previous speeches my colleagues have made, nobody in Uganda has tried to match or to compose or even to try and recompose the National Anthem. 

I take Professor Kakoma as a great man; as a gentleman whose life we should celebrate every year. As we commemorate the Independence celebrations of the country, we should also take time every year to also celebrate his life and appreciate his good work for the country. 

Today in Uganda, the country is facing difficulties, but in Professor’s anthem, there are certain words we can use to console ourselves, especially when we have disunity amongst each other. He said, “We lay our future in thy hand…” He said that we should put all our troubles in God’s hands. 

So, I pray and ask the nation that in everything we do, in whatever challenge we go through as politicians, as Government, let us emulate and try to follow what he said in the National Anthem. Let us put everything in God’s hands and everything will be alright. 

On behalf of my people, may his soul rest in eternal peace. 

3.35
MR JOSEPH BALIKUDDEMBE (DP, Busiro County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am very honoured to speak on such an occasion for a gallant person, the late Prof. George William Kakoma.

I remember in the year 2005, on 11th May, that was the day my father’s body was laid in state. When I came to Parliament that day, I remember I was wailing. I was crying very hard and I found a number of Members of Parliament crying. However, with what the Members of Parliament said and with what we are saying here today, I believe the family has peace of mind. 

The professor here has his name indelibly marked in stone in our country’s history. We are talking of a father and we are talking of a parent who has been exemplary. To the family, your father has got a highlighted name in our history. Always hold the flag of George William Kakoma high. George William Kakoma should not only be left in words; we should not leave him in literature because any good man or woman is seen by his or her acts. We shall always sing and praise George William Kakoma for his very good deeds. 

However, as a nation, I would like to call out to Government, and the Ministry of Public Service. As a lawyer, I always used to see George William Kakoma in the corridors of the High Court but today, and globally, the best way forward is alternative dispute resolution. This should not recur in the corridors of the High Court. You can sit with the family and come up with a resolution as Government so that he is paid for his very good deeds as a gallant Ugandan. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

THE SPEAKER: Just for the record; he is George Wilberforce Kakoma and not William.

3.37
MR SAM AMOOTI OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I join my colleagues in paying tribute and extending my condolences to the family of the bereaved Prof. G.W. Kakoma. I also want to extend my condolences to all the people of Uganda for the loss of what many of us have described as a patriot, as a gallant son who has passed on in a year when we are going to mark half a century of our independence. We are going to mark half a century of our independence, where his contribution is absolutely priceless, and then he passes on when we are going to mark such a very important time. 

I would want to add something to the effect that whereas I agree that the professor is a hero and a gallant son of Uganda, I would want us to look at it in a different perspective. I would like us to also recognise that actually, he is one of the founding fathers of this country. When you think about what was going on, on the day that we got our independence, the Union Jack was getting out and the Uganda flag was coming in; the British anthem was getting out and the Uganda anthem was getting in; the British constitutional order was getting out and the Ugandan constitutional order was coming in. I believe that all these were processes or things that were happening while we were laying the foundation of this country. Therefore, without any fear of contradiction, I would like to state on the Floor of this House that Prof. G.W. Kakoma qualifies to be one of the founding fathers of Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, music speaks to the soul. When the National Anthem was sung, I saw some people shedding a tear. There is that sense of euphoria that comes whenever music plays, but not with all types of music. The National Anthem is so euphoric in nature that every time it plays, you feel like it is brand new at that point in time. 

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, music runs out of fashion. We always hear things like, “This music is out of mulembe”, but the National Anthem is music that will never run out of fashion no matter the time, no matter the generation and no matter the circumstances that we shall be in.  Therefore, I pay glowing tribute to the composer and wonderful son of Uganda who did this very historic work. 

He was a founding father whose dream for our country lay in the National Anthem that he composed, since all founding fathers have a dream. I would like to thank the colleague who spoke before me for his very good and patriotic words, which qualify the dream that this wonderful son of Uganda had in mind for our country, and his music will live forever. 

He was a selfless person. Most musicians patent their songs but he chose not to. He gave it to us as a gift and said, “Take this, Oh! Uganda.” This gives me a lot of pride as I pay glowing tribute to him as a selfless Ugandan who gave us a free gift. He gave us a free gift believing that the beneficiaries of it or even the powers that be would recognise it and reward him with a prize that he did not name. Here we are today, talking about how he has not been paid until the day he has breathed out of life. 

As I conclude, I believe that the same spirit of fairness which he exhibited by not patenting his song for money is the same fairness with which we must find some money to pay his family. (Applause) We always talk about legacy; this is a fine gentleman that has left a legacy in the National Anthem that has not been changed for 50 years. I think even if you put the biggest amount of money in a referendum trying to change this National Anthem, you are not going to win that. It is going to go on for generations to come. 

May we also learn that it is important in the life of a man or a woman to do something that leaves behind a great mark, something that can impact on generations and generations. May his soul be promoted to glory. 

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable members, let us try to keep within the three minutes.  Hon. Ogwal - (Rev. Ogwal rose_) – Sorry, I meant the senior Ogwal

3.44
MRS CECELIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo):  I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker. I have just been explaining to my neighbours here that there is only one Ogwal here. Whoever else is called “Ogwal” has another name before, that is, either Rev. Obua or something else, but there is only one “Ogwal.” (Laughter) So, I knew who you meant when you called out.

Madam Speaker, I must start by thanking you very much for giving us the opportunity to pay tribute to this great man of Uganda. There is no other way we could have remembered him if he had not been brought to Parliament for the entire Uganda to be a party to paying tribute to him. I did not have any opportunity to interact with the late Prof. Kakoma but I am definitely very conversant with his work. At some point I met a professor in Kenya who claimed to have assisted him in composing the Uganda National Anthem. 

Many of us who have had opportunity to visit other countries should be very proud of our national anthem. It is the only national anthem which is a prayer. (Applause) It is the only national anthem that addresses a nation as a spiritual personality - Oh! Uganda - giving Uganda a spirit and a personality and telling Uganda that “I am talking to you and it is only God that can uphold thee.” He is telling Uganda that it must be a land of freedom so that it could be beneficial to all Ugandans. The anthem is addressing Uganda as a spiritual personality and it is so prophetic that we cannot afford to ignore it. 

This man who is before us cannot speak for himself but definitely, there are many things he would have shared with us but we did not give him the opportunity to do so. This is because we, Ugandans, love to talk about bad things and hate promoting the good ones within our midst. (Applause) 

This great man Prof. Kakoma’s death is prophetic. He had to wait for 50 years of Uganda’s life in order for him to go. For those of you who read the Bible, there is an old lady called Anna and a man called Simeon who lived and prayed for Jesus to be born. So, when finally Jesus was born, they prayed to God to release them. The late Prof. Kakoma has lived to see Uganda into the 50 years and say, “If by 50 years you have not learnt what I have told you, you will never learn.” (Applause) So, his death to me is prophetic. 

It is very serious, if we read the word that he put down for us in form of the National Anthem. It can really convict you as a person and more so if you are a leader. I am very fortunate that he has died when I am still alive and a Member of Parliament so that I can continue speaking for unity, democracy and freedom, which I will never depart from at all costs. That is what he told us through the National Anthem in which he personified Uganda, which I am part of. So, we must be a party to the message that he has left with us.

Madam Speaker, there are many things that we would have done for our own, of which Prof. Kakoma is part. There are special places where historical personalities can be kept. I do not know whether we needed Jesus Christ himself to come and tell us that a man like Kakoma should be buried in Kololo. (Applause) He is a symbol of history and for years to come you will continue singing the National Anthem and yet you want him to be buried in the village. Who is going to go to Wakiso and look for the village, and in a few years the wife is also gone and we are looking for the grave of Kakoma when actually we have designated a place to lay to rest people of honour? What better opportunity or person to honour than a man that transcends all history? To me, it can still be done; why not?

I remember when the late Paulo Mwanga died; he died at a very difficult time and it was not possible for his body to be brought to Parliament. I begged the government at that time to forget about the UPC and his connection with any political party as we were burying him as a symbol of history. I also want to put it on record that when the late Dr Obote chose to die on the 10th October and not on the 9th October, it was prophetic and it must be recorded. I want to end by saying that I am very grateful to the people of Uganda that Mzee Musaazi is buried in Kololo, but I will be very happy if other Ugandans who should be honoured like Prof. Kakoma join that place of honour.

I want to say that we normally award medals for good performance. I have seen this man live for 50 years and I have not seen him being honoured, but he could be honoured posthumously with special honour not the ordinary kikwangala honour you give Ogwal. (Laughter)

Finally, I want to say in remembrance of this great man and the message he has left with us that for years to come, we can correct the mistakes we have made in the past. Let us, as Ugandans, resolve that we must inculcate the culture of peaceful handing over of government. May God bless you.

3.54
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also wish to extend my sympathies to the bereaved family. The people of Sheema have also sent sympathies to the family especially to Mrs Kakoma. They are really saddened by the death of this great nationalist.

I have seen countries sing their national anthems with passion. I have seen people paying attention to their national anthems, but for us here, sometimes when we are singing this national anthem you see people not focused or paying limited attention to our national anthem. Like what my colleagues have said, these stanzas have a tremendous message that unites all of us as Ugandans and a message that is true of a patriotic Ugandan.

Perhaps it is not by accident that we are not passionate about this anthem; it is because the majority of our people do not know the true meaning of these messages we sing in the anthem. No wonder; how many people out of our 33 million as per now know the true meaning of this message that the Professor sat down and thought through? Most of us, by the way, know the first stanza but if you sit down and reflect on the three stanzas - perhaps that is why we see many occurrences happening in this world, especially in Uganda. It is thinking of Uganda, the land that feeds us; how many of us treasure this land that feeds all of us? How are we acting or reacting to this land that feeds all of us as Ugandans?

Most of us will believe that we started singing this national anthem in primary school. In other countries, people start knowing their anthem as they begin to speak. This is something that maybe we should inculcate in our country because I believe that this anthem carries a true patriotism message. By the way, honourable members, I believe that we do not need even to begin developing new messages about patriotism. This anthem carries everything, but how do we translate this message to our people and to all of us so that this message builds us as Ugandans? 

The Local Government Act empowers local councils to debate in local languages. Why can’t this national anthem be translated in our local languages, given the fact that we all do not understand English irrespective of being the national language, so that people may understand the true meaning of these messages within the anthem? We should not just take it as a ceremonial song but the message that we derive out of this anthem should be able to build us as Ugandans. That is why we should believe in this anthem.

The National Anthem is very enriching, patriotic, energising and feeds us. When you hear most of those words, for me as a woman, I can translate most of them like “the land of freedom, the land that builds us, the land that feeds us” and see what is happening to people especially occurrences of domestic violence, child sacrifice, corruption, not bothering about your neighbour and all the things that are happening around us. I believe we should take this anthem as a message that we should go by. I want to salute the Professor for thinking through and delivering a message that would take this country into one that would become more patriotic than we actually believe.

Therefore, I want to request that this National Anthem, like hon. Lukyamuzi has said, be translated into local languages so that people may understand the true meaning of this anthem. I thank you.

4.00
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to pay tribute to the late George William Kakoma. I know this is a time for grief especially for the bereaved family. However, my own view is it is not time to cry. It is time to celebrate the life and rare gift of Prof. Kakoma. There are many Ugandans who have lived to his age and yet they left this world without these achievements. 

Madam Speaker, the mighty and powerful, decorated generals, senior politicians sing the late Kakoma’s song. The oppressed and the wretched of the earth sing Prof. Kakoma’s song. The highly educated professors like him do sing his song and yet the illiterate and those yet to go to school sing the same song. Those who understand the message in it do sing it as well as those who do not understand what is in it. I do not remember any song in this country which is sung quite fondly and widely like that of Prof. Kakoma. A great man he has been, a great man he will always be. 

In my culture, which is a little bit similar to that of Prof. Kakoma, on functions like this you do not need to be controversial and I do not intend to. However, I think when Prof. Kakoma, at the age of 39, composed this song, he had some aspiration in mind – a land united, free, for liberty and together we all stand at peace with all our neighbours and friends. He must have had a turbulent life because he did not live this sort of aspiration he thought about. We instead degenerated into wars with thousands killed. We developed a culture of dividing this country into the north and south – the exact opposite of what Prof. Kakoma thought this newly born country would be. So as we praise him, it is a time to reflect not on the fact that he said good things but reflect on if we are living these very good things he thought we would be. 

If from October 8th 1962 we had lived this sort of life, Uganda would be a different country. Prof. Kakoma would maybe have lived a different life if he saw his country living this sort of life. Now that he has gone, have we picked our lessons as a country? We do not have to degenerate to unnecessary conflict, to subject this country to conditions of people without freedom, to have a divided country of “those southerners” or “those northerners” or “those rulers” or “those who are ruled” or even “those easterners” and “those westerners”. I think we need to reflect. That is the only way we can pay tribute to Prof. Kakoma and his colleagues. 

By the way, I have been informed that actually, the committee was made up of five people. With the passing on of Prof. Kakoma, there is only one who is still alive, and that is Prof. Senteza Kajubi. Ibingira is gone, Nadiope is gone and one Munyoro elder is also gone. (Interjections) No, it was not Magezi but someone called Banga – I have forgotten the other name. So, do we have to wait for Prof. Kajubi to go and then we say the same beautiful things we are now saying about Prof. Kakoma?

In my view, we must find a way of recognising our heroes. When they sit there and listen to us pouring praises on them, they get energised and even the young ones would want to live the kind of life these people are living. Let us not wait for “Basiima Ogenze”. (Interjections) According to the religious people, he is hearing. I am not sure if he is hearing these praises. This is for the family. 

Lastly, Prof. Kakoma has died with a sour taste in his mouth, and that is why he was in court. I think this is the time for Government to reflect on this, to see how it can sort out this problem. We will not prescribe the solution but now that there is a case, I do not think the family should proceed with it. You need to reach out to the family and settle this matter out of court to the satisfaction of both the family and Government and indeed the country. 

How do we have our hero, the one we are praising now, struggling to have some monetary recognition? It does not make sense. I request the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business to seriously think about this issue and have this case settled out of court to the satisfaction of the surviving family members of Prof. Kakoma. (Applause) Prof. Kakoma, you have fought a good fight, you have lived a good life; travel in peace and God bless you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I again plead with you to make the eulogy short. I have already entered into the time of the artistes who are waiting at the National Theatre. Let us keep it to two minutes, please. 

4.09
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I want to add two issues from where hon. Katuntu ended. The lawyers representing the late Professor in the case were kind enough not to slap an injunction on the face of all Ugandans so that we do not use the National Anthem until they were fully paid because it was also a legal possibility. So, I would appeal to the Prime Minister, who is the Leader of Government Business, that if the family members cannot get a better deal now, it is very unlikely that they will ever get any better deal. 

As Members of Parliament, we have to play our oversight role. I have looked through resolution No.3, which says, “Be it resolved by this Parliament as follows: That the Almighty God sustains the bereaved and grants Prof. Wilberforce Kakoma eternal rest.” As an ex-seminarian, I know it is very difficult to order God. So, at an appropriate time, I am giving notice that resolution No.3 should be changed to read as follows: “That Government resorts to alternative dispute resolution and reports to Parliament within six months on the progress they have made in the discussion they have had with the family members.” Madam Speaker, I am giving notice to that amendment.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, we are very good at praising people but at times we do not want to clean ourselves. I will give an example. I went for the last funeral rites of the late Gen. Tito Okello Lutwa, the father of the Minister, Oryem Henry Okello. We were so embarrassed at the state of the tomb and I committed myself - because the minister could not speak for himself - that we shall raise this matter in Parliament, that people of this calibre cannot just be buried like that. It is really in a very sorry state. 

In the incoming supplementary budget, there is a provision for compensating the children of the former heads of state. I was approached by both of them lobbying me that when it comes before Parliament, we should support it. For the record of Parliament, it was specifically hon. Oryem Henry Okello and hon. Jimmy Akena. For heaven’s sake, for how long shall we subject the children of those who have served this country diligently to being beggars? Their parents did not just die yesterday; they died years ago. 

I would really appeal to the Prime Minister to bring a law before Parliament that we consider compensating all those who worked for this country diligently. The order of compensation should be that the older be compensated first, instead what we read in the newspapers everyday, “Hassan Basajjabalaba compensated.” What about the others who are older? Where is the order of precedence? Who gets equity first? 

As a country, we must be clean such that when there is compensation, the old people, if the need arises, like the hon. Prime Minister, should take precedence over me. I would not want a situation where because I have good contacts in Government, I get compensated and the old people continue moving in the corridors of the courts of law. That is very hurting and very painful. So, I would appeal to the Prime Minister to make a formal commitment in his closing remarks that within six months, Government will probably come and explain to Parliament that all these issues have been resolved.

The only place I have seen in Uganda with a picture of all the former heads of state is at the reception of KFM. This is the national Parliament of Uganda but we do not have the pictures of the former heads of state. What are we hiding? We only have one person and yet there have been nine presidents. Whether they did good or bad, their pictures are not there. (Applause) When we talk about them, we can really talk and even be declared professors but we do not have where we recognise them. We should have just a simple picture of all the former heads of state in that order, the same way we have the pictures of the former speakers. So, the Minister of Information and National Guidance should come out to honour all Ugandans equally. 

I want to thank the Prime Minister for stating that the National Anthem is priceless. You cannot value it in financial terms. With the little English I studied, something priceless means that gracing it with a pecuniary gain will never give it value. It is better for that thing to be without a fee or a cost attached to it. That is the definition of priceless. Giving money will create an embarrassment for that kind of thing. It should just be like that. 

So, if it is priceless and the family members are asking for Shs 4 billion as their consideration, why then don’t you just make it priceless and pay them? (Laughter) This scenario is different. It is not that no one is asking for money; someone is asking for the money and Government has also put a defence in court. So, since it is priceless, Rt hon. Prime Minister, I would expect you as the most senior person in this House now, to speak directly to the President; let us hear a communication from you that Shs 4 billion of the taxpayer’s money is actually priceless to Uganda and you make a formal commitment on the Floor of this House so that as committees of Parliament, we can now follow up if the priceless commitment you made has been paid to the family. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

4.16
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Before I came to this Parliament, I used to keep around Parliament doing some professional work and leaders and distinguished Ugandans would be brought here for Parliament to pay tribute. There were occasions when Members of Parliament were struggling to find words to say about some colleagues in death. I remember one time, the former Prime Minister, Prof. Apolo Nsibambi, being highly qualified in minting words, was the one who struggled and all the others almost failed. 

We have not struggled to find words to say about the late Kakoma because of his work. The country is mourning him and has been mourning him almost since he was announced dead. This morning I read in one of the daily newspapers, one of the top journalists in the country did write an article entitled “Prof. Kakoma died poor because he chose to sing as others went to fight.” That is how he summarised the situation.

Uganda, which we love or claim to love, is a colonial creation. That is why the first agreements - I am not a lawyer but I deliberately use the word “agreements” - that united us were not written from here but from Britain. When we are talking about people who contributed to the formation and founding of Uganda, maybe this is the time that we need to re-examine the values and aspirations for which we decided to be a country. 

Unity - are we still united? Are we under a better country than when we were under the colonial administration? Just last week, a pressure group to which I belong was banned using a colonial provision enacted in 1950. So, are we happy that we are now being governed by some of us? Have they made the situation better? [Hon. Members: “Yes.”] Not for themselves? [Hon. Members: “No.”] (Laughter) 

Look at the Independence celebrations; who attends and who occupies the front seats? Is it because they were around or they participated in fighting for independence? Is it because they went to fight when the others were composing the national anthem? (Laughter) Don’t they invite themselves and parade themselves at Kololo as the owners of this country at the expense of all the others? Do they even care that there are other Ugandans? 

We are talking about Prof. Kakoma. We must speak to ourselves; we must not speak to him. If the Leader of Government Business could only pay attention because you have lived longer than myself; what I am talking about are things that you have gone through and participated in as an actor. Maybe we need a referendum to ask people who were around when Uganda was being formed to tell us whether they are still interested in being one country. The communities that formed Uganda, are they happy or we simply replaced the colonialist, the white person, and brought another aggressor with the same colour as ourselves?

When you are talking about Uganda, don’t we have people who think they have greater shares in this country than others, people who reward themselves and for that they have picked labels along the way from “karyasausage” to “karyaoil”? The Uganda for which the Kakomas composed a song is - is this the Uganda that he envisaged where those in power will take everything, including masts meant for transmitting information to the rest of the country?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, this occasion is supposed to be solemn. Please respect Prof. Kakoma.

MR NGANDA: Madam Speaker, it is extremely painful that the Uganda the Prof. Kakomas envisaged - a Uganda of unity, that is going to feed all of us, is now feeding some few people. That is not the Uganda for which he composed a song.

Finally, I have visited some countries where tourism is not only animals in the park. Suppose we had constructed - it does not have to be a monument - but a Prof. Kakoma house as one of our tourist sites. It is still possible; we can have a monument –(Interjections)- I do not have to please anyone, really, for you to now tell me, “You are now speaking.”

I want to propose to Government; let us learn from the death of Prof. Kakoma. The Leader of Government Business, who I presume speaks to the President, can tell him that we can turn the former State Lodge into a presidential tourist site. We pick all the Kaunda suits that His Excellency used to put on when he had just assumed power, his t-shirts, the polo necks and guns and everything such that we can also have some political, historical and tourism centres built about our own history. I would have loved, for example, if there was an Amin house in Kampala. I would pay to go and see clothes of Idi Amin. I would pay to go and see clothes and books and notebooks of Milton Obote. We should stop thinking about tourism as going to the park to see animals. 

Madam Speaker, to Prof. Kakoma, to God we belong and to Him is our return. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know we have the family of Prof. Kakoma here. Please bear in mind the pain they are going through and do not really tear their emotions.

4.24
MR RICHARD SEBULIBA-MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I join the rest of the members to mourn the demise of the late Prof. Kakoma. When I read the history of the late, I realised that by the time he was composing the song, he went back to his home; it was a peaceful home and that is what made him manage to compose the song. Therefore, I want to thank Mama Kakoma for giving the late peace, and even the children. Most of us men do not talk of the agonies women give us and we suffer silently. At least from what I read, thank you for that comfort and the support that enabled him come out with such a beautiful piece in our country. I thank all the ladies who give their men that kind of peace and even men who give their women the peace.

Of course, I ask, what happened to the arts men and women because since the 50s and 60s, so many things have gone? People like the late, who composed such beautiful things, who have written beautiful art works, if you compare them to today, we ask, where have they gone? Sometimes I commensurate with the honourable Minister of Information and National Guidance, Karooro Okurut, about the literature department; where are the writers, where are the musicians of those days who could put such beautiful words in such pieces like the late Kakoma did? We really celebrate his life. 

This reminds me, when I look at the agony in which he died taking Government to court for some money, what will happen to the people who are aged? Madam Speaker, think of yourself at 89; I am not saying that when you are lying in state but when you have come to ask for your pension or emolument. What have we done as Parliament to look at those people who are aged - apart from the late professor - who are 60 and beyond and who have served this country diligently, whether in Government or not? What have we done to assist them as they age? 

One time, we were visiting India and we saw that the professors, the engineers and all those people who contributed, even the blacksmiths, are invited whenever there is a national day. They are invited to lay hands in upholding the State of India. What about us? Yes, our Mzee here has passed away, but what about the rest?

Madam Speaker, some colleagues have talked about compensation. He died when he had taken Government to court. I think like some of my colleagues have said, it is pertinent that this does not end here. Let us pursue it and we make sure that the family at least benefits from what Government owed the late Kakoma.

Lastly, what have we put in place to remember him? Yes, tomorrow there will be a gun salute, there will be burial but what have we left behind. He has made his legacy but what are we leaving behind? Is it a road? Are we naming Kololo after him? What are we going to do after here? I know by next week, we will have forgotten about what we have said. He has left a legacy behind but what are we going to put in place as a monument or even a road to remember his great works? 

Like my colleagues have said, it is high time we revisited all the stanzas. If I was to just dare one of us here to sing just the last stanza, it would need a lot of glucose for the honourable member to finish the last stanza. It is terrible! By the way, there is also translating the National Anthem into our local languages; it is only one day that I attended the Bastille Day in the French Embassy and they sang our National Anthem in Luganda beautifully. I do not even know who translated it but it was beautifully done. I do not know whether it has been translated for other areas. I think it is paramount for us to translate it into Kiswahili and then all our languages such that we can learn the works of this late great gentleman. May his soul rest in peace.

THE SPEAKER: May I just say that in Busoga, the teachers have been able to teach the children to sing this anthem in Kiswahili.

4.30 
MR PATRICK NSANJA (Independent, Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. This afternoon as we are honouring the contribution made by Prof. George Wilberforce Kakoma, the composer of the National Anthem, I would wish to say two things. One, he dies honourably because of his nationalistic contribution to all the citizens of Uganda. Secondly, he leaves a legacy, which all Ugandans should emulate. It is at this time that I call upon all the corrupt officials - (Laughter) - holding public offices in this country to emulate the legacy of the late Kakoma. Really, where are you taking the money yet so many Ugandans are suffering? It is high time we looked at an ordinary person.

I also take the honour to thank God for his life of 89 years, for the widow and the children. They have now become historical. As I summarise, I would like to propose three issues. One, that from today, the three stanzas be sung at every national function. The second one is that if possible, his remains should be buried at Kololo. The third one is that the court case should be settled out of court. May his soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you so much. 

4.32
MR KRISPUS AYENA-ODONG (UPC, Oyam County North, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to join my colleagues in the great eulogy of my great mentor, my great inspirer, Prof. George Wilberforce Kakoma. 

For those of us who were of age when this great song was composed, we think and remember Prof. Kakoma with a lot of emotions. Perhaps there is nothing greater than thanking those who imbued Prof. George Kakoma with the wisdom, the compassion and commitment and patriotism to compose such an inspiring national anthem. Many people have spoken before and said the National Anthem of Uganda is autochthonous, was original and was not crafted from any living lyrics or something like that. I would like to recognise, among other things, that apart from being a great composer of music, people have not recognised that in the National Anthem of Uganda, there is great poetry. I wish to recognise that Prof. George Wilberforce Kakoma was a great poet. 

For those who have not had the opportunity to learn the National Anthem, I remember during the time when men were still men, in every school during music festivals one of the pieces which was compulsory was the National Anthem. That is why my age-mates, and perhaps your generation, Madam Speaker, know these things they are talking about - the three stanzas - very well.

I would like to recognise the fact that in the great composition, in the great mind of Prof. Kakoma, this country Uganda was dedicated to God. That is why I am proud to be coming from one of those great schools which gave this country the national motto, “For God and my country” or “Kulwa Katonda n’eggwanga lyaffe.” Is there any better way Prof. Kakoma would have agreed with us, those of us who built this national motto that this country can only move forward? He says, “Oh Uganda, may God uphold thee”; only if we recognise and put God ahead of us.

People have already spoken about the importance of recognising the good deeds of Prof. Kakoma. I do not want to over-emphasise that. In fact, I am embarrassed, terribly embarrassed. I was not aware that Prof. Kakoma had gone to court to plead a case which is as clear as daylight. I am glad my senior brother in the profession, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, is here. I do not have to persuade him. I know he is a man of high moral integrity. Let it be known to the nation that this Parliament, on behalf of Uganda, has spoken loudly that the case of Prof. George Wilberforce Kakoma does not need to be pleaded and won in court. The people of Uganda, through this Parliament, I think today have resolved that the Professor should be paid. Who is who to say no when the Parliament of Uganda says yes? (Applause)

Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for this opportunity. I want to thank the people of Uganda, especially this Parliament, for recognising Prof. Kakoma. I am one of those people who were highly inspired by Prof. Kakoma during my primary school days. I would like it to be put on record that I am one of the people in this Parliament who won a national trophy during the primary school festival in 1968. That was the first time I looked at this man and I said, “God bless Uganda forever and forever for giving us such a great mind.” May his soul rest in eternal peace. For God and my country.

4.37 
MR IDDI ISABIRYE (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to join the rest of the people of Uganda to pay tribute to the fallen great man, Prof. George Wilberforce Kakoma. This is a great man lying before us, a great loss to the nation. His contribution shall always be remembered.

Prof. George Wilberforce Kakoma has contributed a lot to this nation. He has left a legacy, he has left an asset and that is the National Anthem, one of the instruments of power. We shall always remember this great man every time we sing the National Anthem. The Professor will be before us. Today, we are celebrating life, the 89 years which he lived with us in this country. God loved Uganda that he chose to give us the Professor who composed a national anthem which does not get outdated. This is a national anthem which is sung by all people of Uganda, by all tribes. 

I want to thank the Parliament of Uganda for having accepted to honour the Professor before us. May the Almighty God rest the soul of the fallen great man in eternal peace. 

THE SPEAKER: Please take one minute. People have been waiting at the National Theatre for over an hour now. 

4.40
MS EVELYNE ANITE (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to also join the rest of my colleagues in paying tribute to our fallen hero, Prof. Kakoma. 

There is a saying that you will not know the pain of death until you lose someone who is dear to you. The professor who has died is not only dear to his family members but very dear to the rest of us, Ugandans. The word of comfort to the family of Prof. Kakoma is that do not worry, do not cry, do not wear out, he is not dead but he has just passed into a new world and one day you will join him.

Madam Speaker, to the rest of us whom Professor has left in Uganda and in the world, I know one thing for sure, I grew up singing the National Anthem. One thing I learned from the National Anthem is that the intention the Professor had in that anthem was to see a united Uganda. That is why he says, “together we will always stand”. It is very unfortunate that our country, Uganda, does not stand as one. We only stand and sing praises to Uganda when Uganda Cranes are going to play but we call ourselves names, we describe ourselves according to the features we have on our bodies, according to the regions we come from; this is very sad and not the dream of the late Prof. Kakoma. 

Now that he has finally left us, it is very painful and sad for all of us. We are mourning and our hearts are tearing apart because of the death of Professor. As the cream of this country, leaders and legislators, we have all raised our voice upon his death and paid tribute to the late professor. I pray that we start preaching and promoting unity, speaking with one voice – (Member timed out.)

4.43
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I want to pay tribute to Prof. George Kakoma. I did not have a close interaction with the Professor but what he has done has made me analyse some things. One of them is that the National Anthem composed by Prof. Kakoma has stood the test of time. We have had regimes in this country, and it is the character of political leaders to change things, but what Prof. Kakoma did, no regime has tried to change it. 

In this country, we had a President called Idi Amin, the dictator. He moved to the extent of changing the borders of this country and wanted Kagera to be part of this country. One day, he even proposed that the crested crane should be changed because the crane is always standing on one leg. He preferred something standing on two legs. But he never proposed that we change the National Anthem. This shows the value of the anthem to this country. I hope and pray that even the regimes that will come after, nobody will think of changing this anthem until God says this country called Uganda should not be there – (Interjections) – I am not saying that the Opposition will come; we are still here for some years to come, so please be patient.

Madam Speaker, Prof. Kakoma should be counted among the founding fathers of this country because he contributed to the liberation of this country from the people who came here on the iron horse and spoke to the people of this country through the nose. These people were described by Chinua Achebe in his book, No longer at Ease, because they were the same people who colonised Nigeria. They came on an iron horse, speaking through the nose. So, it was very difficult to understand what they were saying and it caused our people to sign agreements that they did not understand. So, he is among the people who tried to liberate our people from those people. (Member timed out_)

4.47
MS SARAH NAKAWUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to say a word about Prof. George Wilberforce Kakoma. Prof. Kakoma was known by almost every pupil in school. Questions have always been asked in exams about the composer of the National Anthem. 

I was born in Wakiso District and I had my primary in Kavumba Primary School, the parish where Professor comes from. During those times, Prof. Kakoma used to come to the school and he taught us some music. There was a teacher at that time who composed a song praising Prof. Kakoma. The teacher asked us to be proud of ourselves because the composer of the National Anthem hailed from Kavumba, the parish where our school was. So, I thank God for his life, I thank the Government for the support it has provided and I pray that his soul rests in peace. Thank you.

4.49
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support the motion to pay tribute to a fallen gallant son. I did not have the opportunity to interact with the late Prof. Kakoma, but I have read about his works. Even when his song was first sang, the National Anthem, I was about to be born but in recent times, I have also read about his works. I have learnt about this story through the members of his family, especially when it was aired on television. May I, therefore, take this opportunity to thank the immediate members of his family for taking care of that great son of this country for whom we are paying tribute today. 

It was a painful moment when the news was first delivered about his poor condition. It is also unfortunate that we stand here to pay tribute to a son who at the time of his death was in court with Government of Uganda. May I request Government to find an opportunity to end that disagreement through a peaceful settlement, and a negotiated one other than through judgement. 

Prof. Kakoma did his part at the time he was required to do it, and I will not want to dwell much on what he did in the 1960s. However, I want to use his example to call on my colleagues and the people of Uganda; when he had an opportunity to do a good job, he did it. All of us, at any particular time, have an opportunity to make a contribution. How are we utilising the opportunity that we have to make a contribution for the people of Uganda? Are we having good deliberations? Are we passing the right laws? Are we bringing the people of Uganda together? Some people are arguing that the Uganda he envisaged is not the Uganda of today. Unity is not an activity but a process; every person must play a role. 

One Chinese professor was got trying to dig down a mountain some years back and when he was asked what he was attempting to do, he said he was digging down the mountain. Somebody asked him when he would finish and he said that it did not matter but what mattered is that what he clips off does not go back, and that is the only important thing. The late Prof. Kakoma made his clip off the mountain, let us also, during our time, make a clip off the mountain so that the children in future will have a smaller load to cut than what they would have done today. (Applause)

The late Prof. Kakoma talked about fertile soils. The soils are no longer as fertile as they used to be. We must act now. What are we doing? Shall we just keep singing about Uganda’s fertile soils? Are they as fertile as Prof. Kakoma saw them? They have progressively deteriorated! We have a role to play. As we reflect on what he did, let us do our part on time so that the people of Uganda today, tomorrow or in 50 years time to come will stand here to pay tribute to us and say that while we lived, we played our role.

Somebody did ask - hon. Cecilia Ogwal - whether the late Prof. Kakoma was ever honoured. Did he ever receive a medal? This is why I have problems with Uganda’s history - 

GEN. TUMWINE: I thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Dombo. I rise to give information in regard to that concern which was even raised in the papers first - Was Prof. Kakoma ever given a medal? I want to put it on record that on 9 October 2010 at Kololo, he was awarded the Independence Medal which he received himself. (Applause) So, he is being honoured as one of the Independence medallists of this country who are so far very few. I have pride to say that he is one of the first artists to be awarded that medal and to be recognised in this manner. I pay tribute to him.

MR DOMBO: Finally, I want to thank the Government of Uganda for choosing to honour the late Prof. Kakoma the way we have done. Apart from the recognition that gives comfort to the family, it is also an inspiration to the people who do well, that if there is a time for recognition, they can be remembered and recognised. The late Prof. Kakoma has fought a good fight, run a good race and won the prize. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

4.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca Mbaguta Sezi): I thank you for the opportunity. I want to support the motion and say that those of us who have been close to the family in the last few days know how grieved they are. I would like to appreciate the life they have lived with Prof. Kakoma. If you have to be a very good worker, you must have very good support in your home, among your friends and relatives. They have been very supportive and that is why we are able to recognise the good work he has done. 

There has been an impression created that Government did not appreciate the services of the late Prof. Kakoma. I would like to inform this House and put it on record that Prof. Kakoma as a public servant retired on 31 October 1974. From 1974, Government did pay his benefits up to this month. It has constantly and religiously been paying. I thought I would put that on record. He was one of our pensioners. 

I would also like to say that if we have said so much about the deceased, it is my considered view that let us all leave this House able to recite the three stanzas of the National Anthem. If we do that, then we shall have given him the best respect because there are so many people who cannot even sing the first stanza. My appeal to all of us as leaders is that we should learn the stanzas and then carry his banner forward.

On his issue of being a musician or artist, I would like to pay tribute for the skill he got at an early age, the skill in music. We as leaders should actually entrench our young people to keep their skills. Many of us are skilled and we leave those skills when we grow and abandon them. From the testimonies we have got, he never abandoned the skill he got when he was young. He actually rendered a service by passing it on to others who said he was their lecturer. Currently, we are aware that a number of young and middle aged people shift away from the basic skills that they could pass on to their young people and therefore not passing on knowledge as he did. 

The information I have gathered is that this anthem came through a competition, and there were judges – those who actually selected proposals - and it eventually became a national anthem. I want to entreat ourselves that once there is competition and one has succeeded, you consider that competition to have come to an end; we have not seen those who competed with Prof. Kakoma for the national anthem making noise about it. (Laughter) Can we take that lesson from those great men who actually made some proposals and they lost out but respected Prof. Wilberforce Kakoma for the great work he has done. I am sure they have been singing the National Anthem too. The fact that they have been singing shows that it is great to accept competition as a great thing in this country.

In the anthem, there are two things I want to draw lessons from. If we are going to carry on his banner, let us look at the land. There is an element of land and there is an element of labour – the labour we give. If we look backwards into our own locality, we should look at where we are and ask if the production is sufficient to make us live on this land. I think we should go for production to be able to go with the National Anthem and we shall be able to carry the banner and the vision that Prof. Kakoma had. 

I want to thank the family for having been with him, looked after him and also for having been strong in this time of mourning. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Let me ask the Prime Minister to wind up very briefly. 

5.01
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, in light of the time constraint, I just want to make two points. I would like to thank you for supporting this motion without reservation. I would like to thank honourable members for the recognition they have given to this late brother who has passed on. We, Government, have noted the points that have been made. First, there was the call for resolving the contentious matters in court, that every effort should be made to resolve them amicably. I want to assure this House that that attempt will be made. (Applause)

Secondly, we take note of the proposal that he should be buried in the heroes’ corner at Kololo. Madam Speaker and honourable members, this is a proposal that came on the Floor of this House and hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi and I carried out some consultations with one member of the family as the debate was on-going. We all came to an agreement that it is a matter that requires consultation within the family and within Government. Therefore, I can only undertake in this House today to take it up in Government, to carry out further consultations with the family so that that proposal is given due consideration and resolution. 

Madam Speaker, we take note of the proposals from all who spoke that this great piece, the National Anthem, ought to be known and sung by all because it is not the case that it is known by everybody. When I was still a young man going to school before independence, every Sunday I would go to church and we sang the British anthem first. I think we sang it twice. Dr Rugunda is the only one of my age here – (interjections) - No, definitely, the hon. Moses Ali is not my age. He is slightly older and even in his time - we had talked about it - they used to do it. I think we ought to do the same, to have a system where not only the children in school but all Ugandans sing this national anthem. This is because it has a great message for our people and for our nation. 

Today, what a great honour it will be if we ended this debate by singing the three stanzas. I would have led the singing if I were sure that each Member of Parliament sitting here today could sing the three stanzas. If the Speaker allows, I will do it. So, I hope from now on, we are all going to learn and cram the three stanzas so that at the earliest opportunity, we can sing them together. 

Madam Speaker, having thanked members for supporting the motion to pay tribute by this House to the great works of the late brother, Prof. Wilberforce Kakoma, both as a teacher and as the author of the National Anthem, I beg to move that the question be put. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, when we started, the Buganda caucus was late, so let me ask them to place the wreath on the casket. Hon. Nambooze, please place the wreath on the casket.

(Laying of wreaths.)

THE SPEAKER: Secondly, I want to remind honourable members that whenever we have a national day, the programme which is printed actually has all the stanzas of the National Anthem. I would like to appeal to members to go back to their homes and check in each of those programmes - the whole anthem is there - and they can start practicing from there. 

Thirdly, on my behalf and the Deputy Speaker, we would like to convey our very sincere condolences to the family of Prof. Kakoma and to thank him for the great contribution to this country. Honourable members, I direct that after the question has been put, the Clerk should transmit the Hansard in its entirety to Mrs Maria Theresa Kakoma for her records and her family. I also direct that as we close, we shall sing all the three stanzas of the National Anthem so that we honour the man who composed them for us. I now put the question that this House do pay tribute to Prof. George Wilberforce Kakoma for his contribution to the Republic of Uganda.

(Question put and agreed to.)

National Anthem (three Verses)

(Exit of the Late Prof. George Wilberforce Kakoma)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank you for the deliberations of today. I also thank you for coming up to give a befitting farewell to Prof. George Wilberforce Kakoma. Before I adjourn the House to Tuesday of next week, I would like to remind you that there will be a funeral service at Namirembe Cathedral. I believe the programme has been announced by the Minister of Information and National Guidance. The House is adjourned to 2 O’clock on Tuesday.

(The House rose at 5.16 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 17 April 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)
