Tuesday, 16 April 2013

Parliament met at 2.24 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Jacob Oulanyah, in Chair)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wish to welcome you to this special sitting. We have again lost another colleague in the name of the honourable Dr Mallinga Stephen Oscar. You may remember that exactly 41 days ago, Parliament sat to pay tribute to the Rt. hon. Eriya Kategaya who passed on. It is therefore so sad and sudden that in such a short span of time, death has come again to rob us of another distinguished servant of this country. This death is the fourth one being recorded in the Ninth Parliament. We have to pray and pray hard. 

The death of the honourable Dr Mallinga is extremely painful because it has been very sudden and unexpected. He was not known to be unwell. He even attended Cabinet and left for his usual activities in the constituency and he just died. That makes it really a disaster for us. 

As I already said in the church yesterday, I had a very close relationship with hon. Mallinga especially in the Seventh Parliament when we were here. We shared light moments, jokes, stories and all kinds of things. I will truly miss him as an individual. 

Dr Mallinga has served this country in various capacities with dedication. He has served Uganda as a medical doctor, military officer, a Member of Parliament and a Cabinet Minister. It is indeed a great and rare occurrence that a person who can serve in such diverse fields should just go like that.  

On the international scene, Dr Mallinga served in the medical field for almost three decades specialising in obstetrics and gynaecology in the State of Illinois in the United States of America, which is popularly known as the State of President Obama as it is there that he nurtured his political aspirations until he assumed the highest office.

Political turmoil in the early 1970s was responsible for hon. Dr Mallinga’s decision to go to exile. I know that he was comfortable and well paid in the United States of America but due to the love of his motherland, Dr Mallinga returned home once he learnt that there was political stability. He sacrificed the comfort and opulent living he had enjoyed in the United States of America to come and serve his nation. He had trust and confidence in Ugandan medical personnel and indeed without any fear, he stated in the House several times that Mulago Hospital could handle many health challenges without much difficulty. No wonder, as a Minister of Health, he pushed for various health reforms in the country. Dr Mallinga will be greatly missed by Parliament, the people of Uganda, the medical fraternity, the Teso community, the people of Butebo in particular, the people he served in Illinois and his family and friends.  

Dr Mallinga had a reserved character but upon interaction with him, you noticed that he was full of wisdom, greatly knowledgeable and very nationalistic; he loved Uganda and Ugandans greatly. On behalf of Parliament and on my own behalf, I wish to register our utmost condolences to his family and to the entire nation for losing the personality of the honourable Dr Mallinga Stephen Oscar.  

I wish to recognise that his family members are seated at the Treasury Bench right behind my seat. We will continue to pray for the family and our hearts will always have room for the Mallinga’s family. May his soul rest in eternal peace.


Honourable members, I wish to inform you that in order to allow as many Members as possible to speak, five minutes will be given to each speaker. We will then review later and see if there are more Members who wish to speak, which I suspect will be the case. I request Members to respect the honourable Dr Mallinga by not making any unnecessary interruptions. I wish to thank you in advance for your expected orderly behaviour. I will terminate the debate at 6.00 p.m. to enable the family to travel back home for the arrangements for final respects of the hon. Mallinga.  

Honourable members, I wish to clarify that Parliament was not sent on recess, rather, plenary was adjourned to allow the sectoral committees to consider and review the indicative allocations of the budget committed to the committees and which should submit their reports to the Committee on Budget for the next financial year. This is in accordance with Section 7(2) of the Budget Act and Rule 134(2) of the Rules of Procedure. This process has to be completed not later than 25 April 2013 in time for the Committee on Budget to report by 15 May 2013 on the estimates and reports of the sectoral committees, whose recommendations should be sent to the Speaker for onward transmission to H.E the President under our Rules of Procedure Rule 134(3) for his consideration.

In light of the command of the Budget Act and the Rules of Procedure, it is important that the sectoral committees should be given priority to sit and handle this important business.  I, therefore, urge other committees to suspend their deliberations during this period. All standing committees, please participate in the meetings of sectoral committees so that we can finish this business. 

Finally, honourable members, the Uganda Vision 2040 is due to be launched by H.E the President on Thursday, 18 April 2013 at Kololo. There is however a requirement under Section 8(5) and (6) of the National Planning Authority Act that the vision should be approved by Parliament. You may recall that on 3 April 2013, the Uganda Vision 2040 was laid on the Table by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and thereafter referred by the Speaker to the joint Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Committee on Budget for scrutiny. 

The report of the joint committee is ready and it is with the above background that I beg your indulgence so that Parliament can meet tomorrow Wednesday, 17 April 2013 at 2.00 p.m. to dispose of this business in fulfilment of the law. Therefore, plenary is rescheduled to handle this particular business and thereafter the sectoral committees should continue with the assignment earlier given.

Honourable members, I wish to thank you for listening to me and I wish you all the best in your endeavours. Please, let us give hon. Mallinga the respect he deserves.

(Entrance of the late Dr Stephen Mallinga)

National anthem (Three stanzas)

The East African Community Anthem

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, given that today is a special sitting, I already see that you  have done the needful so please feel free to sit on any part of the House. There will be no party line voting today so you are free to enjoy the spaces available in the House; you can move over where there is space.

Laying of wreaths
	
MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. DR STEPHEN OSCAR MALLINGA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before I allow the mover of the motion, let me make recognition of some of the members in the Distinguished Strangers’ Gallery. I have noticed that we almost have a full House in the Gallery. I can see a delegation from the Zambian Parliament, led by hon. Banda. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) I shall proceed in no particular order in recognising the hon. Wilfred Kajeke, former Member of Parliament; hon. Dr Abel Rwendeire, former Member of Parliament; hon. Grace Tubwita, former Member of Parliament; hon. Salamu Musumba, former Member of Parliament and current Chairman of Kamuli District –(Laughter)– “Chairman”. We also have hon. Lydia Wanyoto, former Member of EALA; hon. Kubeketerya, former Member of Parliament from Bunya; hon. Wandera Ogalo, both Parliament of Uganda and EALA; hon. Ojok B’Leo, former Member of Parliament from Kyoga – I will come back to those I cannot see properly.

We also have hon. Daniel Omara Atubo; hon. Emmanuel Akika; hon. Raphael Baku; hon. John Timba; hon. Mayanja Nkangi; hon. Oleny – I do not see that one clearly – hon. Livingstone Okello-Okello; (Laughter) hon. Anthony Butele; hon. Grace Oburu; hon. Henry Kyemba; hon. Bob Kitariko; hon. Sarah Kiyingi. I will take note of the people I am not able to see clearly; my glasses need fixing. I will get some notes later and recognise you.

We also have staff from the – oh! I have already informed them. These are the committees on Modernisation and on Legal Affairs, Governance, Human Rights, Gender and Child Rights of the Parliament of Zambia. I have already recognised them. There are pupils and teachers of St Joseph Maya Primary School, represented by hon. Medard Sseggona, Member of Parliament from Busiiro East. Join me in welcoming them.

Honourable members, we have messages. Since they are very many, I will not read the text but only mention the heading and announcements. I have a tribute from the Government Chief Whip addressed to the family. I also have a condolence message from hon. Muruli Mukasa, Minister for Security. We shall pass this to the family. We have a message addressed to the Speaker by hon. Kamba Saleh, MP Kibuku County; a condolence message from hon. Sarah Mwebaza, MP and Chairperson Parliamentary Committee on East African Affairs. There is also a condolence message from hon. Lydia Wanyoto Mutende from Web Advocates and Solicitors. 

We have a message from the Ministry of Education and Sports and it is signed by Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo; a condolence message from hon. Christine Aporu, Minister of State for Teso Affairs; a condolence from hon. Sarah Kataike Ndoboli, Minister of State for Health. We also have a condolence message from the chairperson of the Health Service Commission, Prof. Pius Okong; a condolence message addressed to the Prime Minister from the Ambassador of the Embassy of the United States of America.

We have a message from the Acholi Parliamentary Group signed by hon. Reagan Okumu and they have enclosed Shs 1 million as a contribution to funeral expenses. There is a message from the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme signed by hon. Rose Akol. Those are the messages we have so far received. There is this one from the Ministry of Works, signed by hon. Abraham Byandala, Minister of Works and Transport to the family of the late. The mover of the motion can now proceed. 

3.04
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen.(Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Dr Stephen Mallinga under Rule 43 of the Rules of Procedure. 

“WHEREAS Parliament with regret learnt of the untimely demise of the late hon. Stephen Oscar Mallinga, which occurred on 11 April 2013 at Butebo in Pallisa District; 

AND WHEREAS the late Dr Stephen Oscar Mallinga was born on 17 November 1943 in Pallisa District; studied in Pallisa and later at the University of East Africa, graduating with a Bachelor’s Degree in Human Medicine and Surgery; he was a fellow of the American University of Surgeons; specialised in Obstetrics and a fellow of the International College of Surgeons;

NOTING that the late hon. Dr Stephen Oscar Mallinga had a distinct career in medical practice that spanned three decades, commencing in 1973 as a consultant at Cook County Hospital Chicago in the United States of America; later as chairperson in the Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology at Jackson Park Hospital Chicago between 1973 to 1985; and as a consultant at Eland Memorial Hospital Harvey, Illinois between 1985 and 1995. 

FURTHER NOTING that the late hon. Dr Stephen Oscar Mallinga provided exemplary service to this country from 1970 when he joined and served in the national army at the rank of captain and later in 1996 when he joined national politics as Member of Parliament for Butebo County in Pallisa District, a constituency he has represented until the day of his death. 

APPRECIATING that the late hon. Dr Stephen Oscar Mallinga was in 2006 appointed Minister of Health and later in 2011 Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, a portfolio he has effectively handled until the time of his death;

FURTHER NOTING that the late hon. Dr Stephen Oscar Mallinga was accomplished in Uganda’s multi-party politics having contributed to its strengthening by serving the UPC and later the National Resistance Movement in various capacities, manifesting a high degree of maturity and tolerance when he joined NRM from UPC, but he still remained cordial and friendly to his former colleagues; 

FURTHER NOTING that he served the nation of Uganda and his constituency of Butebo selflessly and with distinction;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows:

    1. That it collectively conveys its deepest condolences to the bereaved family, friends, the patriotic people of Butebo Constituency and the nation as a whole upon the demise of this illustrious son of Uganda.
    2. That it takes cognisance of the distinguished services rendered and the contribution made by the late hon. Dr Stephen Oscar Mallinga both at national and international levels.
    3. That it takes cognisance of the late hon. Dr Stephen Oscar Mallinga as a politically mature person with a high degree of political tolerance and a peace lover who was patriotic and an accomplished medical doctor and politician. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Okay it is seconded by the Leader of the Opposition and the hon. Sam Otada, leader of the Independent Members of Parliament. Please justify your motion. 

GEN. (Rtd) MOSES ALI: The late honourable Dr Stephen Oscar Mallinga was born to Yonasani Obukuyang and Lakeri Asekenye Nambayo on 17 November 1943 at Akoboi Village, Kasiebai Parish Butebo Sub-County, Pallisa District. 

He went to Butebo Primary School, Budaka Junior Secondary School, Nabumali High School and later Ntare School before proceeding to Makerere University where he obtained a Bachelor’s degree in medicine and surgery. He was a great debater and sportsman during his formative years at school. He is remembered for having won so many accolades for the schools he went to. 

His leadership skills were exhibited early during his high school days at Ntare School where he was the house prefect for Baker House. In 1970, he joined military service where he rose to the rank of captain before opting out in 1973. He proceeded to the United States of America where he practiced medicine at various hospitals rising to the rank of consultant obstetrician gynaecologist. He was a fellow of the American College of Obstetricians and a fellow of the International College of Surgeons. 

When he returned to Uganda in 1996, he joined elective politics and became the honourable Member of Parliament for Butebo County. He served on the Committee on Local Government and Public Service as well as the Committee on Works, Communication and Housing. His debating skills and objective approach to issues was unequalled. He exuded confidence and was diplomatic in his approach. 

He was re-elected by his constituents for another term from 2001 to 2006. He served on the Committee on Trade Tourism and Industry, the Committee on Natural Resources and the Committee on Local Government and Public Service. 

In 2006, he joined the National Resistance Movement and was subsequently appointed the Minister of Health. This was a befitting calling for a man of his experience and exposure. It is during his tenure that the health sector made substantial steps towards the improvement of Uganda’s health indicators. Many development partners came on board to fund various programmes that have since transformed the health sector.

The late honourable Dr Stephen Mallinga was appointed Minister for Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees in 2011, a portfolio that he held until his demise.

Government has been furnished with a post-mortem report and it indicates that the cause of death was recurrent myocardial infarction - (Interjections) – I would be ready to be taught English except that this is a wrong time. (Laughter)

He leaves behind a rich legacy which will be an inspiration to both the present and the future generations. Death has robbed the country of a good leader, a patriot and a statesman. May his soul rest in eternal peace and may the Lord give comfort and strength to the bereaved. I beg to move. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you, the mover of the motion. The seconder is the Leader of the Opposition.

3.16
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Winifred Kiiza): Mr Speaker and colleagues, I rise to second the motion moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Dr Stephen Oscar Mallinga.

The widow, family members, friends and relatives of the late hon. Dr Stephen Oscar Mallinga, on behalf of the Opposition in Parliament and on my own behalf, I want to pass our sincere condolences to the widow, the friends, the bereaved family and relatives of the late hon. Dr Stephen Oscar Mallinga.

We have stood on the Floor time and again, every time we lose a dear one, to lament the health situation of our hospitals in this country. It is as if nothing is going to change. Mr Speaker and dear colleagues, today is another sad day when we are saying bye to our dear brother, our dear friend and our dear minister of the Republic of Uganda. Dr Stephen Mallinga in his career as a medical practitioner, like you have heard, and not just a medical practitioner but an accomplished one, has helped many people not only here in Uganda but even outside Uganda. However, when death knocked on his door, Dr Mallinga could not say “No”. 

He saved many, he helped many get out of dangerous situations and this means that death is one fact that we cannot run away from. Therefore, honourable colleagues, it is time for us to re-examine our health sector and I wish to take this opportunity to call upon Government to improve our health systems. In our hospitals, people are even dying of small illnesses like malaria. I want to say that the country demands a lot from us, the representatives. Dr Mallinga, you played your part and indeed the nation has learnt a lot from you.

Like the Prime Minister did mention, Dr Mallinga believed in democracy. He would not argue with the Opposition for the sake of pleasing the powers that be. He believed in reason and this is a man we are missing. When Dr Mallinga crossed from the UPC party to the NRM, he said that he wanted to contribute to the development of this country and his reason was that he could not contribute to national building when he was in the Opposition. That is why he crossed to the ruling party, the NRM. However, like you heard the Prime Minister mentioning, he did not ignore his friends. He was within the UPC party, and he did not oppose for the sake of making a mark that he had arrived in the ruling party; he still believed in reforms. 

I want to say, Dr Mallinga, we shall miss your guidance. We shall miss your wise counsel. We still believe that you can still plead on behalf of the Ugandans that we should all believe in reason and that whoever is ready to contribute, they can contribute from whichever angle they are from, no matter where they are.

Today is Dr Mallinga and tomorrow is another person. All we need to ask ourselves is, what will I be remembered for? When people stand here to speak about me, what will they say? Will they say that this has been an accomplished legislator? Will they say that this has been a people’s representative or they will begin patching words, collecting them from all corners to get words to speak about you? (Laughter) Dr Mallinga is not a person of that kind where you begin looking for words to speak about him. His life spoke for itself. 

I want to thank him. He was a father to some of us in this Parliament because he spoke with dignity and gentility. To his family, you had a father in Dr Mallinga and I must attest to that. You know that better than I do. Those of us who came into close contact with him know that he was really a father to some of us. We know that the good Lord that gives is the same God that has taken him away. You have played your part, Dr Mallinga, and we believe that you have gone to meet your Creator. May your soul rest in eternal peace. I thank you. (Applause)

3.21
MR SAM OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryandongo): I thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I rise to second the motion that has been moved by the Leader of Government Business and ably seconded by the Leader of the Opposition. 

On behalf of the Independent Members of Parliament and on my own behalf, I wish to convey our very sincere and deep condolences to the bereaved family, to His Excellency the President, to all of you colleagues in the House, the people of Butebo County and to all Ugandans. 

I was just thinking about the trend that has been prevailing in this House. Like I said before, in the tenure of five years, one thing that we know for sure is that one of us or a couple of us will fall, but we just do not know who and how the turn will go. I was just thinking about how the trend has been pertaining in this House. For the record, two senior Front Bench members and two first-term Members of Parliament have gone, so four colleagues in that order. 

Mr Speaker, this is not good for both the experienced Members whom we need to nurture the other leaders and also for the incoming breed who should replace those who should be outgoing. It is a bit of a contradiction there; we may want to think about it. However, God’s ways are not our ways and certainly, death is not for those of us who are living. Once somebody departs, all that happens is that we have to partake of the lessons that death leaves behind when somebody departs. So, we are at it again, for the fourth time in the life of the Ninth Parliament, and may the good Lord sustain all of us who are still alive.

Mr Speaker, the Rt Hon. Amama Mbabazi usually feels a bit uncomfortable about colleagues who eulogise and say things which tend to criticise Government and especially in service delivery that it is lacking, and that probably some people could not have died if we had done better. Is it a coincidence that Members choose to speak that way, when colleagues fall? My answer is “No”. My answer is “No” because colleagues die from different causes of death but the situation still remains the same - the institutions that should really help save all and do what is humanly possible, from health centres IV where the hon. Dr Stephen Mallinga died, Mulago Hospital and many other institutions. We run the risk of eulogising colleagues and saying things that will make our Front Bench Members feel uncomfortable, but we are not moving very well. 

May I thank the mover of the motion for profiling the late colleague very well, posthumously of course. May I also thank God for the gift of Dr Stephen Mallinga, very deliberately, because as we speak, Africans in the Diaspora remit over US$ 60 billion to the African Continent and they are very happy in the Diaspora. Many of them are very hesitant to even think of returning to make a contribution back home like our colleague decided to do. 

To be fair, let me thank the Government that made it possible for the honourable Dr Mallinga to fine a conducive environment around the time he came back home. He found a conducive environment to come back home at that time. However, I still want to ask a question: Today, in 2013, are our members in the Diaspora still motivated to come back home to bring expertise like the kind Dr Mallinga brought? My bet is as good as yours, honourable members. A doctor who may want to come back home today cannot come and work with his bare hands. He wants to come and find facilities which can facilitate him to work and if those facilities exist in your constituencies, may God bless you.

These are the issues that we are grappling with and again when death occurs, like today, where we have an opportunity to eulogise, these are times when we find time to speak for the living because for the dead it is finished. For the living, can we think about some of these issues?

Mr Speaker and all of you colleagues, you know that hon. Mallinga was a man of very few words. He was a man of precision. I think that is reminiscent of medical doctors; they just want to go for the point and finish. So, I think I will only be fair to him not to say so many words, which I could have said at the demise of a fine gallant son of Uganda who left a very well established environment in the United States and came back with the hope that he will make a difference. To be fair, he made his mark to the extent that he did and I want to thank him for that.    

I also want to end by saying that it is very important in real life that you should be predictable. Society should be able, with some fair degree of understanding, to understand what you are up to. For many of us in the political circles, our political roadmap is not clear. We have not written “political wills”. People do not know what we are up to. To that end, when we are as anonymous as that, we do not attract the interest of the younger generation to begin positioning themselves to take over and at the end of the day we leave a vacuum when we depart. 

I am saying this deliberately because the hon. Stephen Mallinga had a clear political roadmap. He said that 20 years down the road in 2016, he would not be standing again. He made it very clear to the people of his constituency. Some people are finding that extremely difficult to say - (Laughter) – but I think that is the right thing to say especially when you know what you are up to. So, I know I am fairly senior in this House and some Members are passing the message quietly that “when am I leaving”. I think that will be for another day, not today because I will be nipping in the bud an opportunity which is somebody else’s. (Laughter) 

I would like to conclude by recommending a book to the family. There is a book that has been written by Richard Sigmund. It talks about life after death. I would like to recommend this book to all of you, honourable colleagues. When you read this book, you are going to cease fighting for things of this world, I can assure you. (Laughter) Yes, your appetites will be tamed. Your appetite for worldly things will be tamed and your appetite for heavenly things will be enhanced. So, may I recommend Dr Richard Sigmund’s book to the family, to all of you, honourable Members of Parliament and to anybody else who thinks what I have said is useful. May his soul rest in eternal peace. I second the motion. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I propose the question for your debate. The motion is that this Parliament resolves: 

    1. That it collectively conveys its deepest condolences to the bereaved family, friends, the patriotic people of Butebo Constituency and the nation as a whole upon the demise of this illustrious son of Uganda.
    2. That it takes cognisance of the distinguished services rendered, and the contribution made by the late hon. Dr Stephen Oscar Mallinga, both at national and international levels.
    3. That it takes cognisance of the late hon. Dr Stephen Oscar Mallinga as a politically mature person with a high degree of political tolerance and a peace lover who was a patriotic medical doctor and politician.

That is the motion for your debate. As we said, we will limit the time. I will start with the hon. Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness. 

3.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr Musa Ecweru):  Mr Speaker, in sending my condolence message to you, colleagues and the family, allow me to use this occasion to say the following about the late hon. Dr Mallinga and the work he has done.

The work of relief and refugee management is basically that of a messenger of hope. Our work at the ministry responsible for refugees is to deliver hope to those in distress. Our work is to wipe tears from those who find themselves in pain and most times for no fault of their own. What we do is about repairing broken hearts and bringing a smile to those in distress. This is the responsibility I have had to discharge under the guidance and supervision of the late hon. Dr Stephen Mallinga. By the very nature of the job, the challenges associated with it generate a lot of emotions. That is why none of our interventions has been considered enough.

However, I would like to emphasize that although our job of looking after refugees and relieving the pain of those in distress is not particularly a very pleasant one, it is a very satisfying job. The late joined the ministry in 2011 as my senior minister. On his arrival at the ministry, the late reminded me about our responsibility to the country, a country now bedevilled by numerous emergencies especially those associated with natural calamities.

The late reminded me about how working in harmony, especially between him and I who were responsible for the supervision of the ministry, would overcome the challenges that the ministry faces. He also told me that if we worked with any difficulties, it would create a devastating effect particularly to the Teso Community, because by coincidence we both come from the Teso sub-region. Therefore, we agreed to develop a working relationship of a father and son where anything contentious was resolved from within our house. I asked him to always lend me his brains and experience, but I also accepted to donate to the late my energy for us to propel the ministry forward. That has been the spirit, which has guided our working atmosphere until my dear father fell dead while in Butebo last week.

Let me emphasise a few things that many people may not know about the late. The late hon. Dr Mallinga was very frank. If frankness is a weakness, then he suffered from that weakness. He was also very humorous. Recently, when I had just returned from abroad, he called me on telephone because while I was away, my wife gave birth to a baby boy. He said in Ateso, “Musa, Iroko ijo iswamai iboro ngun?” It means, “Musa, are you still doing those things?” (Laughter) I told him, “Yes, Sir” and I promised him that I would continue doing those things for some time to come. (Laughter) That was the hon. Dr Mallinga for you. That is how close we were.

The late would discuss with me issues to do with his family just like I did because I have children who are just joining university. The late would guide me on how I can also raise my children to a level where they can be better than me.

The late was not a flamboyant man. He was not a boastful man to us as juniors and to all those workers in the Office of the Prime Minister. I want to mention that every Thursday, all of us including junior staff would go to the bedroom – (Interjections) – and all of us would have tea from - I beg your pardon, there is no bedroom –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think those things are still on your mind.

MR ECWERU: No, I said that we would go to the boardroom with all the staff of OPM’s Disaster Management Office to take tea. The late brought to the office the idea of not calling people by titles, for example, minister, honourable, commissioner; we called ourselves by name. His legacy, I want to emphasise, will live on. We will miss him. We promise to diligently continue doing our noble job of being messengers of hope to people in situations of emergency.

Honourable members, I want to invite all of you to Butebo, where we will go to bid the late hon. Dr Mallinga farewell. May his soul rest in eternal peace and may God sustain the bereaved family. For God and my country. 

3.41
CAPT. MIKE MUKULA (NRM, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, today the shadow of darkness is over Parliament. However, before I make any more comments, allow me take this opportunity to thank you and all the honourable colleagues for having prayed for me while I was in incarceration. (Applause) The late hon. Dr Mallinga visited me in Luzira Prison many times. 

As the NRM chairman of the eastern region, I want to say that the loss we have suffered is the third one. This is the third Member of Parliament to die - we have so far lost four Members of Parliament including the late Eriya Kategaya, the late Oromait, the late Cerinah Nebanda and now the late hon. Dr Stephen Mallinga.

The late was a great man. He was a principled man, a man who believed in being honest and sincere. I knew the late while he lived in America. That time he had just treated one of my great friends, a pilot I trained with, the late Jeff Oguli, who used to fly for United Airlines. During that time, I encouraged him to return to Uganda and I am happy to report that he did, even when he had very difficult times in his political transition.  

I remember I left the President in some parts of Bugisu after telling him that I had gone to meet the late now with about 14 elders from Butebo, Pallisa. Our drive then was to have Butebo gazetted into a district. The elders I went with urged the late to cross to the NRM. It however, took us a long time to persuade him; he was quiet throughout the discussion but at the end of the discussion he said, “The service of a Member of Parliament is to the people. I will come and serve my people as you have urged me to cross to the National Resistance Movement.” I want to say that this was a man who believed in his people. I want to thank the late Mallinga.

He was a man who was humorous. As a gynaecologist, he believed in his profession. Mr Speaker, like you said yesterday in church, the late Mallinga was a very humorous man and many people know that. I shared that joke with you which you brought to us yesterday where he believed as a gynaecologist that his profession was a very interesting one, a profession where a husband brings his wife and hands her over to you and you take her into a room and lock the room and do everything to examine and deal with whatever problems; when you come out, open the door, the man receives his wife smiling and he pays you. (Laughter) That was the late Mallinga, very humorous. He believed in his profession and I am so happy that the late Mallinga served very well in the Ministry of Health.

The late was a very organised man in that in his last messages, he wanted to be buried in a certain way. He communicated that in his will. He measured exactly the distance from his father, where the coffin would face and how he would be buried. He wrote his will in detail. That is how organised this man was. I really want to urge you, Members of Parliament and the whole country, to make sure that you prepare for death because it is an inevitable journey, we shall get there. Write your will.

I conclude by thanking the doctors, his wife and the family and also urge those who may have had problems with Mallinga as he goes, to forgive him because as he goes, he goes in peace. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

3.47
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me the chance to pay tribute to my elder and friend. I rise to support the motion moved by the Rt hon. Prime Minister of Uganda to pay glowing tribute to a friend, a colleague, an elder and a good neighbour. The late hon. Stephen Oscar Mallinga was the MP of Butebo County. Butebo County neighbours Kumi County and as a matter of fact, I was probably the biggest beneficiary of a good working relationship with hon. Mallinga. 

Permit me at this point on behalf of the people of Kumi to give my condolences to the family, our good neighbours of Butebo County and this nation at large for the most untimely death of the late Mallinga. 

The late Oscar Mallinga had his roots in Kumi District in a place called Olungia. That is where his forefathers came from. During the turmoil between the Iteso and Kakungulu, there was some form of resistance. This forced the family of the late Mallinga to leave Kumi and move towards Bukedea and found their way eventually to Butebo. He was a proud member of the Ikomolo-Akile clan which is widespread in Kumi District. 

I first met this gallant son of Uganda in 1995 when a towering bearded man stepped into my little office in Kumi. I was then the District Engineer of Kumi and he had come to request for one thing. He said to me, “I have come for a motor grader because the road network in Butebo County is in a total mess.” I saw in the late Mallinga a man of humility. This is a gentleman who had just returned from America, had an illustrious career in America but still could call a little man like me in my office by the title, Sir. That is the person we have lost. 

Later on when I joined the Seventh Parliament, our friendship continued to blossom and I found in him a highly intelligent leader. I worked with him in the UPC Caucus. He was our chairman and I was the secretary of the caucus and the Rt hon. Speaker was actually our member. (Laughter). In our discussions, we were planning to serve this country by way of providing services. Actually, Dr Mallinga made a trip to Lusaka and he met the then President of the UPC. We from the East were convinced that one day Dr Mallinga would become the President of this country. He has died in the NRM. We felt sad that he left the Opposition for the NRM but still, while in the NRM, we continued to work with him. He gave us vital information. 

I will remember Dr Mallinga for making one fundamental statement in this House and that is when we were amending the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda to remove term limits. He voted with progressive forces and his vote was nay. He voted against removal of term limits just like some of us the progressives and I would like to thank him for that. We are clamouring today over the possibility of restoring term limits and I hear apologists apologising for making wrong choices at that time. Dr Mallinga did not have to apologise.

Dr Mallinga walked the talk. He said to the people of Butebo that 20 years is enough. I asked him why he had taken a decision to leave that position while still popular amongst people and he had this to say, “My son, I am old. Next year I will be making 70 years. I would like to go back and live among my people and continue helping them in the development of the area.” Today as we pay tribute to the late hon. Mallinga, in his neighbourhood stands a school named after his late father, Jonathan Memorial College. Some of you who will go to Butebo will see a wonderful school that not only serves the people of Butebo - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: No, I am going to set my very bad precedent. Let us stick to five minutes. Please use the five minutes.

3.54
MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I rise to support the motion to honour and pay tribute to the late Dr Stephen Mallinga. I had the opportunity of interacting and working with Dr Mallinga before joining this Parliament. As has been said, he came to Lusaka as the Chairman of the UPC Parliamentary Group and we had very good interaction. It was clear from my interaction with him that Dr Mallinga had a passion for the good of this country.

As a congressman, we have a clear basis or as the saying goes, raison d’être, the French words for “reason for existence”. In Dr Mallinga, it was clear that he had the passion to work for the benefit of this country. We have lost somebody who was a General in his field and this is in a field where you are not engaged in destroying your fellow Ugandan but assisting in maintaining the health of that Ugandan.

I am also grateful to Dr Mallinga in that when he left the Uganda Peoples’ Congress, he did not attack it. This is more appropriate in the sense that, and I must confess, within our party there were difficulties. Dr Mallinga, upon returning from Lusaka, worked very hard to establish an office for the UPC Parliamentary Group in the party headquarters but some members of the party who did not appreciate his efforts nor recognise his stature within the party, proceeded to lock up that office and threw out all his files. Throughout this period, we never heard Dr Mallinga attacking the party, which he really worked hard to sustain.

I recognise there was a lot of pressure from his constituency in 2005 when the people of Butebo were demanding for a district and put pressure on him to cross over. He accepted the word of the people on the ground but he did not attack the Congress. As such, I remain very grateful. At the same time, after leaving the Congress, it appears there was passion, which was missing. Reading the Hansard, you could read between the lines concerning the passion he had for this country; passion regarding the question of health services and at this moment we are reeling and this is a battle we are losing as Ugandans. 

Our health services are poor although we have the personnel. Dr Mallinga demonstrated this by coming back to work in this country. As a Ugandan, I put it to the Front Bench that we really need to win this battle. We lose far too many Ugandans through poor health services. As Members of Parliament, we are constantly inundated with issues in the constituency. We are constantly burying people who have failed to access decent medical care. As a legacy to Dr Mallinga, we really have to deal with this question. As a congressman, this is a passion, which we have to fulfil. It is the reason we are in politics; to improve the livelihoods of our fellow citizens. It is not to sit on the Front Bench, it is not just to be in power; you have to be in power for a reason and that reason must be to serve the people of Uganda.

Despite Dr Mallinga leaving us, he went with his passion. I recall a debate we had here on health services, which touched on the question of the UPC or Obote hospitals. In answering that question he said, we built those hospitals. He recognised where his roots were and so, on behalf of the Uganda Peoples’ Congress and on my own behalf, it is truly a sad moment that we lose somebody who was willing to serve this country. We hope that his service will be able to inspire others - (Member timed out_)

3.59
MS MARY AMOIT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pallisa): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. To the bereaved family and honourable members, here is the Pallisa Woman MP very saddened and broken because of the death of my father. Dr Mallinga has been my father-in-law as well as my mentor in politics. Pallisa, as a district, calls him father and all of us are going to miss Dr Mallinga greatly. We give Dr Mallinga the due respect in Pallisa. Our father has gone and Pallisa will never have a leader like Papa, hon. Dr Mallinga.

Dr Mallinga has been a true Ugandan with high moral character. He provided good leadership skills and authority as a minister and as MP. Dr Mallinga, on his arrival back to Pallisa, started a lot of projects. He assisted his voters by repairing most of the broken boreholes at that time and opened roads, which were impassable. This was his beginning without even knowing that he would join politics. This is what built his political muscle to aspire as a Member of Parliament. We do not regret having got Mallinga into politics at all.

The honourable Dr Mallinga joined politics in 1996 and while in Parliament, he served this country diligently, with respect and dignity. I believe nobody will dispute that. Dr Mallinga shall be remembered for his hard work and commitment to develop Pallisa and the country at large. This is a tested and experienced man of God who was very principled and his method of work has been very unique.

Dr Mallinga hated corruption of all forms and those who have been close to him will bear witness. He was a scarecrow to all those corrupt officials in the areas he has managed, both at ministerial and district levels. Being a corruption-free man, he believed in transparency and accountability. In fact, Dr Mallinga cherished accountability. I want to tell you, Members, that I worked with Dr Mallinga for a short while in politics and he was so assertive and involved in the development of Pallisa District. I am worried how we shall move on without him. 

In addition, he had some conditions which Government had to consent to. His position as a Cabinet minister contributed a lot to our wellbeing. During his time in office, Pallisa received very many projects like CAIIP for roads and markets. However, roads being a major problem in Pallisa, Dr Mallinga has always been toiling to see that Pallisa roads are tarmacked.

He lobbied for rural electrification, which started and is still going on. We sincerely appreciate his contribution in that regard. In the same vein, Dr Mallinga interested the President to pledge a district status to the people of Butebo, which he has unfortunately gone before realising. He spearheaded health reforms at all levels, from top to bottom. In the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, his passion will never be forgotten. (Member timed out.)

4.05
MR DENNIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to pay tribute to the late hon. Dr Stephen Mallinga. I want to say that in life, just like it is in Parliament, there are best and worst moments. On 14 March 2012, the late Mallinga witnessed one of his worst moments in the Ninth Parliament. He openly shared this with colleagues. On this day, he was appearing before one of the parliamentary committees to respond to issues relating to his docket. When he appeared, he was provoked. But amidst that provocation, the late Mallinga remained calm. The true Itesot in him reigned supreme and prevailed; he remained cool-headed and focussed. In gentility, he simply walked out of the meeting and later when he was interviewed, he said, “I am not a child but a senior citizen who deserves to be respected.”

The late Mallinga was a straightforward gentleman. An accomplished politician and professional, he would always advise both young and old politicians. This is because he had a wealth of experience both politically and professionally. I will describe him as a servant leader and that is why he died in his constituency at the service of his people. He was a simple man with a simple profile and a simple heart. I think his family, the people of Butebo, Teso and Uganda at large will greatly miss his services. 

I got to know the late Dr Mallinga in the last Parliament while he was the Minister of Health and I was a member of the social services committee. That committee was then overseeing two dockets, health and education. I want to say that when you compare his performance as Minister of Health – which was his area of profession – I think he had more passion for it than where he died from. All his submissions to the committee and plenary were straightforward. Even the issues he said while still in the Opposition, he would stand up to the front bench of the ruling party and say, “I told you this while still on the other side and I still maintain it.” That is the gentleman we are paying respect to today. He leaves a legacy of a tested, clearheaded and results oriented leader that will be remembered by this Parliament. May his soul rest in peace. Thank you.

4.09
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Mr Speaker, on behalf of the people of Ngora County and on my own behalf, I wish to extend our deep condolences to the bereaved family and the people of Butebo County, Pallisa District and Uganda at large upon the demise of hon. Dr Stephen Oscar Mallinga.

As our former secretary for the UPC caucus stated, Dr Mallinga was the Chairman of UPC Parliamentary Group in the Seventh Parliament – and I belonged to that group. When it came to humour, he had no competition. I remember, I jokingly told him, “But Mr Chairman, I have noted with concern that many times you moved with bulging pockets; what do you put in there?” He said, “Young man, don’t you know that being in the Opposition is not a simple thing? You need to always move while prepared for any eventuality.” He then pulled out a wad of cash saying, “You need a minimum of at least US$ 5,000 in your pocket and at the same time equipped with your passport.” I thought he was joking but he pulled out his passport and another wad of cash. I found it humorous and interesting. And he said, “I am telling you; be prepared all the time because you never know what happens.”

Mr Speaker, at a certain stage, I was not satisfied with the gears that the UPC was engaging to bring about change of leadership. So I decided to jump on the ship and co-founded FDC. Later on he asked, “What has happened? You have decided to abandon me without whispering to me. Perhaps we would have gone together. For that matter, you will not succeed in convincing me to join you.” Later on, he joined NRM. But interestingly, during the whole of the Eight Parliament, he became the Minister of Health while I was the Shadow Minister for Health; and so we agreed to work together to give Ugandans what they deserve.

Hon. Mallinga was a man who was down-to-earth. As a Shadow Minister of Health, I could call him on phone at any time and he would respond regardless of whether it was midnight. I remember at one time while I was on a field tour, inspecting the health facilities in Kaabong, I found that the staff houses at the hospital had been taken over by non-medical workers whereas the medical staff were renting outside the hospital and I got perturbed. I went to the District Chairman’s office – he now happens to be a Member of Parliament - and I told him that I would not return to Kampala until I saw certain changes instituted. I called hon. Mallinga and the former Prime Minister, Apolo Nsibambi, and he caused a meeting. I got a report later that I was commended by Cabinet, saying they wished all members of the shadow cabinet were doing work as I was. But it was because of the good working relations between those in the government steering and those who keep you in check. 

I can assure you, hon. Dr Stephen Oscar Mallinga was a man who would also generously give me the other side of the coin, that as the situation is, we would need to put our heads together so that we do not seem to be knocking our heads while in plenary. Sometimes we would agree on certain positions and come here in unison and things would move. Sometimes colleagues on the Government side may fear to mention certain things for reasons of collective responsibility; they could hesitate to mention certain things. But when we work together, it is very easy to address them. We bring them up and take them up as a House. This has been the good working relationship I enjoyed with my colleague, hon. Dr Stephen Oscar Mallinga –(Member timed out.)

4.16
MS RUTH LEMATIA (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this chance to talk about a person who has been very consistent in his decisions. I have enjoyed being friends with the late Capt. hon. Dr Stephen Oscar Mallinga. And that friendship as passed over to me because he was first friends with Mr Lematia, dating from 1961 to 1963 when they went to study at High school in Ntare School. Later, as a doctor and a captain in artillery in Masindi, he also became a friend of my younger sister’s husband with whom he was serving in the Army. That is when he got to know me. Since then, the late hon. Dr Stephen Oscar Mallinga called me by name and I always called him Stephen. 

Stephen’s love for the human race went without saying. Imagine, at that time he was able to identify somebody from the West Nile and have a good relationship with them. As a medical person, he became friends with me because he did Ob/Gyn which relates to women’s health. We became great friends because I was also a midwife. 

Stephen was very concerned about the communities of Uganda and particularly women’s health. He fought very hard to see that medical services in this country improved and particularly reproductive health. He was one of those doctors who appreciated and respected other people’s opinions, which is actually the proper attitude for professionals. He always respected the opinions of nurses and midwives when it came to mothers. This is why we would easily strike an agreement with him. We were always in communication with him. 

Two days before his death, he talked to me and asked me about Mr Lematia because both of them suffered from diabetes. He in fact told me to change Mr Lematia from tablets to injections. He always wanted to know how his friend was fairing and he always wanted to know how nurses and midwives were fairing. He wanted to know the conditions of maternal health in this country. That is the kind of man we have lost. He was a man who would never show you that he was the boss; he appreciated other people’s conditions. He was a wonderful man, a man of stamina, a man who loved the human race.

He loved his family. When he lost his son last year, he told me, “Mrs Lematia, I am finished. I thought that when I am retired, this young man would take over the affairs of the family.” He was a man of humour. Several times he asked me, “Between you and Mr Lematia, who befriended the other?” He felt that I talked more than Mr Lematia. So he would say, “I think you are the one who befriended him”. Then I would tell him, “But I am much younger than him; it is him who asked for the relationship.” 

This was a man who loved people. He was consistent with whatever he did. To his family, you have lost a father and my dear lady, you have lost a great man. May the good Lord give you peace and guidance. I know how united you were when you lost Oscar. Remain united. I was very impressed when he stated, “My daughter-in-law, he is gone, but I will work with you.” (Member timed out.)

4.21
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The late hon. Dr Stephen Oscar Mallinga was a personal friend and a friend of distinction. Throughout our friendship, I came to understand that he loved one of the greatest writers of our time, William Shakespeare. I would not do better justice than to quote from William Shakespeare’s play, Measure to Measure: “If I must die, I will encounter darkness as a bride and hug it in mine arms. But to die and go we know not where; to lie in cold obstruction and rot is all that pains me.”     

Mr Speaker, every reasonable mind must fear death because once death comes, you know what comes next. The remainder from William Shakespeare’s quotation to us is that politicians who do not fear death can be dangerous. (Laughter)

The late hon. Dr Stephen Oscar Mallinga was with me in the Sixth Parliament. As I have already stated, he was a sincere friend, a friend of distinction. He admired the way I articulated issues on tradition, on wildlife potential and the rich mosaic of cultures which exists nowhere else in Africa. 

Whenever I told a tale, demanding that Ugandans adopt a system which enables autonomous status to gain power, he would always boost me. I would like to pay tribute to him for that vigour. He supported all that I supported. I hope he was reporting at his home. He supported my “Save Mabira” crusade and he always wished me success in every motion I took. 

It is on record that Dr Mallinga seconded most of my motions and Bills in the Sixth and Seventh Parliament. There was a very controversial motion that I brought and I hesitated to think that he would support it but he supported it. The motion was to demonstrate that UPDF had gone to Congo without Parliament’s notice. He also surprisingly supported the motion that nobody expected he would support, the Lukyamuzi motion seeking to oblige the Government of Uganda to talk to the Kony rebels outside Uganda. He came out in the open to support that motion. I would like to pay tribute to him because in the absence of that motion, possibly the war in Northern Uganda would not have ended. 

Dr Mallinga, we hail you. He supported the anti-DDT motion that I moved and even supported the anti-weed spray motion – the fight against the application of glyphosate, diquat and 2,4-D. Many people who were closely attached to me were in the fear whenever I spoke but he who comes from so far away from Kampala supported me. I want to pay tribute to Dr Mallinga (Applause). However, one area where he did not support me is when I moved a motion seeking to unseat the “big man” in Government. (Laughter) There, Dr Mallinga shunned me and I was left isolated. It was understandable and I could not have blamed him. 

Mr Speaker, there are certain things that we should learn from Dr Mallinga. Why could he have supported John Ken-Lukyamuzi, the man, for example? Under what natural umbrella would he have done this? The natural umbrella is that we are all Ugandans, alright? But is that enough? Possibly he loved the literature that I articulated –(Laughter)– and every time he too had an opportunity to bring a motion, he could not bring that motion in the absence of John Ken-Lukyamuzi.

Dr Mallinga was a man of vision, a very spectacular debater in medical science, a man of conviction and a man of joy. He was very humble and usually spoke with wit, which is one area that possibly attracted him to admire some of the poetry that I articulated. (Laughter) But we in this House right now, Mr Speaker, feel a little bit ashamed because of the way Dr Mallinga died. We have just celebrated 50 years of Independence and by now, reference of Dr Mallinga to Butebo Hospital should have made us –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have all of you on my list because every time you stand, I write. There are over 33 people on my list and we have one and a half hours. Can we change the time to three minutes? I think let us try three minutes. If it becomes too long again, then we see how to bring it down. Let us try and rush. Three minutes, please. You are all on my list.

4.28
MR JACOB OPOLOT (NRM, Pallisa County, Pallisa): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. I join the rest to pay tribute to a fallen hero. I want to first begin by thanking the Almighty for the opportunity and benefit that he gave us in the life of the late Mallinga because in his time, he touched and influenced many lives and we thank God for that. We thank the late hon. Mallinga for utilising that opportunity given to him by the Almighty. 

Many people have spoken about the character of the fallen person before us. Hon. Mallinga was a very courageous and strong personality. When people talk of his experience in some parliamentary committee and his promise never to appear in that committee, I will only say that some of them have only been lucky that God alone has decided to take him before he demonstrated what he wanted to do. After that experience, I went to him and he told me, “Young man, I think some of these people are joking with some of us. We have worked during tough times and for me, I do not care. I do not think that I have more than five years to live and so you will not play around with me. So I am yet to see who will really force me to go to that committee.” He seemed to be determined because he was upset. 

The kind of leadership the late has been providing us made him a converging point for us, the leaders from Pallisa. Now that he has left, he is leaving us there and therefore, it is a challenge to us to get ourselves up and attempt to fill the gap.

Finally, why was the late Mallinga in Pallisa at the time he died? He had mobilised us to go and have a meeting to discuss the state of the roads in Pallisa District. I want to say this with emphasis to the Minister for Works. Mr Speaker, we have been talking a lot and we have been used as conduits of lies to our people. We were supposed to meet that Friday – last Friday - to discuss how best to address the issue of the roads, both the district and national roads so that we would come out with a common position on how to approach the Ministry of Works. But now with him gone, my only appeal is to the Minister for Works; can you make those lies a reality and have our roads, Tirinyi-Pallisa-Kumi and Kamonkoli-Iki-Iki-Pallisa so that we can also be sure that we are part of Uganda? 

Mr Speaker, I thank you very much for this opportunity and also thank the family of the late for all they have done to support him while he was alive. To the children, the late was very proud of you and he always talked like an accomplished person. Thank you for what you have been to him. May God bless you and grant you the courage to live on. I thank you, very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the language of the House should be observed strictly. Government programmes that have not been fulfilled are called unaccomplished or unfulfilled pledges. You do not call them by any other undignified words. Please, let us respect parliamentary language. 

4.33
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support the motion. Let me take this opportunity to present heartfelt condolences from the people of Luweero to the widow, family members, friends and relatives. 

The late Dr Mallinga was a mature, careful and soft spoken man. You would not hear him uttering uncoordinated statements, telling lies and things like that. Dr Mallinga was a very consistent and persistent man on issues he believed in. From the Eighth Parliament and this Parliament, there were issues of medical practice, which he kept on talking about and he believed in. The last time I had a discussion with him, when we were discussing the budget, he came out very persistently and consistently on how he thought issues should be handled in medical practice.

The late Dr Mallinga knew when, where, how and why he was speaking on an issue. He did not just stand up to speak for the Gallery. He knew why, where, when and why. 

I have lost a great friend. When I came in the Eighth Parliament, I used to talk a lot with hon. Mallinga. When I joined Cabinet, I talked a lot with him and he taught me many things on how to move around. Whenever you go into new areas, you need people to mentor you. He was one of those. I had a lot of confidence in him because of his maturity.

He always surprised me with the vast knowledge he had about Luweero. Somehow, he had deep roots in Luweero and whenever we met, he would ask me a lot of things about Luweero and this made me feel at home. Hon. Mallinga was a real Member of Parliament. From the Eighth Parliament to the Ninth Parliament, he debated as a Member of Parliament and not a district councillor. We have had many people who end up debating like district councillors -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the honourable members of this House took oath to defend the Constitution and they took oath to defend the sovereignty of Uganda as Members of Parliament. They could not do anything above or below that.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I withdraw the statement. As I conclude, the death of hon. Mallinga reminds us to go for medical check-ups. I was told he had a heart problem and many of us do not go for these medical check-ups. (Member timed out.)

4.37
DR STEPHEN CHEBROT (NRM, Tingey County, Kapchorwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I first heard of hon. Mallinga’s death when I was away in Turkey attending a conference. One of the participants wrote me a note saying, “Dr Mallinga is dead.” I was shocked. I could not believe it because I had just been with him three days before. 

I got to know Dr Mallinga way back in the Sixth Parliament in 1996 when he had joined Parliament. He was a prolific debater and he used to sit at the back with me. When I had just left Cabinet, he was very supportive to me. When I left Cabinet, I stood to be the Chairman of the Movement together with the former Vice-President, Dr Bukenya. Dr Mallinga was my supporter together with the Government Chief Whip. He continued to support me even when I had left Parliament. He, together with Dr Kiyonga, appointed me a member of the Health Service Commission. He continued to be very close to me even when he was sick. About two or three months ago, he asked me to come and administer medicine to him in the lobby and I would go and administer medicine to him through his eyes.

Dr Mallinga was one person who loved his family. Whenever I would go to his home, he had all the photographs of his children on the wall and he would tell me the characters of each and every one of them. He loved all of them. He loved his youngest daughter most and he would always wish she could be with him all the time. 

Dr Mallinga was a very loving person but also he was very humorous. As you all know, he was a professional colleague, a gynaecologist. We were two gynaecologists here and now, I am left alone with nobody to share the jokes that we would have with him. 

When I made it to Parliament, as I said, he had appointed me a member of the Health Service Commission but he made sure as a person, he always travelled to his constituency every week. One time I asked him, “Where do you get the energy for travelling all the time and yet you are sick?” He said, “Chebrot, I trust the person who is looking after me in Mulago.” (Member timed out.)

4.40
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support the motion and also to inform the House that the late was my boss in the Ministry of Health. If you want to know the character of a person - the person they are talking about - you work with him and you know him better. In the 12 years I have spent in Parliament, I got an opportunity to serve in a ministry with him for four years and I learnt a lot of things from him. 

He exhibited teamwork and time management. He was in his own class and that is why the record of the performance of the team then is clear. I have to mention this because he guided us. He was a well experienced person who wanted to do work and he was interested in results, not lamentations. He was a committed professional with integrity. One time, we had a meeting and he quarrelled with other colleagues in the profession. He said, “You people are cheating Government. How do you become a doctor to work in a health centre but you have a private clinic?” This is the person who is lying in the casket. 

Ethically, he told them, “You are a doctor who is supposed to treat people and you are getting money from Government but also you are cheating Government of the time you would have served people in the health centre.” He told me that most people get problems, they get corrupt because they do not want to work very hard. He said, “I am a person who all my life has been struggling. I have worked very hard. I do not think I need to be corrupt.”   

He was a committed professional and you know, Mr Speaker, people rarely practise what they learn at school. If what we were taught in class is what we practised, corruption would have been at the lowest, not even low. 

He offered wise counsel to me. When I had challenges, when people were writing garbage about me, he said, “You young people are yet to face more. Some of us have gone through all these stages. We are here in bad times, in good times, but you have to keep your line and consistency.” (Member timed out.)

4.43
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My condolences to the family of the late Dr Stephen Mallinga. The people of Tororo County dearly mourn Dr Mallinga. Dr Stephen Mallinga has been the voice of the people of Tororo County on many issues. I believe the ministers seated there know very well how Dr Stephen Mallinga has been defending the interests of the people of Tororo County in Cabinet. He would call and if I missed his call, Mr Speaker, and I call back he would say, “Ekanya, why don’t you pick my calls?” I would then respond: “Doctor, I am sorry.”

I want to say that the late has left us before accomplishing what he had been fighting for in respect of the people of Tororo County. In that regard, I would like to request H.E. the President to respect the cry of the people of Tororo County and the message that the late here has been sending to him for all these years; it is about granting Tororo County a district status.

The late is a hero not only to the people of Tororo County but to all Ugandans. In 2001, when I was coordinating youth campaigns in Eastern Uganda, the people of Pallisa feared him so much because of his military background. Whenever I met him, he would ask me to tell the youth to be peaceful. He would say that Uganda is here to stay even after all of us have gone. I would also send the same message to the youth.

What lessons do we learn from all this I have said? I am saying this because there are clean people who have died. Yes, for shortage of words, there are also people who die but after doing so many dirty things. I have always urged that we set up a national memorial ground. All of us must have seen such in most countries we travel to. My suggestion, therefore, is that Parliament of Uganda acquires land for setting up a national memorial ground. It is there that names of good people, who have done many good things, will be printed, for the coming generations to know, so that they can live a clean life bearing in mind the fact that the world after them will get to know of it.

Under the circumstances, where all of us are buried in our villages, we will all disappear with all the good things we have done for this country. I urge Parliament of Uganda to take the first step by securing land. This arrangement will be done by way of a will. Those who wish to be buried there will indicate that in their wills. But what I know is that tourists who come to this country will visit such memorial burial grounds and will know, for example, that there was a man in Uganda called hon. Dr Stephen Mallinga –(Member timed out.)

4.46
DR SAMUEL LYOMOKI (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. As most of you may know, I hail from Butebo County. The late hon. Dr Mallinga has been my Member of Parliament. We actually joined this Parliament together in the Sixth Parliament. We have been consecutively working together. Before we were forced to come to this side of the House because of some changes that took place during the dispensation, we used to sit together behind there.

One of the things learnt from our now departed colleague is that as friends on the opposite sides of the House, we should learn to always resolve differences with cordiality and jokes. Whenever I said something that did not please him, he would always say – because he was an uncle to my wife – “I am going to tell my daughter to move out.” I would also joke around with him that I would go and stand against him in the constituency. That would make him laugh out to the extent that he would even forget there was a bad issue between him and I.

I worked with the late in many areas. During that time, one of the issues that stood out is that he was the first Minister of Health to come out and declare that there was need for recentralisation of health workers. It is unfortunate the Committee on Health has introduced a Bill to recentralise health workers at a time when he has passed on. It would have been better if this Bill had been introduced with him alive so as to give us his views on how best to do it.

As the NRM party, we have lost a colleague. Coincidently, as you know, we have also lost other colleagues from the party. We need prayers. Hon. Patrick Amuriat said that the people of Teso had hope that he would one time become a President. I think that mantle is now available, come 2016.

Mr Speaker, we all know that when colleagues depart, many things are said. Some of them are good, others not. One of the most important things we should learn to do for our colleagues who depart, just like my colleagues said, is to follow up on the projects they might have started. It would be good, for example, if all of us do a follow-up and support the issues the late has been keen on. There is that Bill that I have just talked about, for example; why don’t we ensure that this Bill goes up to its conclusion? Also, there is need for us to recognise colleagues that depart and leave very important issues that they might have been speaking for –(Member timed out.)

4.51
MS IRENE MULONI (NRM, District Woman Representative, Bulambuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues in supporting the motion and mourning the tragic loss of our colleague, the late hon. Dr Stephen Mallinga. I wish to relay deepest sympathies from the people of Bulambuli District and the Mt Elgon zone as a whole to the family.

As you are all aware, landslides have affected the Mt Elgon zone many times, but the late has been working very hard with his junior minister, hon. Musa Ecweru, to support the people in responding to the disaster. The late would speak passionately about issues of development and those that related to improving the living conditions of people. 

As a matter of fact, last Wednesday, while in the Cabinet meeting, I sat next to the late hon. Dr Mallinga. During that time, the two of us had the opportunity to share ideas about respective assignments. I can assure you that the late has been very passionate about the electrification programme in Pallisa District. I would also regularly update him about the progress. After we confirmed arrangements to complete some of the projects in that district, he got very satisfied.

On the front to resettle the people in the Mt Elgon zone, the late Dr Mallinga has been working with the Prime Minister’s Office to ensure that Government relocates those people to safer grounds so that we can avoid any further loss. It is a pity that after we discussed those issues and agreed how each of us was going to follow up, soon after we heard that Dr Mallinga had passed on. I was shocked. I could not believe it but it has happened and the sudden death sends a message to all of us. How ready are we for the next world?  (Member timed out.)

4.55
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support the motion but I want to inform those who did not know that hon. Dr Mallinga was a person who cared about others. Let me give the example; in the last Parliament, when hon. Kajeke resigned as Member of Parliament, Dr Mallinga took it upon himself and looked for hon. Kajeke and told him, “As a medical doctor, I think you have a problem. When people have mental problems, they look normal. So, it is we, the doctors, to know that one has a problem” and hon. Kajeke laughed at him. When hon. Kajeke went to the canteen, Dr Mallinga followed him up to the canteen and still requested him to listen to him. So, hon. Kajeke listened to Dr Mallinga and after that, he walked away. 

Dr Mallinga did not stop at that. He organised for a doctor from Butabika to examine hon. Kajeke. (Laughter) That was a sign that he was very caring about others and actually, some people were surprised. Actually, hon. Kajeke told Dr Mallinga that maybe it was he who had a mental problem, but he did not give up. He continued. I want to take this opportunity to thank Dr Mallinga for caring for others because it is not common these days. We always think of ourselves individually. So, we have to thank God for the gift He gave him. 

I also want to say, honourable members, that I was in Pallisa for the NRM Liberation Day celebrations as Chief Guest. Dr Mallinga travelled all the way from Kampala to come and attend the district function. As chairman NRM, I expected him to attend but he said, “My daughter, I have come to Pallisa but I am not coming for that function because I have to give space to my vice-chairperson, who is a woman, to also come and demonstrate to the people of Pallisa that women can perform.” I really respected and thanked him for that. I thank the people who raised Dr Mallinga, those who groomed him to appreciate a woman because people of that generation hardly appreciate women. 

Lastly, Dr Mallinga was a person who was rich at heart. Despite the fact that he had responsibilities in big offices, you never heard that Dr Mallinga snatched what did not belong to him in terms of finances. We have to praise him for that because in this generation and with the corruption that is going on in every sphere in the civil service, amongst politicians, amongst NGOs and even in religious institutions, we thank God for that gift. Rest in peace, Dr Stephen Mallinga. We promise to pray for the family and be with you. 

5.58
DR CHRISPUS KIYONGA (NRM, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My heart goes out to the family, the people of Butebo and all Ugandans following this tragic loss in the death of our brother, the late Dr Mallinga. 

I first got connected to Dr Mallinga through my good friend, Dr Chebrot, here in Parliament. Hon. Chebrot told me that that man is a good man. He then told me how he had come from America and he said that he was also not a poor man. So, following that, we paid a visit to Pallisa on the invitation of Dr Mallinga and we left his constituency at about 10.00 p.m. in the night, having gone almost to every health unit in his constituency and that is why he really struck me. Having spent so many years as you have heard in the States practising medicine in a developed environment, but here he was back in Uganda, back to the roots trying to do what he could for his people. 

I would describe Dr Mallinga as someone who was dependable. If you asked him something or if he told you he would do something, you could rest assured that he would stand by that word. He definitely had commitments to Uganda, he had commitments to Africa and that is why he returned to this country. However, colleagues, I think in the health sector for which he had a passion, I must confirm that he has left three key debates as far as health care is concerned. 

Number one is the quantum of money that is allocated to the health sector. He constantly spoke for the allocation of more money into the health sector. The second debate he has left with us, and which we should carry on, those who believe in him, is the impact of decentralisation on the healthcare delivery system. This debate is not yet resolved. The third and perhaps more complex is the issue on how we can achieve a balance within the limited resources between treating diseases like heart disease, diabetes and hypertension as against diseases like cholera, malaria - diseases that can be prevented, diseases that afflict the majority of our people. 

It is a very serious debate because we, the elite, those who are in the cities, have louder voices. We can speak on the Floor of Parliament or in the newspapers. The people we represent here have a voice through us but it is not as loud as ours. (Member timed out.) 

6.01
MAJ (RTD) JESSICA ALUPO EPEL (NRM, District Woman Representative, Katakwi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank you for giving me this chance. First, I would like to state very clearly that I support the motion in its entirety. Secondly, I know that the late Dr Stephen Mallinga is a leader who has interacted with all Members of Parliament here including Cabinet members. I knew the late Dr Stephen Mallinga in the last Parliament when I joined for the first time. The first time I interacted with him, the first question that he asked me was: “What is your clan?” When I told him my clan he said, “No, that is a sub clan. There are only seven clans in the Itesot culture which are major clans but the one you are talking about is a sub clan.” 

Mr Speaker, what I am saying here is that Dr Stephen Mallinga, much as he was an accomplished medical doctor, an accomplished military officer and had lived abroad under conditions of the first world, he was able to stand out and teach the young Iteso that they have a culture that they should be proud of. From that time, I have learnt to cram the seven clans of the Iteso including Ikarebwok, Inom and others. (Laughter)

The late hon. Mallinga was a retired officer in the military but he told me, as a retired officer also, “you should make sure that your interpersonal relationship with people comes from a cool head.” He would always say that there is no harm in articulating your arguments in a manner that is reasonable and objective without necessarily raising your voice - (Member timed out.)

5.05
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I met the honourable Dr Stephen Mallinga when he was a Member of the Eighth Parliament and I was a physician in Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital. He was travelling to Kabale for a function and he got a heart attack. I was the physician on call and met him in the waiting place. I had only one ampoule of glycerin trinitrate and gave it to him. He later said he was getting better. I wanted to admit him but he refused because he said in case he did not attend the Kabale function, things would go wrong. That is the committed man we have before us.

The medical fraternity where we belong is at pain to see a doctor dying at 67. I think he has died young because in other countries, people die at 80 or 90 years and the man was only 67 years. The people of Mbarara Municipality will miss this man because he studied in my constituency - Mbarara Municipality - at Ntare School. I can tell you, there is darkness in Ntare now and people have been ringing me saying, “We have lost.”

As a specialist physician, I will go on and give a medical perspective as to what could have killed this man. When I listened to what people submitted on NTV plus what people have been talking about here, this man died of a silent myocardial infarction secondary to stress in an elderly diabetic case. This is simple medicine. The whole thing is, I want to warn my colleagues and Members of Parliament here who are a bit young to stop stressing the old. This is because sometimes we push them up to the wall and if we do not become very careful, they will collapse and we will be in trouble here.

When I invited this old man to come to my sub-committee handling nodding disease, I handled him with care because I had shared with him and knew the diseases he had at his age. I urge you, my honourable colleagues, that when we have our colleagues who are slightly above 60 years of age, can we handle them with care. I am talking as a doctor this time and I am very serious by the way, this is not a joke. Otherwise, we are going to get problems here. Remember that what happens with myocardial infarctions in the elderly is that sometimes they do not have chest pain but general weakness because of a cut of blood supply to the brain and other parts of the body and I think that is what he had.

The health centres IV, which hon. Dr Chrispus Kiyonga started and which Dr Mallinga fought for, must be improved so that anybody who gets a problem in his or her constituency can get some help. The most important gift God gave you on earth is health - (Member timed out.)

5.08
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Mr Speaker, I would like to convey my heartfelt condolences and those of the people of Gulu upon the death of our colleague. We can never get used to death. When it hits, it is as if it has never happened before and it is the first time, especially when it comes suddenly. When you hear about somebody being sick, when God takes him or her, you say, well maybe it is his or her time, but when it hits the way doctor went, you feel very bad.

I was in Kitgum for the Peace Week when all of a sudden, I received a message. It was just like the time when we lost the other two, hon. Nebanda and hon. Oromait. All of them went suddenly. It is hard but my prayer, especially to the family, is that they take heart. You know God gives and God takes. Let us pray that He sends an angel to give you strength.

I happened to interact very closely with doctor in the Eighth Parliament when he went to Gulu and we were in Bobi Health Centre IV. We interacted very closely especially on Gulu Regional Referral Hospital. He was a man who gave people hope and indeed, he gave me hope that time saying, “Honourable members, let me tell you, Gulu Regional Referral Hospital is now a teaching hospital but it has to become a national referral hospital.” I said, “Doctor, a national referral hospital without an x-ray service?” He said, “We are going to make sure that you have an x-ray in Gulu Regional Referral Hospital.” I must tell you that to date, Gulu Regional Referral Hospital does not have an x-ray and it is a teaching hospital. I was yet to follow up this issue with Dr Mallinga and remind him of his promise of an ultrasound machine, x-ray machine and others. He was somebody who would not discourage you but give you hope - (Member timed out.)

5.12
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support the motion to pay tribute to our late father, friend and brother who lies before us here. On behalf of the people of Bukedea, I bring my condolences to the family, to you, Members of Parliament and all the people of this country.

Before us here, lies a very honest man who was not corrupt as has been testified by many, soft spoken and humorous. He was soft spoken to the extent that if you sat at the next table in the canteen, you may not hear his voice but if you watched him, you would realise that actually he is talking to someone.

Hon. Mallinga laying before us here was proud to be an Itesot. He is one person who knew where his roots were. He was always planning to look for wherever an Itesot was. From the migration of the Iteso from Abyssinia, the hon. Mallinga knew that there are Iteso in Ethiopia, in South Sudan, in Kenya, in Tororo here and even the Karimojong, actually. We are all together and his plan was to go further into Ethiopia and look for those people. It is unfortunate that today he lays here before fulfilling that. 

Mr Speaker, for us the people of Teso, we are going to miss hon. Mallinga very much because he was one person who united us; whenever we had any problems, be it political or otherwise, we always went to consult him and he would listen to anyone regardless of their party affiliation. 

Hon. Mallinga was planning to retire and one of the places he wanted to retire to was his newly built home in Bukedea in Kolir Subcounty. In that place, he has established a farm of more than 500 acres. For some of you who read the New Vision, that is where he already established a large number of cattle which he would look after himself whenever he went there. So – (Member timed out.)

5.15
MR MICHAEL WERIKHE (NRM, Bungokho County South, Mbale): Mr Speaker, on behalf of the people of Bungokho South, I would like to extend our sincere condolences to the family, relatives and friends of the late hon. Mallinga.

Hon. Mallinga will be remembered by the people of Bungokho South because, as you may have all known or heard, the late went to Nabumali High School and he was very proud of his school. He used to call Nabumali “the school”. Actually, throughout his tenure in Parliament, he always lobbied for Nabumali High School, especially concerning its rehabilitation. This is because he always wanted that school to give the kind of education he got while they were still students there. 

Indeed, the people of Bungokho South will remember him again because as a student, he was a very active person. There is a place called Nabumali Corner and he used to visit some areas there. In fact, some of the old people remember him very well as a respectful and humble boy.

Hon. Mallinga considered Mbale as his second home. As I speak now, the late has property there and I think he is a neighbour to hon. Wamanga-Wamai. In Mbale, whenever we had functions involving any developmental projects, the late always participated as one of us. Therefore, we are really going to miss him as a people of Mbale District. 

Many of us have alluded to the fact that the late was humorous. Two days before he passed on, I called him “omusinde” as we always joked. Omusinde is someone who is “not a real man”. He said, “No, I cannot be an Omusinde; do you want me to lay proof on the Table?” You can imagine how humorous he was. That is how we used to joke with him. He was a simple and humble person notwithstanding the status and the position he held. (Member timed out)

5.18
MS EVELYN ANITE (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the young people of Northern Uganda, I would like to extend our sincere condolences to the family of the late honourable Dr Mallinga.

I first met Dr Mallinga in 2009 when I first joined Uganda Media Centre, fresh from university. As a journalist, I was very impressed that Dr Mallinga was the first minister I interacted with. I became very excited because among all the journalists in the House when he was addressing the media on Hepatitis B, he picked on me and said, “Before I leave this press briefing, I want to hear the voice of that young, tall, black beauty standing at the corner.” But I had no question to ask him at that time. However, I quickly organised myself because he had recognised my beauty - (Laughter) - and I asked him a question on Hepatitis B.

I will truly miss Dr Mallinga because when I became a Member of Parliament in 2011, I went to the parliamentary canteen but hon. Dr Mallinga had not forgotten the beauty that he saw in 2009. (Laughter) Yes, I must emphasise this because I am truly what he saw. (Laughter) The late Dr Mallinga told me, “Young girl, what are you doing in this canteen? Are you now working with the PR Department of Parliament?” I told him that I was the Youth MP for Northern Uganda. He invited me to share a table with him. I immediately moved with my plate of food and shared a table with him. He told me how lucky I was to be given such an opportunity of being a Member of Parliament at a tender age. “Do not ever misuse it; ensure that you invest what you get out of this Parliament and work as though you would never be a Member of Parliament again.”

Mr Speaker, as Dr Mallinga lies in front of me, I am proud because I did not throw away the advice he gave me in 2011 and at my age, I have invested. May your soul rest in peace because I am who I am and all that I have is because of the advice you gave me. Thank you.

5.22
DR JEREMIAH TWA-TWA (NRM, Iki-Iki County, Budaka): Mr Speaker, as you are aware, I represent Iki-Iki County, which shares a common border with Butebo. Also, here in Parliament, I head the group of the Bagwere Members of Parliament. So, on behalf of the people of Iki-Iki and the Bagwere members of Parliament, I would like to extend our deepest condolences to the Parliament, the Government, the people of Butebo and above all the family of the late Mallinga.

I worked under Dr Mallinga while at the Ministry of Health before I joined politics. I would like to pay tribute to him for the following: Like hon. Kakooza said, when he joined the ministry, Dr Mallinga introduced teamwork, which was lacking at that time because the previous ministers had mismanaged it. 
At the same time, he reduced the gap between the politicians and the technocrats. At this point, I would like to appeal to the Executive to always ensure that there is no gap between the technocrats and the ministers; this will actually improve performance. 

The other thing I would like to commend him for is while he was a minister, he lobbied to improve on the amount of money allocated to health. We saw Government contributing more for the procurement of medicines, particularly anti-malaria drugs and ARVs. 

He was passionate about ethics among health workers. He loved to see patients handled properly. He took it upon himself on several occasions to do supervision upcountry. He was passionate about the reduction of maternal and infant mortality. He is the one who introduced maternal mortality audit, where every woman who dies of child birth problems has to be reported and discussed. That system is still in place to this day. He also encouraged the endorsement of medicines to reduce loss of drugs from the health facilities. 

Politically, I admired his mobilisation skills. At the time I was preparing to join politics, I realised that he loved his people in Butebo. He did not want to lose an inch of the land in Butebo. Actually, he succeeded because he had good mobilisation skills –(Member timed out.)

5.25
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to start with an announcement as the chairperson of the committee on transport. Four buses will be available here on Thursday at 7 O’clock headed for Butebo. 

Secondly, talking about the great Teso, I would like to inform the Members present here that the following people were prominent while we were growing up: The late Dr Stephen Mallinga, the late Cuthbert Obwangor, Bishop Ilukor, Omaria, the Late Ateker Ejalu, Mzee Paul Etyang, Mzee Elianu from Kaberamaido, and the late teacher Mzee Epel who was father of hon. Jessica Alupo. 

As young children growing in Teso, those names were our aim. I want to give a testimony here. The late Dr Stephen Mallinga is among the people who gave me Shs 5 million as an Etesot who was vying to become a Member of Parliament for the region. He told me, “I advise you to call Mzee Paul Etyang”, and he gave me his number. I say this to show that he was proud to be Etesot at all times, during the night and day, not like some of us today. 

I am happy that the same has been emulated by my brothers and sisters before me here. I see four Americans before us here. However, the Itesot names are still upheld by all the children before us here and I am very proud of that. I want to remind my brother, Jonathan, and my sisters that Butebo is your home. Whatever you do in America, get time to come and appreciate what your father has left behind as a legacy. 

The last issue I want to talk about, as a Member of the Committee for the Presidency, is that the late called me, having known that I am a member of that committee, and said, “I cannot allow selfish individuals to grab Government land.” That is when we were handling the issue of Rwamanja Refugee Settlement camp. He instructed me as a young leader to mobilise my colleagues to support Government endeavours to save that land from being grabbed by a few selfish individuals within that area. 

Hon. Tonny Ayoo and some other colleagues are my witnesses. Besides what happened in the media and what happened in our committee, we were defending the position of our minister to refuse selfish individuals from grabbing the resettlement land of Government – (Member timed out.)

5.29
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to share with this Parliament my first encounter with my colleague, the late Dr Stephen Mallinga, who is lying before us here. Last year when I had a disaster in my constituency - there were floods - I run to him with a letter. I got him in his office and discussed with him the problem and the challenges my people were facing. 

He asked me, “Hon. Okwenye, do you have Iteso in your district?” I said, “Yes”. He said, “They are in a parish called Atira?” I said, “Yes, they are very many”. He then asked me, “Are you one of them?” I said, “Yes, I am an Itesot but from Tororo, not Otuke”. He said, “You mean you are my daughter?” I said, “Yes Sir, I am an Itesot”. He asked me, “Which clan are you from?” I said, “I am from the Katekok clan”. He was very excited. He said, “Because my people are there and they are very many, I think I need to help them”. He signed my letter immediately and my people got a lot of supplies, namely food in form of maize, beans and other things they needed. That is the man laying before us here. 

He was a man who cared for his people. He never discriminated. He would give advice where advice was due and he would give support where necessary. I miss him because to me, he was a father figure. Most of our colleagues here, especially those on the frontbench, when you approach them with a problem, the best they can give you is lip service. They will talk to you and promise to help you but it will end at lip service. So, we will miss this gentleman who would talk and then put his words into action. May his soul rest in eternal peace. I pray to God that we will meet him in heaven. Thank you for this opportunity. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, just for the future readers of the Hansard, what do you mean by lip service?

MS NYAKECHO: By lip service, I mean they talk to you and say, “I am going to help you” but it ends at that. They do not implement what they say. It only ends at lip service, just sweet-talking. 

5.32
MR FRED EBIL (UPC, Kole County, Kole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues who have spoken before me in paying tribute to the fallen gallant son of Uganda. As you are aware, hon. Mallinga was a member of UPC, the party to which I belong. We cherish the moments he spent to build the party in Parliament and the time he spent building the relationship between the headquarters and the Parliamentary group. We also acknowledge that in politics, there are no permanent enemies or friends. So, when he shifted to NRM, he kept the relationship between his new political home and the members of the Opposition. Honourable members will always remember him for this. 

When I joined this Ninth Parliament, I swore to bring a new kind of politics and I discovered hon. Mallinga was practicing that politics, where you do not see your opponents politically as your enemies but as friends although pursuing politics from a different political persuasion. For that, as Member of Parliament for Kole and on behalf of the people of Kole County, I would like to send our sincere and deep condolences to the family, the people of Butebo County and the people of Teso generally and the Government of Uganda. We will always cherish the ideals that hon. Mallinga stood for, the ideal that Uganda belongs to all of us, that Uganda is our country. Despite being in America, he remembered that in his own county of Butebo, he needed to create or build leadership or to accord them leadership. For this, we will always remember him. 

I would like to thank the Government for the arrangements made especially for our fallen leaders who have always been with us by giving them a befitting farewell. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

5.36
MR SAM OKUONZI (Independent, Vurra County, Arua): I thank you for this opportunity, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Vurra, I want to convey our deepest condolences to the family and the country for the loss of our colleague. 

Members have talked about his passion for his clan, tribe and also his profession. When I met him in 2006 up to the time when we last met, he did not master where I came from. He always spoke to me in Ateso. He spoke passionately about his people. If I had not heard a few words when I worked in Ngora Hospital, I would have got lost. I had to remind him all the time that I did not come from that part of the world but I came from Arua and that he may be confusing me with somebody else. So, he was someone who was passionate. 

What I want to convey here is that there are a group of 30 doctors and health workers from the US who have sent messages that I need to convey to this Parliament. This is headed by hon. Bakoko Zoe, who was a minister here sometime back but is now in Chicago. She is in touch with a network of doctors and health workers and she introduced these people to the late hon. Mallinga. They have together put up two things in his memory. The first is that they are writing a book – they were already writing this book to which I also contributed - about HIV/AIDS, a curriculum for HIV/AIDS for the youth in the world. In front of this book, they want to pay tribute to hon. Mallinga and they have informed me to inform this Parliament. (Applause) When this book comes, I will present it here.

Secondly, there is one person who physically met the late hon. Mallinga in the US some time back, I do not know exactly when. He is called Dr David Kenneth Waldman. He identified the passion for health services in Mallinga. He has, as of Monday, that is yesterday, established what he calls the Dr Mallinga health systems scholarship – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: One minute.

MR OKUONZI: He has asked all of us – He has asked his colleagues, the 30 members in that network, to each contribute US$ 300 on this account. He is asking us as Members of Parliament in Uganda to put US$ 10 per person because this scholarship is going to take two or three Ugandans to study in the US on how to improve on our health systems  –(Applause)-  because that was the passion of the person who is laying before us.

I got to know Dr Mallinga, as I said, in 2006. When he was appointed the Minister for Health, I was also being appointed as the caretaker coordinator for global health fund for AIDS, TB and malaria. At that time, Justice Ogola was on his mission and he commanded us to collect all the money that NGOs had been given. So, one day somebody brought me Shs 300 million in cash and poured it on my desk. I rang the minister who is now laying here. I said, “I have Shs 300 million raw cash in front of me; where do I take this money? He said, “I have put a red mark between the administration that gave out this money and my administration; you take it where you can best manage it.” So, I took the money to the Ministry of Finance. If I had known the character of the staff of Ministry of Finance as of today, I would have taken this elsewhere. I took the money to the Ministry of Finance and a special account was opened but I cannot tell you where exactly this money went – (Member timed out.)

5.42
MS SARAH NAKAWUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mpigi): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to say a word about the honourable Dr Mallinga. 

In 2010 when I was still at the district as a councillor, Dr Mallinga was the Minister for Health and he made an abrupt visit to one of the health centres III in the district. The health centre is about five kilometres away from the main road. When he reached there at around 11.30 a.m., he never found the in-charge or the staff but only porters and the patients. Because we did not have the contacts for the district leaders, we called the ministry officials who called the district officials like the chairman, the councillors and everybody there. So, the DHO rang the in-charge of that health centre and they all rushed to Butoro Health Centre III. 

When the in-charge reached the health centre, Dr Mallinga was there. Dr Mallinga asked the in-charge why he was not on duty together with his staff. The in-charge, in panic, said, “I had taken my mum to a certain hospital; she is sick.” The doctor told him, “You give me the telephone number of that hospital so that I can call them.” The in-charge then changed his story and said, “You know, the sickness has always been confusing us so I had taken my mother to a traditional healer. Even when you call, you cannot get them because that traditional doctor does not have a telephone number.” That is what the in-charge answered. So, the doctor asked him to write to him a letter explaining why he was not at the station with his staff. I do not know how it ended but that is what happened. The in-charge was called by the district leaders and they asked him to write the letter. That is the man who is laying there. 

On behalf of the people of Mpigi and on my own behalf, I extend our deep condolences to the family and the people of Butebo. (Member timed out.)

5.45
MAJ. (RTD) BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (NRM, Isingiro County North, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the motion and join the rest of my colleagues to pay tribute to the fallen nationalist. 

The late hon. Stephen Mallinga was a nationalist and he drew friends from different parts of the country. Last night, we had prayers and the Vicar of Luzira was preaching and he brought out an analogy of people setting standards for heaven. He said we must set standards and that in heaven when you go there, they have set standards. Those who are substandard end up in hell. In business, we have the Uganda National Bureau of Standards; if you have counterfeits, you find your position.

Mr Speaker, all that has been said about hon. Mallinga shows who the late Dr Mallinga was. I want to clarify that the way he would talk to the Iteso is the way he was would talk to the Banyankole. The late hon. Stephen Mallinga was a very close friend of mine. One day, he shocked me; I had a niece who was suffering from cancer in India and he sent hard cash to the hospital. 

Hon. Stephen Mallinga was a nationalist. He was a freedom fighter; he was a captain in Amin’s army. Amin, I understand, tempted him with a promotion to Brigadier to lure him back to Uganda and I think he promised him a Mercedes Benz. The late hon. Mallinga refused it.

Recently, they were carrying out evictions of people from wetlands and the lead officer actually misused his authority and wreaked havoc. I was talking to him on Wednesday and he told me, “Really, we should look at it.” I said I was very angry and I had written a letter. He said, “No, please wait until you cool down so that we can discuss these matters.”

The late hon. Mallinga was patient. The late hon. Mallinga was full of purpose. Honourable colleagues, we should take a leaf and borrow from some of our colleagues who leave us here. We have had a lot of misfortunes and we have lost many of our colleagues. Just imagine when you are down here what people will talk about you. His contribution to this nation speaks for itself - a soldier, a doctor and an accomplished politician. (Member timed out.)

5.49
MR IGNATIUS WAMAKUYU (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I join the rest to mourn Dr Stephen Mallinga. I was with Dr Stephen Mallinga last Tuesday at the canteen. We talked a lot about issues of landslides. I told him, “I am going to raise this issue on the Floor of Parliament today and I do not want to ambush you.” He said, “It is okay, you go and raise it; I have talked in Cabinet but I have failed.” So, I came here and raised the issue of mudslides. He then called me out and said, “Do you know what we can do? Let us meet on Saturday in Mbale - that was last Saturday - and then we go and see the area.” He told me, “On Thursday, I will be going to my constituency, Friday I will be there and then Saturday, you will get me at home in senior quarters.” I then got the message that he had passed on.

Dr Mallinga was a simple man. One time, he called me to his home in Kitintale. When I got there, he was the one who opened the gate for me to enter his place. I wanted to stop but he said, “No, Please come in.” He was a simple person who interacted with everybody. 

One time he told me, “I have my clan in your place.” He knew that area of mine very well, even better than the people who are there. He told me about a certain family. He said, “You go and find out from that family; those are my relatives.” When I went there, I asked those people, “Do you know a person called Mallinga?” They said, “We know Mallinga.” Actually, that old woman, the grandma, came from that clan. So, those are Iteso. I came here and I told him and he said, “Bring those people.” I brought two of them from that family. I do not know what they discussed but he said, “From today onwards, keep my people well.” 

Dr Mallinga has passed on when he was struggling to resettle our people in the area. He had been moving around the region looking for where to relocate these people. We discussed the issue of land that side but he told me, “You know, when people see that Government wants to buy land, they will inflate the price.” But he said, “I know Bugisu; I will check the price myself.” So, he went to the place we had intended to resettle those people and he asked those people for the price of land in that area. 

He later came and told me, “Now I have got land and we are going to buy at this price.” I said, “Why can’t we do it now?” He said, “You know Government things at times - I am fed up.” That is what he told me. He said, “I am fed up; that is why I am retiring.” I said, “But are you retiring because of Government?” He said, “But I am old.” Last week, when we were in the canteen, again I asked, “Suppose they call you back as an ex officio?” He said, “I will not take that offer.” That is what he told me. “Even if they call me here, I will not come after 2016.”

Mr Speaker, he told me that in the draft Budget, which they discussed - the one which is coming - there were gaps. So, I want the Executive at least to take up those issues he mentioned in the Budget. I do not want to say it here because I do not want to antagonise personalities, but there are issues, which he raised in the Budget, which are supposed to be captured - (Member timed out)

5.52
MS FLORENCE EKWAU IBI (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I pay my tribute to this House and my heartfelt condolences to the family; your life definitely will never be the same but being a unifying factor that this Etesot was, I pray that you live together and you can only do that and make him happy wherever he is. 

In supporting this motion, I want to say that in the Eighth Parliament, we were about 20 Members of Parliament from Teso. Minister Mallinga took the trouble of identifying each of us by their clan. Very few in this House would do that and would have such a passion for the people with whom they share identity. For that, we really miss the late Dr Mallinga and pray that God gives him eternal rest.

Mr Speaker, the late served in two lucrative ministries, the one of disaster preparedness and the other of health. Unlike the time when Northern Uganda was supplied with plastic pangas and the like, the late Dr Mallinga’s regime as Minister for Disaster Preparedness never had any taint or even a dot associated with cases of corruption. As Teso sub region, we proudly identify with you and we will always remember you for not shaming us.

Lastly, I want to point out that every part of this country has the opportunity to produce the best, be it a president or even a fellow. Studying to the level of a fellow is not something that happens everyday. Given equal opportunity, any part of this country can produce a distinguished lady or gentleman who can serve this country above self. So, we urge Government to remove and put to an end the barriers that have created inequalities in this country. 

I am say this because when you look at the circumstances under which children go to schools today, it is very difficult to have someone rise up to the level of a fellow. None can come from a distant village like Kaberamaido, where I come from. It is very difficult for any child from Kaberamaido and other remote villages to study and become a doctor who can live in America after making a name.

My message to Government is that if you really love Uganda, please give the children, who will come after us, fair and equal opportunities so that we feel that we all belong to Uganda. This will help us to always remember the people who served this country diligently. May the soul of the late honourable Dr Stephen Oscar Mallinga rest in eternal peace and may his contributions to Uganda bear fruits. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.56
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to eulogise the late. First, allow me send sincere condolences from the people of Pader District to the family, the people of Butebo County, Government and the entire country.

We are a big number of Members of Parliament, so it is true that quite a number of us do not know each other closely. However, I had the opportunity to work closely with the late Dr Stephen Mallinga when he headed the inter-ministerial committee that was constituted by the President to fight the nodding syndrome. He would organise meetings, more or less on a weekly basis, with Members of Parliament from the affected districts who were part of the committee.

Last year, around May, he led a delegation of members of this committee to Northern Uganda districts, particularly Lamwo, Kitgum and Pader. I recall that during that visit, the late demonstrated how interested he was in understanding the problem that had affected these children very keenly. But you will also recall that it was around this time that tragedy befell his family when he lost his son in a very tragic incident. Therefore, I wish to sympathise with the family upon this double loss through such tragic incidents. I know it is quite a difficult time for you, but I want to say that we are with you. We will honestly pray to the Almighty God to give you the comfort you need during this difficult time. 

May the soul of the late honourable Dr Stephen Mallinga rest in peace. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have got 14 members left to speak to this motion. I had said that the House would rise at 6.00 p.m. but it seems that is not possible now. Let me now extend the sitting to accommodate those remaining but can we shorten the time to only two minutes. Let us work with only two minutes.

6.01
MS HELLEN AMONGIN APORU (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Kumi and Teso sub region as a whole, I want to convey condolences to the family upon the demise of the late honourable Dr Stephen Oscar Mallinga.

In 1995 when the late returned to Uganda after 25 years of living in America, he was advised that in order to speak perfect Ateso once more, he should read the Bible, the Etop newspaper and Amateeka. He crammed the books of the Bible from Genesis, Ageun, up to Revelation, Apukokinio. The late was a very good Christian. He associated very much with the bishops - Bishop Okile, Bishop Ilukor, Bishop Wandera and all the others. We shall miss his support to the Church.

My late grandmother, Irene Emulu, Mama UPC, drew him close to our family. We always had the UPC and Movement camps in our family. The two would always plan because he was a UPC youth winger; he worked with my late husband before he joined NRM.

Mr Speaker, on Thursday I followed the late Dr Mallinga while we were driving to office; he drove ahead of me. He addressed the Amuria council before hon. Otengo and I. We talked and he bid farewell to me before leaving for home to attend a district meeting. However, I was shocked when hon. David Ochwa called me on Thursday night to say that Dr Stephen Mallinga had collapsed and died – (Member timed out.)

6.03
MR RICHARD TODWONG (NRM, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. By the very fact that many Members of Parliament would like to continue to give testimony is a demonstration that the late comrade was in touch with all of us individually.

I met the late honourable Dr Stephen Mallinga before I came to Parliament while I worked in Northern Uganda. That time, I had come to his office because we wanted to transport LRA victims to Mulago for specialised treatment. He had never met me and I had never talked to him. So, when I reached his office, I heard somebody exchanging words with someone in the corridors about health workers who come like ordinary civil servants to work. He was instructing that person to write for him a circular that he would send all over the country so that health workers should make sure they are always at station. 

When he entered his office, he saw this young man seated. He asked, “What is the problem?” When I explained what took me to his office, he said, “Sit, I am going to call all the relevant persons concerned and you will explain the things you are telling me and I am going to write the letter now to Mulago Hospital.” I was shocked to see a government minister working so perfectly at that time and it hit me by surprise. 

Mr Speaker, when I joined Cabinet some five months ago, one of the things that I learnt was to consult some of these seniors. Dr Mallinga was one of those I used to sit nearby. In the last conversation we had in the last Cabinet meeting, he told me, “Do you know that we have some three clans of the Iteso whose origin we are tracing from the Acholi?” I did not know and I realised he was becoming another serious anthropologist. He told me that these clans have a very strong relationship with the people of Atiak under Rwot Olya. I did not know that because our history tells us that the Iteso are the plain land Nilotes with the Karimojong, the Langi and all that. But Dr Mallinga was trying to link the cultures and people together. To me, that shows that Dr Mallinga was a nationalist, a Pan Africanist, someone who did not believe in tribalism and separations of people because of pettiness.

Mr Speaker, we have heard about his patriotism, his simplicity, his tolerance, his obedience in Government and to the people. To the family, we are speaking, we are mourning and we shall come and bury but keep his home open. Keep the friendship – (Member timed out.)

6.07
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Mr Speaker, I thank you for the chance you have given me to support this motion and also convey a word of condolence to the bereaved family on behalf of the people of Kioga. Like everyone, on the morning of Friday I got struck by the sad news of the demise of Dr Stephen Mallinga. This catastrophe that has befallen us has painted yet another dark day in the history of the Ninth Parliament. 

I had known Dr Stephen Mallinga since I came to Parliament but for the short time that I interacted with him I concluded that it is not the length in life but rather the depth in life that matters. For all this time, the late Dr Mallinga lived a remarkable life, one that inspired many greatly. His broad range of interest and attitude to work made him a wonderful person to know. He was a man full of generosity and affection for his people. Indeed, you will agree with me, Mr Speaker, that this was a man full of virtues. 

Modern Christian theology states that human beings are created to act according to the will of the Creator. The morally correct thing to do is to reflect the character of the Creator and Dr Mallinga did just that. He was loving, joyful, peaceful, patient, kind, gentle and had self-control. These traits touched my life and positioned Dr Mallinga with a character that you would never want to live without –(Member timed out.)

6.09
MS EVERLINE CHELANGAT (NRM, District Woman Representative, Bukwo): Mr Speaker, I want to thank you very much for giving me this opportunity. I would like to support the motion. On behalf of the people of Bukwo and on my own behalf, I convey condolences to the bereaved family, the Government of Uganda, the people of Teso and the medical fraternity. 

Just like other people who have talked about all the good things about hon. Mallinga, I stand to confirm that the late is among the true leaders who could listen to people below him like me. Hon. Mallinga was able to listen to cries of the people of Bukwo. When he was the Minister of Health, he gave us hope when we had lost hope by upgrading and constructing Bukwo District Hospital. 

I want to thank the Ministry of Health for the support to the people of Bukwo. Before this hospital, our people, especially the pregnant mothers, used to die while being transferred to either Kenya or Kapchorwa especially when it rained. He understood the problem of Bukwo. At least, the death rate in the district where I come from has reduced because of Mallinga. He is the reason I am back to Parliament because that hospital helped me to come to back to Parliament.

There is a sub county in my district where many women used to die every year. In fact, in that sub county there are very many widowers. So, hon. Mallinga came in to rescue these men. To the current Minister of Health, please complete the work that hon. Mallinga had started. He gave us an ultrasound machine, an x-ray machine, dental machines but they are idle – (Member timed out.)

6.11
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, District Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues to convey my condolences to the bereaved family. Since the time is limited, allow me to go straight to the issues that I should raise. 

When I joined this Parliament and Cabinet, I discovered that hon. Mallinga was a very quiet person, somebody who would only speak when it was necessary to speak. One of the issues that I actually found him advocating for was returning the nurses training institutions to the Ministry of Health. They had been moved to the Ministry of Education. His reason was that currently, the Ministry of Education is actually training cadres that are not very relevant in the health sector. Of course, he did not succeed but he continued talking about this matter. If I recall, in the very last special Cabinet meeting in March, he actually did raise this matter again, still appealing to us to reconsider returning the nurses training institute to the Ministry of Health. 

His other reason was that currently, we have so many mothers dying because we do not have midwives being trained by the ministry responsible for training, instead they are comprehensive nurses. This is an indication that he was very passionate about maternal health and of course, this has been raised by the colleagues who spoke earlier.

While serving as Minister of Health, Dr Mallinga oversaw the expansion and rehabilitation of the health facilities in this country. Most of the health centres III and IV were actually rehabilitated during his term and some of them were elevated from lower health facilities to higher health facilities. It is little wonder, like the late hon. Oromait who bought an ambulance and it is the same ambulance that transported him when he collapsed in his home, Dr Mallinga also collapsed and was rushed to Butebo Health Centre IV, which was rehabilitated during his term as a minister. (Member timed out)

6.14
DR JOHN MUYINGO (Independent, Bamunanika County, Luweero): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also stand to support the motion and pay tribute to a great son of this land. The country has lost a great man, very intelligent leader and a mentor to many of us. In fact, some of us who have just joined politics have lost a mentor, someone who helped us fit into the shoes we are wearing now.

I have been following the late with a lot of interest because of his character. I loved his character. If I was to write epitaph about the late, I would say, “Here lies a man who was a compassionate debater, an engaging political actor but very brutal with the truth.”  Honourable members will recall that whenever the late was convinced about an issue or had a point to defend, he could bring out all his energy and focus and make sure that everybody, wherever they were, heard his voice and was persuaded.

The late had a very good plan for retirement. In most of our vocabulary, the word “retirement” is absent. The late had a very wonderful plan. One time after a Cabinet meeting, as we were enjoying our meal, he broke his silence and called me aside and said, “Brother, I am planning to retire by 2016 and I want to keep in touch with my people by putting up the best school in my area.” He told me of the great land he had in Butebo and the land that he had in Mbale and he wanted a good school. He asked me to give him a hand, which I did, and I am sure that school has taken off. (Member timed out.)

6.17
MR TONY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion to pay tribute to the late hon. Mallinga. Allow me, on behalf of the people of Kwania, to convey our condolences to the family of the late Mallinga, Government of Uganda and the people of Uganda whom hon. Mallinga served.

I came to know hon. Mallinga in 2008 when he was the Minister of Health and when he visited Apac Hospital. His visit made a fundamental change in the hospital because he moved with authority as a minister and checked the activities of the health workers. One of the things he did was to tell health workers that it is not only when money is there that they have to work. He asked one of the in-charges of the wards why the ward was dirty, and the lady told the minister that they did not have the money. He asked for a broom and they brought it. Hon. Mallinga, being a tall person, raised his hand with a broom and started removing the cobwebs and the dust from the windows. He asked the lady, “How much would it take you to clean the windows and the cobwebs, and you think everything is about money; that must stop.” From that day, cleaning the hospital became a routine in Apac Hospital. 

He did not stop there but he promised that rehabilitation would start, because this is one of the oldest hospitals that were built in 1960’s. Within a short time, the rehabilitation works started in the children’s ward and the people said that that was the only minister who had visited the hospital.

Last year, while Parliament was in a bit of a disagreement with Government over providing for recruitment of more health workers and raising the salaries of the doctors for health centres IV, hon. Mallinga would say, “You people, that is the right thing to do.” (Member timed out)

6.20
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman representative Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to bring the condolences of the people of Serere, FDC party and of His Highness Papa Emorimor to the family and to this grieving nation.

I met hon. Mallinga in 2001 when I had joined Parliament. He was one of those people you always looked forward to listen to. He spoke with authority and authenticity and with such a passion that you wanted to hear what next hon. Mallinga would say. So, to us who were new and less exposed, he turned out to be our mentor.

Mr Speaker, if for lack of time I will say nothing else, let me just say that hon. Mallinga was very loving, caring and he had a big heart. One of those days when I was very heavy and expectant, hon. Mallinga took off time to counsel and encourage me but most interestingly, he bought me two mosquito nets. He said he needed the pregnant women to have two mosquito nets. I will always remember those mosquito nets. I want to thank him for showing me love and care. I think pregnant mothers need so much love. I think the hormones really give them a hard time.

There are two things I want to put on record. This country, going by what has been said about hon. Mallinga, has the brains, the professionals, the skills and the potential but they just do not have the working facilities. We have people in Mulago and elsewhere who could operate on our hearts but the equipment is not there. If only for the love of hon. Mallinga we would revive the health system, perhaps his legacy would live on. 

I sat with hon. Mallinga one day in his office. He pondered over the disasters in this country. He wanted to help but there was no money. Can we put money in those sectors that directly touch the suffering people –(Member timed out.)

6.23
MS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI (IND, Woman representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I rise to pay tribute to our colleague and friend, Dr Mallinga. I send my condolences to the bereaved family, to the Members of Parliament and to the whole country.

Hon. Mallinga was a friend. One time, when I had just come to Parliament, I met him outside at the steps. He asked me where I came from and I told that I came from Kapchorwa District. He said that he had his people there, that there is a family which belongs to his clan and that he had recently given one of them a job. I asked him which family this was and he told me the name of the family. I told him that I knew that family and I was also related to them. I asked, “Does it mean that I am your relative now?” He said, “Yes, you must be my relative.” 

I want to tell you, honourable members, that there was a rumour in Kapchorwa concerning the same family. People were saying these people are Iteso. So, it seems hon. Mallinga was confirming to me that it is true that these people came from the other side. I asked him how they came to Kapchorwa because he said this person came from Bukedea. He said that those days when the people of Bukedea were hunting, they met with the Sabiny in the wild. One of the children then followed the Sabiny because he was still young. He was taken and looked after by the Sabiny from Kapchorwa and grew up and became a chief in Kapchorwa District. He added that if you follow the story of this family, all of them are chiefs. I asked him now which clan this was. He said the clan is called Ikomolo clan. He told me that the name of this Mzee who became a chief in Kapchorwa was Ojangole. So, I now say that in front of us lies my relative. 

I give my condolences on behalf of the relatives in Kapchorwa and the people of Kapchorwa and say, may God rest his soul in eternal peace. Thank you.

6.25
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Bundibugyo and on my own behalf, I wish to join my colleagues in mourning our father whom I used to call “Dad”, hon. Stephen Mallinga. Because of time, I will not talk about everything that I know concerning Dr Mallinga but I will elaborate only two issues. 

One, Dr Mallinga was a friend to the people of Bundibugyo. In 2007, when the people of Bundibugyo were attacked by Ebola, the honourable Dr Mallinga was the minister then. As people were running away from Bundibugyo, it was only Dr Mallinga who travelled from Kampala to go to Bundibugyo and join those who were suffering. We still remember Dr Mallinga entering the ward, which was isolated, and he looked at the dying doctors. 

When we lost the only doctor who we had in Bundibugyo, Dr Yona, Dr Mallinga was one of the people who processed transport to take the body of Dr Yona for burial in Bundibugyo. He also attended the mass burial of health workers in Bundibugyo District. Although in absentia, we appreciate and respect you very much.

Secondly, when I presented the issue of the little people in Bundibugyo, how around 40 per cent of them were being attacked by HIV and how they are dying up to now, last week he called me.  They do not take ARVs because of hunger. So, he asked me to go to the CAO, ask him to write a letter and deliver it to him, which I did, and last week I submitted this letter to him. When he called me, he told me to come and pick the consignment on Tuesday. Today is Tuesday and he is not there. Dr Mallinga, the little people will miss you because they are going to die. The person who was supposed to rescue them from death is the first person to die –(Member timed out.)

6.29
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to pay tribute to the gallant son who is laying there. Hon. Mallinga was an Etesot without intrigue. He was a man who would not pass without greeting you. He would say, “My daughter, how are you?” and you would feel that you have a father. We shall miss him. Some of us will miss him personally because he is a man who guided and supported us.

I learnt from hon. Mallinga that he loved his family. I remember the last time we were in Butebo, Pallisa and he said, “If there is anybody who thinks he is my child, come out now; if not, keep quiet forever.” Another time he said, “I am going home to my teacher; she will organise for me ajon. I do not want to waste time in Kampala. You know ajon is the real malwa.” I thought, “How respectful this man is”. Most of us come to Kampala and we forget about our families, we forget about these first wives of ours and even forget about the children because we might have better children.

The late hon. Mallinga advised me. He said, “My daughter, five years is just like the wind. You have just entered Parliament; do not go for a stylish life. Think about your future, think about investment and be near to the voters that brought you here. Please, do not forget the voters.” I thought this was very good advice. 

On Friday, when I put on my radio first thing in the morning to listen to the news, I heard that hon. Mallinga had died. I screamed and my children came to the room asking, “Mummy, what has happened?” Maybe they thought I had got a problem. I said, “My goodness, is it Stephen Mallinga who is dead?” I listened and I heard again that Stephen Mallinga, the Minister for Disaster Preparedness, had died. I asked what this was. I called hon. Monica Amoding and she said it was true he had died. I said, “No, I saw the minister leaving Parliament on Thursday and he did not show any signs”. I even asked him, “Are you not going in for plenary?” He said “No, I am travelling to the constituency.” On Wednesday, he also passed by and talked to hon. Amero and I as we were seated together, then he went out. I asked myself, what is taking us; what is killing us?

Mr Speaker, it is very painful to lose a leader. This gentleman laying there would never miss any big function in Teso. You would see him with respect, with his walking stick, and you would see a father and an elder seated in front of you who would always guide you and who wanted to know what your problem was. He liked asking personal questions like, “How are you fairing in your family?” (Member timed out.)

6.32
MAJ. GEN. KAHINDA OTAFIIRE (NRM, Ruhinda County, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to bid farewell to my intellectual friend, faithful and just. Dr Mallinga was an icon. He was my man of big proportions. From testimony, he used to relate with the humble but he could also tangle with the mighty. He had resolve and conviction. We used to engage in debate, the nature of which I cannot relate here. I hope his views will triumph because then we shall meet. When mine win - I bid thee farewell.

He was a narrative in his sojourn of the tragic political history of this country. He epitomised how we have squandered talent. For him to spend 20 years out of this country serving people who never paid for his achievements is indicative of what we have failed to do by running round in circles chasing our tail, widening the guile of lack of introspection and refusing to accept the mirror reflection of the political dictates of today.

Hon. Mallinga was strong in his resolve; he could be relied on. I have heard people testify that he crossed from UPC to NRM as though that was something great. Who has not done it? –(Member timed out)

6.35
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Last week on Wednesday, I met the late Dr Stephen Mallinga teasing a policewoman just out here before the exit. She had saluted him with her hand on the face when he asked her, “Don’t you know how to salute? You have to do it like this!” I found that quite funny and I asked him, “Captain, did you have to tease her that way?” and we all laughed. 

This is a gentleman who most of you knew. We were with hon. Harriet Ntabazi and a few other Members in Kamuli; while we were in Jinja, hon. Margaret Baba Diri, who is a specialist in voice recognition, had not recognised my voice that well. So, when I spoke, she said, “You know that your voice sometimes sounds like that of hon. Mallinga.” Then the next morning, we heard that hon. Mallinga had died.

We might bury your body but we shall not be able to bury the beliefs that you stood for. We might even bury the shoulders but not the concerns that you carried. Hon. Mallinga, you were proud to be a Mukedi. Whenever he could see me, he would say, “You young Mukedi, be a responsible leader.” This is because of the nasty history he had in the Ministry of Health with the person that I replaced. As a Member of Parliament from West Budama South, I had to take responsibility to apologise. I said, “This is not how we behave.” So, he picked interest in me and whenever he saw me, he would crack jokes. 

At one time, he said, “You talk very differently; you must be an Etesot. Are you an Etesot?” I told him that I am not an Etesot and he said that the way I talked was different from that of the Jopadhola. (Laughter) I think if he had powers, he would have made every Ugandan an Etesot or Atesot. 

Dr Stephen Mallinga, we are here that you may live in us, that if we bury your eyes, we may not bury the vision. If we bury the legs, we shall not bury the path of your life and if we bury your hands, we shall not bury the diligent efforts that you have made. I can almost hear you telling us that. May you rest in peace.

6.37
MS GRACE KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion and to bring my condolences from Zombo District. I met the late Dr Mallinga in 2007 and by that time, I was facilitating an international workshop for which he was supposed to give a keynote address. When he came – I think he was not feeling well – he asked for tea but the tea delayed. He called me and said, “Young lady, please, bring me Fanta before I collapse.” 

I asked myself, “If he was that sick, why did he come?” After he gave his very good address, I saw him off and he told me, “Young lady, you are lucky that I did not collapse.” I did not know how to respond because I was meeting him for the first time and therefore, did not know the extent of his sickness. But the impression I got was that he was so committed a man that he could come for a workshop despite not feeling well and be able to perform his role. 

Secondly, when I joined Parliament, I met him and he asked, “Which constituency do you represent?” When I told him it is Zombo, he said he knew Zombo, especially Paidha Market, Nyagak and hon. D’Ujanga’s constituency. Many people who I tell that I come from Zombo keep asking, “Where exactly is Zombo?” But when we talked, I immediately felt at home. The next time we met again, he asked, “Are you also from the royal family?” When I told him that I was, he said, “I also come from that family – Atyak. From today, call me you brother because you are my sister.”

I would also like to say, just like many colleagues here have said, whenever he asked you such questions, he wanted to know more about where you come from. Unfortunately, most of us lack that interpersonal skill. Many of us pass by each other and say, “Hi, how are you?” without taking time to know where our colleagues come from and how they feel or what challenges they are facing. The late Dr Mallinga would bother to ask you, just as many colleagues here have testified. I pay my tribute to him and end by saying, may your soul rest in eternal peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. You will notice the difficulty I have had in trying to bring this debate to a close. This is a debate that has been from the heart, in my opinion. In my assessment, I am the only one who has sat here without debating. So, I have listened and have processed all the contributions from you, honourable members. Everybody was talking about “I” in relation to knowing hon. Mallinga or dealing with him. 

In my experience, this is a completely new thing in a debate of this nature. It demonstrates that the person we are sending off has touched each and every one of us in one way or the other and his departure hurts all of us. So, it is a moment of reflection about the kind of life we should live. If we tried to live just half as he did, this Parliament and our country would be a better place. 

Honourable members, there are more condolence messages; these will be read on Thursday at the funeral since I have just received them now. The motion is that Parliament resolves as follows:

1. 	That it collectively conveys its deepest condolences to the bereaved family, friends, the patriotic people of Butebo constituency and the nation as a whole upon the demise of this illustrious son of Uganda.

2. 	That it takes cognizance of the distinguished services rendered and the contribution made by the late honourable Dr Stephen Oscar Mallinga both at national and international levels.

3. 	That it takes cognizance of the late honourable Dr Stephen Oscar Mallinga as a politically mature person with a high degree of political tolerance and a peace lover who was patriotic and an accomplished medical doctor and politician.

Members, I put the question now.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The East African Community Anthem 

The National Anthem

Exit of the Late Hon. Stephen Mallinga

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you very much for this sitting and your contributions. As I requested yesterday, tomorrow we need to perform some legislative function in terms of looking through, approving and adopting the Vision 2040 developed by the National Planning Authority. It was submitted to a committee, discussed by the committee and the report is ready. You have just been given copies of the report because it is due for launching on Thursday. I request you to come tomorrow at 2 o’clock so that we finish with that business and then after that, we continue with committee work.

This special sitting is adjourned but tomorrow, plenary will sit to deal with one specific issue, that is the issue of debating and approving of Vision 2040. House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 o’clock. 

(The House rose at 6.50 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 17 April 2013 at 2.00 p.m.) 
