Tuesday, 29 April 2014

Parliament met at 2.30 in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah in the Chair.)

The House was called to order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. As you have already seen, on the Notice of Business to Follow, we have several Bills and we need to have some understanding as to how far they have gone with those Bills so that we can start handling them. For example, we have the Marriage and Divorce Bill, 2009; at one time in March last year, discussions were in this House and on the 4th April, 2013 the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire requested that on further reflection, the Executive needed more time to consult on the Bill. The Speaker ruled that Members be given further three months to consult on the Bill. 

This was April 2013; that is one year back! Can we have the current status of this Bill from the Government and from the Members? If it is not going to proceed, can we then have a decision to formally handle it so that it gets off our pending work? If it is ready for handling, it should get back to this House and we finish with it. 

Secondly, the Retirement Benefits Sector Liberalisation Bill, 2011; we have seen communication to the effect that Government wants to withdraw this Bill. This was a correspondence between the Minister of Finance and Public Service and there is a proposal that this Bill should be withdrawn. We do not know what is happening; we do not want it to be clogging Parliament because next week the committee would like to start handling this Bill. 

So, if there are discussions between the ministers that this Bill should be withdrawn, we should be formally notified and a formal withdrawal made here so that we do not spend time on it. 

The same applies to the National Biotechnology and Bio-safety Bill, 2012. It was before this House; discussions were held and it reached a certain stage. Somehow it got on Business to Follow and nobody is talking about it anymore. Can we have a brief on this and we know the status? 

I am going to give communication to the effect that all those Bills that came before the House and for some reason or the other have been withdrawn, and are being handled some other way, should be formally withdrawn from the House so that we get them out of the way. If they want to resubmit them, the procedure is clear: you bring back the Bill and do the first reading so that the process continues instead of making us wait for something which is not coming. 

I have got information from the Ministry of Health and also from our own Chairperson of Health Committee on the status of the HIV/AIDS Bill that consultations are still ongoing. So for that matter, we will not be able to handle it today. We will schedule it for another day when consultations are done so that the processing of that Bill can move on.

Finally, I have received a letter from the Government Chief Whip in pursuant to Rule 176(2) of our Rules of Procedure; the party whip is requested to assign Members to committees. And as you know, we have just had a new Member of Parliament, hon. Rose Mutonyi Masaba, who was elected as NRM Member of Parliament. She has therefore been designated as follows:
Sectoral committee, she has been assigned to the Committee of Foreign Affairs. I put the question to that. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On the standing committee, she has been put on the Committee on Science and Technology. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If there was a no, I was going to ask for an explanation as to why the Member does not wish the other Member to belong to those committees. 

I also received notice from hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi; notice of motion for a resolution of Parliament on the issue of Kaveera / polythene bags. I hereby give you leave to present that motion tomorrow.

2.35
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. I would like to inform this House and the nation at large that a strange disease has broken out in Obongi as an epidemic. Strange in the sense that it is not known what it is; but in terms of signs and symptoms, it was suspected to be either Cholera or Ebola. But according to a report from the laboratory in Entebbe it is proved it is not Cholera. 

Anyway, 81 people have been admitted to Obongi Health Centre IV with four deaths. The disease kills fast in the sense that those who fell sick did not take long to die. 

So far, the doctors in Obongi Health Centre IV and entire Amuru District have tried to do their best. But this is where I need your help. Congestion is a big problem. Obongi Health Centre IV was designed to handle 50 patients. But with a number of 81, from this epidemic, added to the natural sicknesses has caused congestion. Tents were needed to provide isolation because the disease is contagious. But there are no tents in Moyo. 

Secondly, supplies of drugs especially those used to treat the problem of dehydration coming from diarrhoea and vomiting are running out. Innovations were done by gathering medicines from the neighbouring health centres and hospitals, but Moyo District is stressed, right now they are extending their hands to beg from the neighbouring districts. 

I have been in touch with the minister - he is here. I am very disappointed to see that what is called “disaster preparedness and response” does not exist in this Government. I would like to ask the minister to help us tell the country and this Parliament what is the problem that you are facing in your ministry such that the concept of disaster preparedness does not seem to be existing? Quick response is not there because I have been in touch with your office since Saturday and as I speak now, no tangible help has reached Moyo District from the ministry. The promise made on Saturday is still the promise remaining now. 

In my judgement I therefore say the Ministry of Health has a problem, we need to assist. The minister, Dr Ruhakana Rugunda, is here; what is the problem that is making you to be so slow like it is not an emergency? What is the concept of emergency in your language of the Ministry of Health of Uganda? 

Lastly, Mr Speaker, this disease seems to be spreading along the River Nile and then we have refugees living in a congested area in the neighbourhood. Adjumani, for example, there is Mungula Sudanese refugee settlement, and then also we have Uninvipi and Rhino king. Should this disease be allowed to reach these areas, the results may be more disastrous. I would like to call upon you to join the Ministry of Health - first of all, I would like to understand from the minister here what his genuine problem is. He should tell us without lying. Why is the ministry not able to respond as fast as required? Thank you very much?

3.39
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much Mr Speaker. I thank the hon. Fungaroo for what he has reported. A lot of what he has reported is consisted with what we have in the Ministry of Health. 

I do not share his view, Mr Speaker, that the Ministry of Health has no capacity or is incapacitated. On the contrary, the Ministry of Health and Government are fully alert and handling the epidemic or the outbreak that we are talking about in Obongi.
It does not require the Ministry of Health to physically send too many things from National Medical Stores, Kampala. Actually as soon as this epidemic was known, the nearby hospital which is Moyo Hospital was asked to make whatever requirements needed to Obongi so that the reinforcements from Kampala would not only go to re-enforce Obongi but also reinforce the supplies from Moyo Hospital. In fact, apart from Moyo Hospital both Adjumani and Yumbe hospitals have also been mobilised to help especially with rapid admissions of the numbers that Ndugu Fungaroo is talking about. 

The figures we have are consistent that 81 patients have been admitted and there has been 11 discharges before people we have lost died in the first two days and for the last three days there have been no deaths, and this would suggest that the health workers who are doing their best in circumstances are getting on top of the situation. I have been talking with Dr Alike the medical officer in charge of Obongi and Dr Jimmy Opigo the district health officer are on the spot handling the situation. 

So what is this problem? The media has published a number of possibilities. What we have done as a ministry is to take samples/specimens both to the labs in Entebbe, Uganda Virus Research Lab and also that in Kampala. The preliminary thinking, diagnosis and working approach is that this is likely to be one //of the organisms or pathogens enteric fevers that causes fever related to the gastro intestinal system. But we are still waiting for full results; we do expect that we are going to get results within these 24 hours because it requires also doing some cultures which may take some bit of time. 

So we are also getting support from both WHO, Red Cross and also from UNICEF. As I speak now the WHO team is already in West Nile and our own team from the Ministry of Health Headquarters is also moving to the same area. The central medical stores or National Medical Stores have today dispatched a lorry of reinforcements and of fluids because fluids are very much required. 

The last comment I would like to make is that, personal hygiene is absolutely crucial: washing of hands, boiling of water. And I will call upon my brother, Ndugu Fungaroo, to use his prestigious position as Member of Parliament of the people of Obongi to help people take charge of their own lives by improving their habits, hygiene, boiling water so that we can terminate this process of affectivity.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is very important for all of you. As the honourable minister said, what has made the spread of the disease so fast is transmission from person to person. This happens more so in the transportation of the patients from the homes to the health centre. They use a boda-boda: a patient seated behind a boda-boda rider, and also another person. The reason why as a Member of Parliament, we tried our level best and we procured an ambulance. 

Right now people are transported using a boda-boda motorcycle while there is an ambulance lying in Obongi Health Centre IV. Health workers have been prevented from using that ambulance by the RDC and the network of the chairpersons of NRM in the district. If you read in The New Vision today, there is a hint Dr Alike talked about.

In the meeting of the disaster team of the sub county including the district one, they resolved that they needed to use that ambulance but they were not given the permission to do so. The RDC said: “This ambulance brought by the people organised by an MP from opposition is abusing the Government.” For one month this ambulance has been lying there. When the disease broke I even offered one drum of petrol to be put in the ambulance but this has been rejected. What are you asking me to do here, when your counterpart on the ground does not want my contribution?

Mr Speaker, I would like you to prevail on the arrangement of NRM leaders on the ground not to politicise health. That ambulance will not pick only the MP’s members. Dr Alike fears, if he touches the ambulance he will lose his job from the RDC and the Chairman LCV. This is my problem, this is my predicament.

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On that information, Ndugu Fungaroo and I yesterday discussed this very subject matter. I did not believe the information that I was given so in the presence of hon. Fungaroo, I called the RDC of Moyo who told me, and I quoted the same to hon. Fungaroo, that the ambulance, from yesterday irrespective of the scrabbles and quarrels that were going on, should be used to ferry patients.

I do expect that the people concerned are doing precisely that. It is true, Mr Speaker, that there is a stand-off. This ambulance was bought by money and support mobilised by hon. Fungaroo but it was registered in the name of Moyo District. The district authorities said that since this is a vehicle for Moyo District, will be used to help the people of Moyo District who require service. Ndugu Fungaroo said, it is the people of Obongi who have mobilised money so this ambulance should be used only for Obongi.

The district authorities answered and said, since all the people of Moyo are going to be contributing to the maintenance and buying fuel for this vehicle, we would like it to be used by all. To cut the long story short, we did agree with Ndugu Fungaroo and the authorities in Moyo yesterday that while a memorandum of understanding is being negotiated between Obongi and Moyo as a district, let the wanainchi who are suffering get the benefit of the ambulance transporting the sick and basically, that was agreed upon.

Let me also say that Government salutes the initiative taken by the Member of Parliament for Obongi to ensure that he mobilises people to get an ambulance. I think this is a very commendable effort.

2.50
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (DP, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Last week, I raised a matter of national importance to the effect that registration of marriages in Uganda was being made very-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, have we concluded this matter?

MR KASIBANTE: I thought so, Mr Speaker.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The honourable minister knows that I am among those people who have a lot of respect for him. However, he has not told this House what action he took against the RDC who acted outside his powers to stop an ambulance from saving people’s lives. This would seem to be a political matter and I seek some clarification from him.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is not the first ambulance bought by an MP; there are several. In some districts, they have been accepted and they are working. In others, there have been problems like in Obongi. I think it would be better for the ministry to issue some guidelines on this policy of donations by either Members of Parliament or Ugandans so that there are no squabbles because if somebody has contributed money and helped his people, he should not be seen as somebody politicking or one who has just wasted his efforts. There have been issues in Mukono and in another place I have forgotten.

So, Mr Minister, can you have a policy so that we do not have this repeated time and again? Thank you.

MR OKUONZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wanted the minister to inform this House and also clarify to me about the disease surveillance system. What we are getting around the country appears to be sporadic and not systematic collection of information about outbreaks and epidemics. 

Can the minister inform us further about the role that these surveillance systems have played in this particular incidence and whether this system is still working? I know that it used to work but I now have a lot of doubt about it. Can you inform us?

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On the point raised by hon. Mwiru, the RDC did not stop the ambulance from being used but there was an impasse by the political leaders that was being resolved through negotiating a Memorandum of Understanding. That MoU would be the basis on which the ambulance would be used: one that would be acceptable to the Member of Parliament and to the leadership of the district as a whole.

Secondly, and with regard to the Leader of the Opposition’s guidance, I think it is reasonable that with this scattered scuffles that are coming up, there may be need for general guidance and I expect more ambulances will be procured under this type of arrangement. I think the idea of guidelines is, in my view, a very reasonable one.

On the question of surveillance raised by Ndugu Okuonzi, there is an effective surveillance programme that is going on. Village health workers are collecting information and are following people who have been discharged. The Ministry of Health surveillance team is also moving to reinforce the people who are in the field in Obongi and in neighbouring areas. If there is any other major development on this matter, Parliament will be informed. I thank you, Sir.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

2.55
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The issue I would like to raise has to do with the payment of salaries to civil servants and then probably I will get very specific to the police force.

The Government of Uganda used to manage a centralised payroll and our understanding then was that it resulted from the creation of so many ghosts that this business had to be brought back to the centre so that there would be a central point where the ghosts would be cleared and an authentic payroll arrived at.

Since in the last two months the Ministry of Finance has gone back to the old system wherein the institutions have to handle the responsibility of paying, first of course I have my own fears and I would like the Minister of Finance to allay those fears that this will not create more ghosts. Did we not learn from the first scenario where we centralised the payroll?

Secondly and most importantly, as a result of this, for the last two months there has been a situation where some individuals in the Police Force have said some policemen are not paid while others are paid on the basis of a telephone call. You simply call and you are told, “Go you will be paid.” Some people are even being told that, “You should receive your salary in cash.” And I think that is really bad – to the individuals in the force that have not received the March salary; and you know April is ending tomorrow; it is a mixed up thing. I would like the Ministry responsible to tell us when they will pay the Police and also how they plan to prevent the system from being abused. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Public Service Minister.

THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Henry Kajura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There are two issues that perhaps all put in one; payment of salaries since maybe two or three weeks has become the responsibility of the Ministry of Finance, who pay the officers who are responsible for that particular activity. For example, in the case of the Police, this has got to be the accounting officer, who is the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Internal Affairs. 

The system is no longer what it used to be – that money would go to Public Service and then to the ministry or department concerned. Maybe it is taking a bit of time to settle and to be effective but that is the way things are at the moment. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Minister, don’t you think it is a matter for your concern that some of your public servants are not being paid because of the change in the system?

MR KAJURA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is a matter of concern but what happens when a new procedure is being inaugurated, it takes time to be effective and to be without problems -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please allow the minister to finish the statement he is making.

MR KAJURA: Therefore, everything is being done to make sure that the new system gets effective and payment is made.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a little bit worried by the minister’s answer. For instance, if you go to the Ministry of Education, you would have many ghost teachers, which they will even admit. But they would attribute that to the CAOs because they have not submitted pay-change reports.

Here, the minister is even moving away the responsibility from Public Service, which some have been concerned with the pay-change to the Ministry of Finance. So how will Ministry of Finance know that someone has left service? We wanted to know what informed your decision to arrive at this; was it panic or policy? What informs the shift?

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, at least I got a chance to sit in the Committee of Local Government, chaired by hon. Freedom. And the chairperson took time to call the three ministries together: Public Service, Local Government and Finance –(Interruption)

MS SANTA OGWANG: Mr Speaker, I sit on the Committee of Public Service and Local Government. And this is the issue that we are just about to bring before this House. Is it procedurally right for the honourable member to begin summoning our chairperson and yet we are just about to bring that report on this Floor? And, isn’t it procedurally right for the minister to get ready to defend his sector because we have a very pregnant report? (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, if you look at the Order Paper, on the “Business to Follow” item No.11, you will see “Report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government on the Statement by the Minister of Public Service on the non-payment of salaries for public servants.” 

This matter came to this Floor as a statement; it was referred to the committee, which has handled it and is due to report to the House. Don’t you think that would be the proper time to house this debate so that it is comprehensively handled?

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I have no problem – of course I am not even privy to what initiated this report; whether it was because of the changes in payroll management, I have no idea. The only concern I will have is that whenever we have “Notice of Business to Follow” it could even take a month or two months. And yet we are talking about a salary – which is a right. There are people who did not get their salary last month and also this month has ended. These people have their children and stomachs like anyone of us and they can even become angry Police when they are handling us on the road - (Interruption) 

MR KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker. I would like to inform this House generally and in particular the Member for Serere that the issue of payment is so critical that I have information that even the parliamentary police, which takes care of very many Members of Parliament, including you, Mr Speaker, is not paid for the month of March. And that is very dangerous! Some officers have approached me – they are badly off.

MS ALASO: Thank you, my colleague. So, Mr Speaker, maybe upon the basis of your assurance, if we can have this matter expeditiously handled and probably brought forward because it is on the “Notice of Business to Follow” then maybe we can leave it at that and hopefully say that tomorrow we shall expedite this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we expected this report to come last week; the committee had not been able to finish but have finished today – I have been given notice of that. So this matter will come tomorrow; the chairperson, please take notice that this matter should be on the Floor tomorrow afternoon so that we can handle all the other aspects – delayed salaries and the new matters that have arisen. The debate can then be more comprehensive when there is a report on the Floor.

Now there is an honourable member who had raised a question of marriage fees; Attorney-General, have you been able to consult on this subject? This matter was raised last week.

3.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS AND DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fredrick Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I will follow up this matter with the Member raising this concern and I will give an appropriate answer tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, so we expect an answer on that subject tomorrow afternoon. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

REPORT OF THE DELEGATION TO THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT





3.08
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on Table a report of the delegation to the United States of America on a financial management study tour which took place from 9th February to 19th February 2014. I beg to lay. 

GOVERNMENT MINISTRIES’ FINANCIAL STATEMENT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2013 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL





3.09
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Mr Paul Mwiru): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on Table financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2013 together with the opinion thereon of the Auditor-General for the Ministry of Works and Transport. I beg to lay. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the government ministries financial statement for the year ended 30 June 2013 together with the opinion thereon of the Auditor-General for the following ministries: Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development; Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs; Ministry of Local Government; Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development; Ministry of Health; Uganda Global Fund to fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria Project, system strengthening component; Uganda Global Fund to fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria Project, HIV component; Uganda Global Fund to fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria Project, Malaria round IV component; Uganda Global Fund to fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria Project, TB component; Uganda Global Fund to fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria Project, Malaria round VII; Lira Referral Hospital financial statements, I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you confirming the documents?

MR MWIRU: Yes, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay Gulu Referral Hospital; Fort Portal Referral Hospital; Mubende Referral Hospital. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let the records capture the government ministries’ financial statements for the financial year ended 30 June 2013 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General of those ministry reports and opinion. They stand accordingly referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for expeditious handling. 

Honourable members, you recall that I communicated that item number four will not be handled today. So let us go to the next item on the order paper. 

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT ON THE PETITION BY CHILDREN WITH DISABILITIES

3.12
MS MARGARET KOMUHANGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Mr Speaker, this is the report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on the petition by children with disability and I would like to lay on Table the minutes of the proceedings. 

Mr Speaker, to refresh the minds of the Members, should I go to introduction or straight to the prayers?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have 15 minutes –(Laughter)– you can outline what they are asking Parliament to do and then you go on to deal with the others. 

MS KOMUHANGI: Let me start from the background. Hon. Hawib Katoto presented a petition on 3 July 2012 on behalf of children with disability. The petition was presented under Rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure. The petition was about lack of care, support and help from family members, the community and society at large. 

The speaker directed the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development to consider the petition and report back. The petition stated that:

    1. There is lack of respect for rights of children with disabilities by family members, the community, fellow children and other people and as a result, disabled children do not get the care and protection they are entitled to like other children. 

    2. Children with disabilities are rejected, mistreated, tied on trees, locked in the homes, denied food, not allowed to play or attend parties and considered curses, which makes them discouraged and stigmatised. 

    3. There are inadequate accessories or aid for mobility like wheelchairs, walking sticks, crutches, special tools for physical impairment, learning aids such as hearing aids, brailles and braille papers. 

    4. Parents deny children with disability an opportunity to go to school because they consider them useless and thereof a waste of their resources. 

    5. There are few teachers trained to provide education to children with disabilities and most teachers regard them as slow learners. 

    6. Communities, families and fellow children consider children with disabilities and children who have albinism as ghosts, which require protection. 

    7. Children with disabilities are sexually abused by adults thereby putting them at a risk of contracting HIV/AIDS and other related diseases yet in most cases they cannot seek help because of their physical and other conditions. 

    8. Children with disability risk being poisoned because they are neglected by their parents thereby becoming susceptible to all sorts of abuse. 

    9. Children are denied health care because their parents do not take them to hospitals when they are sick and even the health facilities do not provide specialised care for the disabled persons.

The representation of people with disabilities does not adequately advocate the protection and fulfillment of rights of children with disabilities. 

The petitioners prayed that Parliament urges Government to – I wish to go straight to the prayers because we handled one after another in details. 

Findings and observations

The petitioners prayed that Parliament urges Government to handle specific issues. The committee findings and observations are therefore made under each of the prayers as indicated below: 

On the issue to ensure that all schools have facilities and learning materials which promote the learning of the children with disability, the committee was informed that the Ministry of Education and Sports has a department for special needs education and shares a vote with the department of guidance and counselling. The ministry has a draft special needs and inclusive education policy. 

The policy stipulates the need for provision of user friendly facilities and infrastructure in all schools, communication in accessible formats, orientation and mobility induction programmes, especially, for learners who are blind and deaf, in all schools and institutions handling them, adoption of all curricula for the benefit of learners with special needs and carrying out of functional assessment for early identification and intervention against barriers to learning among children.

The function assessment should be carried out at the school entry level and followed up later. This draft policy has not been approved by Cabinet because a funding commitment for the policy in conformity with the Ministry of Finance guidelines has not been secured.

The Ministry of Education provides special instruction materials for teaching and learning by children with disabilities in order to ensure that they enroll and complete school. For the last ten years, vocational institutions have been receiving materials to accommodate special needs education. 

The Ministry of Education conducts an annual census in all schools countrywide which includes data on children with disability but does not follow up or supervise. The ministry recognises the need to improve special needs education services and has approved the following measures:

    1. Transfer of special needs education schools to special needs education department. 
    2. Transfer of budget lines from special needs education in other departments to the mother department. 
    3. Representation of special needs education department at all committees or councils. 
    4. Developing a special project for special needs education and the proposal is already with the finance ministry. 

Table 1 shows the enrolment of children with disability in education institutions across the country in 2012. 

A list of special needs education institutions is attached as appendix 1 to this report. So you will be shown in each district where the special needs education institutions are located. 

When the committee visited Kiswa Primary School in Kampala, an inclusive school, to ascertain the learning environment of children with special needs, there were no special facilities for them like ramps, toilets or proper reading formats like reading letters. 

Schools receive funds for new buildings but the amount of money provided does not cater for children with disability. Since the plans come from the Ministry of Education, the school heads cannot change these plans. 

The committee was further informed that since Kampala City Council became Kampala Capital City Authority, no officer has been put in charge of special needs at primary school level yet that person was there when the institution was KCC. 

This has left the needs of special needs education pupils unattended to. This is made worse by parents who do not know that their children are disabled, while others know it but do not inform the teachers. 

The large number of children in one classroom especially UPE classrooms makes it hard for the teachers to identify those with disability. The committee observed that:

    a) Special needs education schools in the country are not equitably distributed with districts like Luwero having as many as seven yet others like Nakaseke lack even a single school. 
    b) Lack of a separate vote by the special needs education department in the Ministry of Education was affecting the operations of the department negatively. 
    c) The number of special needs education teachers is not adequate to cover all schools in the country. Even the few who are there are sometimes deployed to other schools or take on non-teaching jobs. 
    d) In almost all the inclusive schools, there is lack of facilities and structures to cater for the needs of children with disabilities. For instance, storeyed buildings lack ramps or lifts, toilets lack specialised facilities and the compounds are rough. 
    e) The number of children with disability enrolled in schools decrease as the level of education becomes more advanced. 

The committee recommends that:

    a) The Ministry of Education should ensure that all teachers trained in special needs education are deployed to schools with children with disabilities and special needs education schools. 
    b) The ministry should speed up the process of getting a separate vote function for the special needs education department. 
    c) Every school should have a teacher responsible for children with disabilities and all schools should have disability units. Schools should devise ways of screening pupils and students for disabilities. 
    d) The Ministry of Education should approve building designs which are disability sensitive and provide facilities like ramps to cater for children with disability who have enrolled in schools. 
    e) Support secondary schools to include specialised education for children with disability. 

The committee was informed that Government plans to establish special needs education secondary schools, especially for the blind and the deaf. The schools will be built in the 18 districts which were established at the time of Independence in 1962. 

The schools will be built in phases. Wakiso Secondary School in Wakiso District for the deaf and Mbale Secondary School in Mbale District are already operational. 

There are also other special needs schools like St. Kizito in Mukono District, for the blind; Ngora Secondary School in Soroti, for the deaf; Mvara Senior Secondary School in Arua, for the blind; Salama School for the Blind in Mukono and a school in Mulago and another one in Kabale. 

The committee observed that establishing the special needs education schools in a phased manner would delay access to education by children who are severely disabled yet they are more comfortable studying in specialised schools. 

The committee recommends that Government should speed up construction of specialised schools in the original 18 schools of the country. 

Develop a special curriculum examination academic timetable that is friendly to children with disability so that they can benefit from formal education

The committee was informed that guidelines on disability especially the need to have a curriculum designed to meet learning needs of all learners with disabilities; provision of relevant materials and extra time during examinations to enable them have equal opportunity to compete with their counterparts had been developed. 

Children with low vision are able to access a proper reading format in big letters upon the request of the head teachers making those whose head teachers do not ask for the format miss out.

The committee observed that many school administrators lack skills to identify and handle children with disabilities like those with low vision and partial hearing impairment. The committee recommends that:

    a) The Ministry of Education should ensure that all school administrators are trained in disability issues.
    b) Children with disability should regularly be assessed to ensure that they are given the correct devices and receive relevant medical treatment. 

Include special need training in the curriculum of all universities and teacher training institutions. The committee was informed that Kyambogo University has trained 75 students in special needs over the last three years and about 30 special needs education teachers graduate from the faculty of special needs and rehabilitation annually.

Government sponsorship for special needs has fallen from 65 to about 10 because of the emphasis on sponsoring science students. As a result, the number of teachers trained cannot be distributed in all schools in the country. Even the few who are trained take on other jobs.

The committee was further informed that the faculty of special needs and rehabilitation is grossly understaffed and underfunded a factor exacerbated by the transfer of the early childhood and assessment centre to the faculty of education and the withdrawal of donor funding due to the bad image of Kyambogo University. The funds are channelled through the university unlike previously when the Uganda national institute of special education unit would receive the funds directly before it became faculty of special needs and rehabilitation. The Uganda National Institute for Special Needs Education used to be a model for special needs education and training in the region but has been overtaken by Kenya and Tanzania. The braille production unit collapsed about four years ago. The committee observed:

    a) That the faculty of special needs and rehabilitation is in an appalling situation yet it is the only institution in the country providing that unique kind of education.
    b) People with disabilities are not benefiting from the functional adult literacy programme yet most of them miss out on formal education when they are young.
    c) The faculty of special needs and rehabilitation is not performing as well as it used to do when it was an autonomous body called the Uganda National Institute of Special Education Unit. 

The committee recommends therefore that:
    a) Government sponsorship of students joining the faculty for special needs and rehabilitation should be increased.
    b) The amount of funds allocated to the faculties should be increased to enable the unit carry out planned activities and programmes. 
    c) The ministry of education and sports should ensure that other public universities and nursing training schools also provide training in special needs so that the graduates are able to reach out to the large number of children with disabilities in the country. 
    d) Teachers trained in special needs should be evenly distributed so that a large part of the country is covered.
    e) The deployment should be accompanied with a competitive salary so that they are motivated. Teachers who teach children with disabilities should be given a special allowance like civil servants working in hard to reach areas. 
Promote sign language in other professional courses to enable children with disability communicate with others. 

On this prayer the committee was informed that sign language is a professional course at Kyambogo University. The faculty of special needs and rehabilitation has three departments and one of them is a department of special needs which awards post graduate diplomas in special needs, Bachelor of Education in Special Needs, plus diplomas and certificates in sign language. The faculty plans to introduce two new programmes; certificates in deaf, blindness and multi-sensory activities and a Master’s programme in special needs education. 

The committee observes that Kyambogo University is the only institution in the country teaching sign language. The committee therefore recommends that the teaching of sign language should be spread out in schools across the country. The sign language interpreters should be incorporated into the public service structure so that they are deployed in schools, health centres, the judiciary, hospitals and many places where they are needed. 

When we were there, the teachers also complained that Parliament does not have interpreters so they miss out on the proceedings of Parliament.

Provide or reduce prices of system devices or appliances. The committee was informed that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has been liaising with the Ministry of Health which has the mandate to produce system devices. The ministry has several orthopaedic workshops to fulfil this. There are six government orthopaedic workshops in the regional referral hospitals of Gulu, Arua, Mbale, Mulago, Fort Portal, Mbarara, while the privately owned workshops are located in Lira, Kabale, Kumi, Buloba, Katalemwa, Kyesire home in Mpererwe, Kampala, and comprehensive rehabilitation services in Uganda workshop. 

The Mulago Orthopaedic workshop was built in 1940 and is using equipment of the 1960s. Rehabilitating this dilapidated structure is more expensive than setting up a new one. However, it receives only 183 million shillings a year from government. A total of 50 percent of the patients receive wheel chairs, artificial limbs, crutches, orthopaedic shoes which are made at this workshop. Three wheel chairs are assembled daily. There is an eye clinic and a laboratory which makes attachments for hearing aids. 

Every Wednesday, there is the amputee clinic. The department lacks audiometers. Glasses are provided at a subsidised fee of between Shs 20,000 and Shs 30,000. Crutches are sold at Shs 20,000 against a market rate of Shs 70,000. Some items like knee components, foot pads, metallic crutches are imported and are sold at Shs 250,000, Shs 150,000, and Shs 40,000 respectively. A set of artificial limbs costs Shs 250,000.

The Ministry of Health has distributed more than 1,000 wheelchairs and developed a wheelchair data bank. The Ministry of Health has been able to establish two optical workshops in Entebbe and Jinja for making and distribution of spectacles established here modelling laboratories in Mulago and Kyambogo University. They have mobilised several partners like Canadian Rotarians who donate diagnostic equipment for various hospitals. 

All regional referral hospitals minus Moroto, which is new, have modern high equipment. The national medical stores procure raw materials for production of assistive devices in the orthopaedic workshop. The procured materials are limited in scope and quantity and quickly run out of stock while some devices are not produced because their raw materials cannot be supplied. 

The Ministry of Health has applied to National Medical Stores for braille equipment. The committee observed that the orthopaedic workshop is unfunded priority yet is a national referral facility. The assistive devices are expensive and few people with disability can afford them. The amount of money allocated for assistive devices is too little to enable national medical stores supply sufficient quantities. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that funding for the orthopaedic workshop at Mulago is increased, the process of building a new workshop should be expedited, and government explores the option of establishing a national rehabilitation institute with an autonomous status. 

Monitoring the implementation of laws, quality programmes for children to ensure the children with disabilities are also protected. The committee recommends that the draft social protection policy should target children with disabilities among others.

Increase awareness among communities about causes of disability in all forms including albinism. The committee recommends the following on that prayer; 

a) 	Government should ensure that more health workers acquire skills in handling children with disabilities and specialists are deployed in lower health centres to help prevent disabilities and manage those who have them.
b) 	Outreach mobile clinics should be organised by the Ministry of Health for support visits by specialists from the regional referral hospitals to the lower health centres.
c) 	Government should explore the possibility of establishing a national rehabilitation institute with a semi-autonomous status like the cancer or heart institute. This will not only offer services for persons with disabilities but will also save government from expensive referrals for medical rehabilitation abroad.
d) 	More funds should be provided for primary health care fund to cater for outreaches for the disabled. The ministry of gender labour and social development should empower community development officers to increase awareness about the rights of children with disability by providing them with adequate facilitation. Special attention should be on families of children with disabilities so that they understand the special care needed by the children and they know how much potential they have if handled well.

Ensure accessibility to social services and public buildings. The committee recommends that district planners and other authorities should not approve plans, which lack provisions for access by persons with disability.

Government and other stakeholders should ensure that all laws on accessibility are implemented.

Fulfill the promises made towards the protection of children particularly children with disabilities. The committee recommends the following:

There should be increased awareness about programmes and policies for children with disability especially at the district level. This can be done by community development officers who should liaise with the district officials.

District rehabilitation officers who used to handle children with disability should be reintroduced. Government should ensure that implementation of the United Nations Convention on rights of people with disability is done across the board.

I have general recommendations:
    (a) A special fund should be established to cater for children with disability and their families since many families of children with disabilities are poor. This can be done by providing cash hand outs to such families after proper assessment.
    (b) Government should incorporate issues of disability in all its programmes. Disability should be used as one of the critical parameters, for example, in the National Development Plan. There should also be resources and a budget allocated to each sector; a total of five percent of the sector budget. Government programmes should also support activities, which benefit people with disabilities including children with disabilities.
    (c) Government should ensure that all relevant government units and schools provide segregated data about children with disabilities to facilitate planning by Government and other stakeholders. 
    (d) The next housing census should aim at providing critical data on children with disabilities in the country, among others.
    (e) The Ministry of Local Government should work with Ministry of Gender and add disability as one of the parameters for local governments as in the case of environment, HIV/AIDS and gender. Disability will not be effectively addressed as long as it remains hidden under Gender.

There should be officers in charge of special needs education at the local government level since schools are now under local governments. The Ministry of Public Service should put programmes provided by universities like Kyambogo on its list for required qualifications so that graduates do not miss out on some jobs they are qualified for. This will also go a long way in boosting interest in special needs courses.

The Disability Act, 2006 which is being reviewed should be amended to include setting up of multi-disciplinary assessment teams and boards and also stringent measures taken against families that deliberately neglect their children who have disabilities.

In conclusion, despite the various programmes, activities, policies and laws targeting people with disability, a lot still needs to be done to improve their welfare. Children are the future of the nation and therefore the country should plan comprehensively for all categories of children.

Children with disability should be given special attention so that their potential is fully realised. 

However, the committee has no evidence that representatives of persons with disability are not effective as stated by the petitioners. History reveals that the advancement of disability issues in Uganda has always been pioneered by the representatives and leaders of persons with disabilities and consequently, many people from different parts of the world are consulting Uganda on disability issues. 

We now call upon hon. Members to adopt this report and further call upon Government and other stakeholders to address the recommendations of the committee.

I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. That is a petition from children with disabilities. It has taken long but it is finally here. Let us have debate. Hon. Members, the question, which I propose for your debate is for the adoption of the report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on a petition by children with disabilities. That is the motion and debate starts now.

3.43
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): I thank you, Mr Speaker and I would like to commend the committee for the good work done and for the good recommendations. However, I think the recommendations are good but too many so I am wondering if the ministry can handle them and implement all those recommendations. I propose that we have an independent body maybe under the Ministry of Education or wherever to handle all those activities for our children.

Secondly, the report focuses a lot on education but remember we have children who may not be able to go to school. There are those children with disabilities who cannot go to school. I would therefore propose, like they have proposed, that we have a fund for children with disabilities. We have had funds like the Land Fund and HIV fund so I do not see any problem with having a fund for children with disabilities.

Lastly, I have visited some of these institutions in Katalemwa, Mukono and so many others because I also have a daughter with disability but I realise that the equipment and even the services are so expensive for somebody to manage. I would therefore suggest that Government finds a way to subsidise the costs of these institutions like Katalemwa and other private institutions. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.45
MS NAKATO KYABANGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Gomba): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I want to thank the committee for a well-researched report. It is true the government lacks enough facilities and structures to cater for people with special needs. Let me give an example of Gomba District. The whole district has only one teacher trained to handle people with special needs and she is placed in a remote school with no facilities at all. This means that even transporting such children to the school is expensive. If a family produces a disabled child, it is like a curse to the family.

I would therefore like to support the recommendation of the committee that every school should have a teacher responsible for people with disabilities. If the government concentrates on only putting up one structure or institution in each district, that will become costly for our parents, especially the poor ones, to transport their children to such schools. If there are teachers to cater for such children, it means that the problem of distance will no longer be existing and that will assist our children with disabilities. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I will have the Members for Kisoro and Bujenje and then, I come to this side.

3.48
MS SARAH NYIRABASHITSI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kisoro): Thank you. I would like to thank the committee for the good work. Although the recommendations are so many, we can try and work on one by one. But from the committee’s report, I wanted to inquire whether in these secondary schools, do these students pay school fees or it is free? 

Then in places where we have primary schools, after primary, what happens to these students because I happen to have one of the schools for the deaf in Kisoro but after primary school, they are stuck and have nothing to do. They cannot go to the vocational schools because they are told that they have to pay a certain fee and so, they end up not going to secondary and other vocational schools. 

Mr Speaker, I have visited the new library at Makerere University and they have a computer lab which is meant for students with disabilities. But if you reach there surely – if you are a leader of this country, you can cry because I found people with serious disabilities of the eyes and young girls struggling to read on the computer – putting the eyes directly on the computer so that they can read. 

I do not know whether it is possible for the Ministry of Education to get us some assistive devices to help these people as they use these computer labs other than straining their eyes the more.   

The Community Development Officers at all sub-counties are supposed to have complete data of the children with disabilities. We should not be having these children staying at home, children not going into – classes, if the community development officers were doing their work. I thank you.

3.49
MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much. I also want to thank the committee for the work that they have done and the report that they have given us. I have a few issues.

The children with disabilities are indeed further marginalised and I am glad that the report has brought up some recommendation and I do not think that these recommendations are too many. They can be addressed by the Government and we should not be losing these children.

I have a child from my constituency who was very bright doing PCB but along the way, she got blind. They recommended her to go to Iganga S.S. - I think. But I will tell you that for the disabled children, there is no USE. They are asking for Shs 900,000 per term and the child cannot afford it. I have moved almost everywhere, including the ministry but there seems to be no help at all. So, when you enumerate these schools for special education, do they have USE in them and how can these children be helped?

Two, I want to commend CORSU in Entebbe. It is doing a very good job but of course it is private and not government owned. Can the government borrow a leaf from CORSU? I do know whether you have found time to visit it; kindly go there because you may have some good points to help our country develop a policy, especially on the institute that you are suggesting – the National Rehabilitation Institute. 

Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that there should be outreaches from the referral hospitals to lower institutions or units. I do not know how this will be done because, for example, Hoima is our regional referral hospital but even in a workshop, it is not anywhere to be mentioned. In any case, the staff are not enough at the Hoima Referral Hospital. How then, will they go to the lower units? This one is for the Minister for Education, I believe.

The second last, some time back, the policy of Government was to mainstream the persons with disability issues especially in education. I do not know whether this policy was changed because if you are going to look for one person to be in charge of special needs in each school, you will find children who have different special needs. You will find somebody who knows braille but the child in that school needs sign language. How will that be handled at that particular school? Can we mainstream such disability issues including sign language? Let everybody have some kind of knowledge in sign language especially for teachers. I know that if the programme is reorganised properly, this sign language can be taught to everybody especially in teacher training colleges and health centres. 

The braille is very expensive. She has mentioned that some braille equipment is being manufactured somewhere but it is not having any impact. So, for a while, can we say that let Government avail our children with braille and of course, train the trainers in sign language? 

One of these schools talked about is in my constituency and this is Masindi Centre for the Handicapped. It is heavily under enrolled because of the costs that are involved in maintaining these children – the parents - it is under UPE but the parents are overburdened with extra costs which are necessary to ensure that these children stay in school.

Mr Speaker, it is a good story to say that we have schools for special needs but there is another story to it that these schools are not facilitated to the level that they should be. Government should have affirmative action for these schools. I thank you.  

3.54
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the wonderful reports that they have presented to us. It is true that actually some parents neglect their disabled children and dump them in some of the schools that are actually catering for these children. I have a primary school, Isheshe Primary School and most of the children are dumped there and it up to the school to facilitate them. Most of these schools are supported by donors. I am wondering why can’t the government come up with a very strong programme to support our children who are born with disabilities.

Recently, I was watching a scenario from Kasese where a disabled girl was stopped from participating in this identity card registration. As an activist, I picked my phone and called the returning officer. However, the returning officer said it was not his problem that the facility that they had presented – from the seat, the girl could not reach the computer. So, what can’t – information?

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. Actually, the report itself is indicating serious issues of marginalisation to the extent that even when someone has qualified for work, the person goes ahead to be discriminated against. This lady passed the interviews which they gave to parish supervisors and parish enrolment officers. The problem was that she could not access the camera because she is very short; she is disabled in the category of little persons. When the activists and other concerned persons raised an alarm, she was reinstated but on condition that she gets a guide whom she would have to pay from her own salary. So you can see the level of marginalisation. They get very little money, yet they want this lady, Alice, to use her money to pay the person who is going to help her. I now ask, is she working for herself or for the guide? You can see that the level of marginalisation goes deeper into the places of employment. 

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Mr Speaker, on the issue of the teachers who are teaching the children with disabilities, they need to be supported. Whenever I visit this school, I feel like crying. They handle all sorts of children with disabilities yet they are left to themselves. And when you talk to them, you wonder what you can do as a Member of Parliament. The Minister of Education and Government should come up to support and facilitate these teachers. They train these children and by the time they reach primary seven, they are much better. They have the challenge of brailles – the children are anxious to learn, but they are not facilitated. 

When it comes to the needs of other persons, who are normal human beings, we all dash in and raise our voices. This group, which my colleague has said are marginalised, deserves even more voices to support them. They are human beings like us and they have human needs like we have. So Government needs to come up and support them and also support the teachers that teach them. 

4.03
MR JOHN BAGOOLE (Independent, Luuka County, Luuka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the work well-done. I have two issues. The report was only talking about children born with disabilities. But when we talk about disability, I would think that even some members of Parliament who are in the chambers are serious candidates of disability. 

I was born with ten fingers and I grew up with them. But I was involved in a nasty accident one day and I became disabled. But that is not the issue; I have visited a number of disabled homes and workshops because I developed a culture of helping the disabled. When you go to the open market to buy a bicycle for a normal human being, it goes for Shs 180,000 or Shs 200,000. But when you want a wheelchair or a tri-cycle, it goes for a minimum of Shs 500,000. 

When you go to private workshops, the guys who work in them say that the materials they use to make wheelchairs are expensive because they are overtaxed. Honourable members, Parliament can help in the forthcoming budget. Why don’t we make such aids tax free so that our colleagues who cannot afford to work or who do not have the money benefit from this by getting cheap wheelchairs and tri-cycles?

Mr Speaker, there are some other issues that we found out when we went to Katalemwa and I think Government must get more serious about our people. Those people are seriously suffering and when we allocate funds, we do not take care of the people who are in these kinds of homes. We must do something very serious about the disabled because they also belong to this country and some of us are very – (Interruption) 

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Being serious about these people cuts across. only last week, I watched our honourable colleague, honourable “Panadol”, distributing money in sacks to voters. He was actually throwing it at them. I wondered how the disabled voters could have their share of this money –(Laughter)– thank you very much. 

MR BAGOOLE: Mr Speaker, as I conclude, there was another point about the schools. The schools are in a few places, like in the whole of Busoga –(Member timed out.)

4.03
MR ANDREW ALLEN (Independent, Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want first of all to thank the chairperson for the job well done. However, my input is a general observation. When we talk about disability, this is a very sensitive issue around the country. There are very many disabled people who are highly neglected and they keep wondering whether they are part of this country. 

I want to associate disability with the youth and children as a general case. In my opinion, I do not think this category of people should continue being under the ministry of gender. I would suggest that we create a ministry charged with disability, youth and children affairs so that these people are effectively catered for and given an opportunity to leave like any other ordinary Ugandan –(Interruption) 

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, honourable member, and Mr Speaker. The information I want to give is based on what you have just proposed. Many of the children with disability have got multiple disabilities. So putting all these special interest groups under ministry of gender is a disservice because many of the issues are not handled as we expect them to be. So I really support the proposal; we need a specific ministry. Thank you. 

MR ALLEN: Mr Speaker, as you can see, this is a very serious matter. There is no need of us creating ministries that are not necessary. This ministry charged with disability, youth and children is such a sensitive one and will serve our people better and will not inconvenience the Ministry of Gender as opposed to the current situation now. So, it is very important to consider creating a new ministry charged with that responsibility. I submit. 

4.07
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to be on record to thank the committee for this very noble job that they have done. But before I make my comments, I want to borrow a leaf from the general motto of persons with disability that inability is not disability. Unless the socio-economic and cultural paradigm of our society changes, people will not appreciate the worthiness and value of our children especially those who are handicapped or who have got disability. These are the children, upon detection that they have got some sort of disability first and foremost are ostracized. They are neglected; they are never brought to the attention of the public. Many times they are either kept in the backyard or locked up in houses and they suffer undetected. 

Mr Speaker, in 2006 under the Government of Uganda UNICEF-funded programme, the Uganda Society for Disabled Children conducted a research and the findings of this research were that 90 percent of children with disability were among those who were always abandoned on the streets, in the highways, for whoever can pay attention to them to pick and do whatever they can with them. To the extent that even if you look at the government institutions, for example we have got an institution in Naguru specifically for children but if you went to that institution, leave alone the remand home which caters for those who are in conflict with the law but they are those innocent ones up there and when you examine them case by case, you will find that 90 percent of the children who have been abandoned and who have been committed to that home through courts of law are children with disability which ranges from mental disability or physical disability to hearing impairment. And here are people who have been abandoned and at the end of the day, there is nobody to look to them in terms of having a responsibility such that even all that government does - Mr Speaker, I am happy that the Leader of Government Business is here and the minister responsible for the sector is here; he is laughing but it is all lip-service. 

In the 90s, there was a special project funded by DANIDA under the Ministry of Education where every district was implementing a project where specialised training was given to teachers to handle cases of children with disability. I remember that time they were given yellow Mitsubishi double-cabin pickups and what happened? Immediately the project ended, Government of Uganda could not even put a shilling for its continuity. Immediately, these vehicles were no longer road worthy; they were abandoned and nothing was done. So, there is a need for more commitment on the part of Government. Let Government appreciate that these children are a gift from God and they are part of our society and we must look into their welfare as well. 

Honourable colleagues, when I was doing my Masters Degree, one of us, in a class of about 26 people, was a person with disability but you would wonder how this person could cope with all these lectures and also do various tests and wide reading but at the end of the day after the two years, this gentleman passed his exams highly and is here within Kampala working. So, if we can identify such talent, why don’t we as a country look after our children? Why don’t we as a country have specific and exceptional organs for these children? 

Mr Speaker, many times we say that over 70 percent of our population consists of children and when particularly asking for appropriate resource allocation for the Ministry Of Gender, Labour and Social Development, do you know the common saying from us politicians and those who take decisions at Cabinet level when they divide that MTEF levels? They say, “Oh you know children’s issues are everywhere. When you go to a hospital, antenatal care it is children, you go to Education it is children, agriculture, it is children, these roads are for children, water is for children.” You can imagine how they trivialize issues to that level. 

So, Mr Speaker, it is not enough for us to create a specific ministry. It will even be made more vulnerable. It will make the situation worse. What we need to do as Parliament, as a people, is really to struggle to enshrine the needs of these unfortunate children into the main paradigm of development so that they are specifically provided for. 

Because right now Uganda has the largest Cabinet and this large Cabinet hasn’t been translated into efficient service delivery. So, why should we expand so that we can give wakina Madada more vehicles to drive around? That will not help the situation. What we need right now is to commit ourselves not to create additional ministries. We already have enough. Actually if we had some more students, we would rather realign them and reduce the number so that the amount of money we spend on Prof. Kabwegyere and his team or administration would rather go into service delivery and that is the way we should think – (Laughter)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, is the hon. Member in order to attribute certain things to me when he, as a member of this House, was one of those struggling to create a district in order to create another membership and create more and more people who cannot be served by the economy of this country? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Both your point of order and his position is that there should be better service delivery. 

MR WADRI: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. I have known hon. Prof. Kabwegyere for quite a long time when he used to be in DP, so I wouldn’t want to dwell much on that. 

The point I want to make is that on a very serious note, we have relegated service provision to marginalized children especially those with disability to the extent that the few institutions like Madera School for the Blind is entirely depending on religious based groups. Government does not even put a shilling, not even subvention which used to be allocated during those days when I was in civil service. Every financial year, subvention would be given to these NGOs that are engaged in benevolent work. That is no longer there. 

So, let Government appreciate this important input made by NGOs towards the welfare of our children and state ownership of these issues and budget and deliver services to these unfortunate members of our communities. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.15
MR ISAIAS SASSAGA (FDC, Bubadiri East County, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also commend the committee recommendations and the good work. As my chairperson of the Committee on Government Assurances said that disability is not inability, recently we had disabled children from Budadiri Girls Primary School who represented Uganda in the regional scouts competition in Burundi and actually emerged first in that category but what troubles me is that when you sit and look at the various recommendations made by the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development in the previous parliaments year in and year out, we keep rotating on the same recommendations. Colleagues, go and read them. The problem is the government and until we get a mechanism of how best we can make the government accountable because we shall discus and pass them year in and year out and of course the next Parliament will come and with the same petitions and will come with the same recommendations.

We have that challenge as Government Assurances Committee –(Interjection) yes recommendations are there, Government has committed itself, they have recommended, please facilitate very well the  education department, detach the schools of special needs from the main stream schools. They did something in Kyegegwa and stopped doing in other schools yet this will always come up. 

Until Government commits to this Parliament the treasury memoranda which will be guiding us and helping us to track the level of Government commitment and the status of the implementation of our recommendations we make we shall be wasting time. I rest my case.

3.17
MR JACOB OPOLOT (NRM, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I join the rest in thanking the committee for the good job and wonderful report. There is a mention of teachers of children with disabilities and it is unfortunate that the front bench is inadequate in terms of the Ministry of Education but we would have loved to have some of them here so that maybe at some point they can make commitments to this House about what they intend to do in order to enhance the availability of teachers. 

I have heard of cases where some of these schools have one teacher who is supposed to teach all the subjects and in case he or she is not able to teach a particular subject, the children will be maintained in school without benefiting from that kind of subject and one would wonder why they are at school. Are they there just for formality or they are supposed to benefit and progress to another level where they can be useful to themselves, their societies and this country? 

So I would have loved to hear from the Minister of Education how they are going to bridge the gap so that these children benefit fully like any other children at school. 

I really wish to urge colleagues that this syndrome of ministry, minister and whatever is misleading this country. Like it has already been said, we have very many ministries and very many ministers but we are not seeing results. We are not really asking for places to be occupied by people, we are asking for services. If we have a minister of state responsible for this docket, can he show accountability for what he has done so far in improving the welfare and service provision to children with disabilities but not looking for a ministry per say. How many ministries shall we have? When I have a problem with a road in Pallisa, will I ask for the minister for Pallisa roads? 

Someone should be able to do everything for as long as a policy service is provided. I therefore end by saying that for those of us who really look at the issue of children with disability as something that must be addressed urgently. We should urge those whether ministers or not who are so far handling this matter to handle it with commitment, dedication and policy service. Thank you very much, Mr speaker.

3.18
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Fort Portal): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am just imagining if I am the minister and this report comes out, of course it would tell me that there is something going wrong within my docket because actually what we see is that the ministry is supposed to monitor and follow up on all these developments in as far as the disabled people are concerned. So what we see is that there is lack - because I don’t see that manifested within the budget. A budget is a very important tool for action. Now if you have a ministry without a budget that caters for these needs, then what is it that you are representing because for me that is the bargaining part? 

Why should we have institutions which are now non-functional. Why should we have structures that have been brought up by donors and abandoned? So these are issues, which we need the ministry to take very seriously. (Interruption)

MR BADDA: Thank you my honourable colleague. On that note I want to inform you and the House that sometime last year the ministry informed local governments that at least 10 percent of the educational funds are supposed to go for students and people with disabilities but they never followed it up with guidelines, so even the responsible people in Local Government have the instructions but they don’t have guidelines; they don’t know what to do. So they end up spending all that money on other issues. Thank you.

MR RUHUNDA: Mr Speaker, that is good information which shows lack of seriousness. For me I find it as part and parcel really of the culture surrounding us even when a European begins a hotel, this hotel is well maintained throughout and when an African, a Ugandan especially begins one, the first paint for the first year or three months is what you see but after that when you go back it is miserable. So this is a cultural problem.

But nevertheless I have been following up on the youth fund and when I looked at the guidelines of the youth fund, I realised that they are paying only 30 percent must be women or girls. Now I got disturbed because I found these young people with disabilities who also want to engage in business. They cannot be part of these groups. The demand for the groups is quite high. For a disabled youth, this becomes a very difficult thing yet the ministry for youth is located within the same Ministry of Gender. And you are neighbours, so what is the problem? Why couldn’t we also see these young children with disabilities taken care of? 
Lastly, We are seeing many of these companies which have social corporate responsibilities, but the way they are allocating their finances, if at all we could come up with a policy to the private sector to say for every social corporate responsibility a particular percentage must be allotted to people with disabilities, and this would help much more than waiting for the government money that is not forthcoming. If we have the private sector actively mobilised and involved, this would make a much better difference.

4.24
MR WILSON ISIKO (NRM, Busiki County, Namutumba): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me chance to contribute to this sensitive topic. I also would like to thank the committee for a report well researched. 

Disability is in two forms: there are those who are born disabled; and there are those who are candidates for disability. Almost all of us are candidates to disability therefore when we are debating disability we should debate it with intimacy and the concern because it could easily come to every person. 

I would like to thank the government for highlighting disability in most of its activities, it has helped very many disabled people to go to school and reach high levels and also attain high qualifications. But when it comes to employment there is a very big problem. There are so many disabled graduates who cannot struggle in the normal way for the jobs the way they are got in Uganda.  

Mr Speaker, in the Disability Act, there were special provisions to help the disabled to get jobs in this country. It is very appalling for this Parliament to continue passing laws and nobody follows them up. Wherever jobs are advertised, there is a percentage of those jobs that are supposed to go to the disabled who have the qualifications, if they did apply. Indeed, they do apply and they are never given jobs, just by attending the interviews, they are simply disqualified. 

I know a disabled young man in my constituency, who is very qualified. He has been shortlisted and sat interviews but somehow, does not go through at the interviewing level. I do not know because the reasons are not given but I thought that being disabled, somehow, and the law in position, he would be considered.

At this moment, I want to recognise one Dr Gashishire who was a superintendent of Iganga Hospital. He employed very many disabled people to do certain jobs at the gates, simply opening and closing the gates. When he left Iganga Hospital, all of them were sacked.

Mr Speaker, disabled people require special facilities when they want to access certain services, for instance, in a taxi park or bus park, a disabled person cannot struggle for a taxi. Every day, wherever we are travelling, you find them seated in their wheelchair as taxi by taxi fill and go, wherever the disabled person is going, someone says, “I do not have space for a wheelchair” and yet, he has space for a box of fish or other merchandise but they do not have space for a wheelchair. I beg the Government to go beyond lip-service and inspect some of these things that are within the disability law. 

There are things like the creams for the Albinos - the other day, I was reading in the newspapers that the creams to help maintain the skin of an Albino, could be the most expensive thing on our beauty products market as per now. What makes them very expensive is the tax that is imposed on those creams. These creams are for Albinos – they cannot be used by a person with normal skin; they are for disabled people.

I really get appalled by the way business is made out of disability. People and Government are making money even out of disability. For instance, there are spectacles sold everywhere on the street, in the market and around the park. Spectacles are devices to help correct eyesight but how does somebody sell them around the market at Shs 5,000? They are there in the park. (Interjections) They are spectacles. I know what I am talking about. Hon. Minister, you have taken hundreds of years without going through the park. Maybe, one of these days, let the Government vehicle and go through the park –(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: I do not need to be educated, hon. Member. Spectacles are measured devices – they measure your defect and give you on the measurement to correct the defect. If you find somebody selling something that looks like spectacles on the street, those that look like mine, obviously, how can you conclude that those are spectacles? They may be goggles; there is a difference between spectacles and goggles. They may look alike but they are different. (Laughter)

MR ISIKO: Mr Speaker, some of us need the two lines; this honourable line of moving through town with our own vehicles but also sometimes to go by taxi and try to move around the street to do some bit of shopping. Maybe, the honourable minister could use the several assistants he has to help him check the facts — this is a real fact. If you gave anybody ten minutes to go to the street now, he would come back with spectacles being sold between Shs 5,000 and 10,000 - real spectacles. As I wind up, I would – (Interruption)

MR TUMWESIGYE: I would like you to get some clarification. Hon. Isiko said that there are a number of workers who were in Iganga Hospital and that when the Medical Superintendent left, they were sacked. I take that seriously and I would hope that he can provide the information because we do not believe in discrimination of people for employment. Therefore, Parliament should not take it as if it is policy of discriminating against people with disability.

It is also worth noting that employees in hospitals are actually employed by the District Service Commission. It would be interesting to know whether supervisors in hospitals or elsewhere in the district can, at will, hire and fire people without reference to any policy guidelines or even reference to the laid down procedures on how you can dismiss staff.

So, I hope the honourable member can provide information today or later, to the ministry in terms of who, the number, when they were employed and when they were dismissed. I thank you.

MR ISIKO: Mr Speaker, it is a fact of life that we had dumb people opening and closing gates in Iganga Hospital under Dr Gashishire who is also disabled. Hon. Minister, you know Dr Gashishire very well. You are also in proper contact with Iganga Hospital, even by a simple phone call - technology has simplified everything. It is very easy to find out these things without even taking two or three minutes, because what I am talking about is a matter of fact. When Dr Gashishire left the hospital, all of them were sacked and they are no longer there.  

I thank you for allowing me to contribute these important facts. I am only appealing to Government to lead by the laws that are enacted because most of these laws are brought to Parliament by Government itself. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we should prepare to close now. I will have Bukoto, Tororo, Kabarole and we close. There are other debates coming.

4.34
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report and to support the recommendations made by the committee. However, we have a housing policy, which is not properly enforced, to cater for people with disabilities. If we do not, it is high time we looked at that because there are many buildings that are coming up without any provision for the disabilities. Even in this building, the Parliament itself, there are areas where people with disabilities or challenges cannot reach.

So, I feel that the concerned ministers should look into enforcement on the housing policy where we want to see that the people with challenges can access. Sometimes, you find toilets which are not accessible to these people, which are not friendly.

Mr Speaker, we also know that there are many children that are kept in backdoors and some are kept in cages. There is an incident that happened in one of the constituencies, where three children from the same family were being kept in a cage like animals. We feel that if the ministry does not come out vigorously to look into this issue and sensitize the people who stay with these children, some will be killed though some have been denied by some men who think that children born with disability are not good children.

Mr Speaker, my appeal to the committee is for them to ensure the recommendations that have been made in this report, get to be implemented. They should do follow-ups so that they don’t remain on paper. It is unfortunate that Government is also discriminating against people with disability. We have just heard from the previous speaker about those who were sacked from their jobs. But also there are those who have been denied employment because of the challenges they have. I hope the responsible minister will explain what the ministry is doing to address most of these issues. Thank you very much.

4.38
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. While I rise to support the report, I would also like to raise a few concerns.

In my constituency, I have a school called Agururu Primary School for the deaf and mute, as they are called – we no longer use the word “dump” because many of them are extremely brilliant - but every time I visit that school – there is no way anybody with a humane sense would fail to shade tears.

The school has two sets of pupils – the normal ones and those that have that special need, all lamped together. I have been a Member of Parliament for seven year. During this time I have written several letters lobbying several people – we just managed to get a borehole in that school recently. Otherwise, those children would move for almost two kilometers, in a municipality moreover, to fetch water. But how does such a blind child move such a long distance to fetch water? You can ask yourselves.

And when you look at the study materials – I would like to agree with my colleague who said that there is an extreme lack of policy. A few years back we lobbied a Germany NGO that donated to those children some beds. With the help of the DEO and the leadership of the municipality, wooden beds were supplied. The beds were short in height to enable these children ably climb over. But some great person from the ministry came in and said that because such beds are prone to fire – that was the time of school fires – the beds were rejected and thrown out as if the metallic ones would not burn if the fire inferno came about.

So, you fail to understand the situation. First of all, some of these children are deaf and so cannot hear a fire alarm if there was any fire outbreak. My thinking is that these beds would have been left and a warden placed at the dormitory. But the people managing this institution were not willing to pay that extra person who was supposed to sleep there.

That aside, we do not even have teaching staff with special skills in sign language to conduct classes for these children. Mr Speaker, it is a failure from the word “go” in my opinion and that school in my constituency is a testimony.

When you go to the Ministry of Gender – and I am glad that the minister is here today – they push you to the Ministry of Education and Sports. When you go to the Ministry of Education and Sports, they will tell you “Our role entails this and their social needs fall under the Ministry of Gender.” But officials at the Ministry of Gender will tell you they have no budget.

I would like to agree with the honourable colleague who urged this Parliament to put its foot down when it comes to issues regarding these children especially the deaf and the mute.

Mr Speaker, I would like to also agree with what hon. Asupasa Isiko said and I also would like to again reiterate the issue of spectacles being sold on the streets of Kampala. Hon. Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere, it is true those glasses are numbered as -0.5, +0.5, +1, +1.5 and so forth but they are sold as cheap cakes and vegetables. The honourable member is right; they go for as cheap as Shs 5000. If you come to my petrol station on Jinja Road there, you will find the hawkers there selling them.

This is the policy that we are crying over, Mr Speaker. But also this is not an issue that we are bringing to Parliament for the first time. While the committee has been able to capture many of the salient concerns of Ugandans and parties that are involved, one thing that we in the past as a committee and as Parliament and as ministry, maybe many of their officials are even not aware but we have a provision in the Uganda Revenue Authority Act – and that would be in reply to what my colleague from Fort Portal said – that says that anybody who employs a certain percentage of disabled people qualifies for a tax rebate. Why can’t we involve these people? When somebody says they are qualified but that they can’t get a job, these corporate companies must employ for such people.

I happened to work or deal with Nile Breweries but I can tell you that for many years, their receptionist was a blind person. But that person would connect you on telephone to receive your calls and so forth. He was such a brilliant person; I have seen them operate –(Interjections)– yeah! Crane Bank, for example. So, in my opinion, why can’t the ministry come out to enforce such provisions of the law?

Lastly, my concern is, why we blame the ministry and the other officials is because the onus lies upon us as leaders and as Ugandans whom God has blessed with all parts of the body to also feel that we have a responsibility.

As leaders, we need to own up this responsibility so that we can act in a manner that we would so desire the responsible ministry and Government to act. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.45
MS VICTORIA BUSINGE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. If these vulnerable children understood that we have the powers that we possess to make sure their budgets are included and implemented, they would curse us very much.

Mr Speaker, all these lamentations are around money. Inadequate buildings, inadequate teachers and so forth are all about money. If I am to borrow a leaf from what we previously did as Parliament, when we refused to pass the budget for the Ministry of Health until the Mama Kits were included, we will have solved this problem. (Applause)

Budgets are usually very clear and every inadequacy falls under some ministry. I know that NGOs have come up to offer support – I used to work as DEO before I was elected to this Parliament and I know that all the annual votes for the disable children are supported by UNICEF. I can inform you that in my district we have two Gold Medals of 100 metres; that of 100 meters and relies. So these children can do what the normal children do if their curriculum is implemented. 

I therefore request that we put up a time frame for the Ministry of Education and Sports in liaison with the Curriculum Development Centre to make it compulsory for all teachers training college to have a component of special needs. We are going to approve the budget and brails will be bought. But who is going to use them? So the teachers who are knowledgeable about special needs are scarce; they are only a handful and when you consider the number of children in the schools in relation to the number of schools, we have no teachers for special needs –(Interruption)

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you for giving way.  I am a member of the committee that is why I am not contributing. But the information I want to provide is about the teachers, especially those in secondary schools. We were in Yumbe, secondary school; it is from senior one to senior six and they have blind students there yet that school has no single teacher for special needs education. They only have a retiree who volunteered to mark the papers of the blind children. 

And in Vala, where there is a secondary school, I sponsor children, who are blind in that school, but there, they do not sit for exams – their exams are not marked because there is no teacher. So the issue of lack of teachers is very serious. 

And in my own district of Koboko, I have established two schools for the blind, but unfortunately, there was one teacher who was supporting the blind children, but the DEO decided transfer this special needs teacher to become a headmistress. So the children are there without anybody to support them. It is such a big challenge for special needs children. Thank you very much. 

MS BUSINGE: Mr Speaker, one of my colleagues the Woman MP for Kisoro asked, “When these children successfully complete their primary education, where do they go?” 

It is true secondary education is private and it is my appeal to Government and this Parliament to pass a law where all special needs children who complete primary education are given full sponsorship for their secondary and university education –(Applause)

On defilement, there is rampant defilement which is not even reported because parents think that these are useless children and the defilers walk around boosting and repeatedly defile these girls. Last month, I saw in the papers the story of a girl who was defiled repeatedly. And when the mother was consulted by concerned neighbours, she said: “What do you want me to do; should I carry her on my back to the market? The man will continue defiling her, because I told her to lock herself in the house”. So parents need sensitisation and reprimand for their neglect. 

Finally, Mr Speaker, when we come to inspectorate section, the inspectors themselves do not know much about special needs education and they are still very few. I pray that the inspectors be put on a special course every holiday for some weeks so that they can get knowledge about special needs and that they can be able to inspect effectively and make recommendations to us. The recommendations are very many, but if each ministry takes its schedule, these recommendations can be managed. 

4.51
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Wafula Oguttu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the committee for a very good report and my colleagues for the debate. The society is measured by the way it cares for the vulnerable and minorities. From what we just said this afternoon, our society does not seem to care much about the vulnerable children. 

When I was in middle school – O’Level - we visited Jinja at Mpumudde Rehabilitation Centre and Kireka and Madara in Soroti. At that time, those were caring institutions for disadvantaged children. Today, many of these are now like human zoos. We don’t make them places to rehabilitate and make our people have a sense of self belonging. But now it is where we dump our own children. 

Last week, I attended a conference in Munyonyo as a Rotarian. There was a motivational speaker called Alvin Law. Alvin is a man without arms. He is Canadian born without arms. He was abandoned by his parents as undesirable. At that time, Europe looked at such children as we do now; as people that you should throw away. 

Today, Alvin Law is an author; he is a pianist; he is a motivational speaker and a renowned musician. But he does all these tasks with his feet. He says, “Never give up or demean yourself”.

We seem to demean our own. There is either lack of policy in our Government or there are deficiencies in the policy of our Government on vulnerable and disadvantaged people. In the report, the chairperson said, they have cut sponsorship from children with special needs from 75 to 10. The money has gone to the science students. Are they mutually exclusive; should children with special needs be scientists? Why should you disadvantage them? That means we do not care. I think we should be looking for policies that would help these people to live a normal life. 

I support those who have said that we should have teachers to get knowledge on special needs; like sign language. I used to be on the council for Kyambogo University. We merged that school for special needs with the university; maybe we made a mistake. But even after we merged them, we did not say that every teacher can now go and attend a special needs course. 

When a child is in Bugiri and they do not see or hear, most likely that child will never go to school because there is no school to help that child. And why is it that the parents of those children suffer like it is a punishment that once you have such a child given to you by God, when you go to school, you must pay extra fees? 

A proposal has been made that we have these children study for free. Maybe the minister does not know how many they are because many of these children are hidden in houses. People are ashamed of them. We need the minister to educate the people that these children are human beings who need to be helped to live a normal life like the person I just got to know last week, Alvin Law. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.56
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I really like to congratulate the committee on the comprehensive report they have given and I concur with most of the recommendations they have made. I just simply wanted to add three things. 

One, focusing on what Government should do, is well and good but it is not enough. Identifying a disability is itself a big problem in the first place. By the time you identify who needs special attention, you are dealing with the parents; the very background where the children grows. By the time the child goes to school, already some damage can be made of not identifying a disability. So there is more to it than just going to school but even the home environment, which enriches growth, must also be enriched.

So we need to do more than what we are talking about. There is even a cultural factor. You know, traditionally in my area, twins, a boy and a girl, were interpreted to be a disaster to the family, especially if one of them looked smaller or was invariably smaller than the other. If it was a boy, it would mean a threat to the father; so the child would be killed. So there are a number of things – where a child is not enabled to even grow on identification at birth by the parents and put in the backyard and never allowed to realise their potential. So there is more to that.

Then there is even another aspect, Mr Speaker, that extreme brilliance can be a disability. There are children that are very brilliant and when the environment is poor, they become a problem. I have known a case of a children who excelled at primary school, O’ Level, A’ Level (scoring As all through in Physics, Chemistry and Mathematics), applied to Makerere but there was nobody to attend to him. He jumped down from the second floor of the Sheraton Kampala Hotel and died. So, even brilliance can be a disability as long as nobody identifies it and nurtures it. So disability, therefore, needs to be – (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have the following issues on which I need clarification from the academician of the level of the professor of sociology, particularly anthropology.

Mr Speaker, hon. Prof. Kabwegyere has repeated twice that brilliance is disability. My own interpretation of disability was to mean that your capacity and ability to perform is curtailed. But here is a situation where Prof. Kabwegyere is saying that brilliance is disability. Can he help me; am not all that well-endowed in understanding what disability is as to how brilliance becomes disability?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, we are talking of using your potential to the best of your ability. And if you are brilliant and that brilliance is not nurtured and it becomes a weakness – you see in the US, they have special programmes for especially gifted children. This is because if a child is gifted and you do not nurture them, the child actually becomes a problem; that child fails to adapt to society. And we are talking of somebody where the focus here is on physical – because he cannot see, hear or is handicapped in the form. But I am talking about something I understand and I can certainly mean it – that a person who has ability but that ability is not brought out can actually become a problem. Some of these people who kill have been known to be those who have not been guided positively –(Interjection)– before you help me, let me help myself by saying exactly what I want to say. (Laughter)

There are cases where people become deviant just because they do not know better on how to be right because they have not been guided. So you can now help me. (Laughter)

DR OKUONZI: Thank you, my colleague and thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing me to make this contribution. The professor is correct; it is medically known that at a certain level of IQ, where the IQ is so high that it is not socially useful - and these people are categorised as abnormal and so they are actually disabled. So he is actually right.

There is a disease called schizophrenia – most of those people have a very high intelligence but they are functionally insane. So he is very correct. Thank you.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you very much. You see, the obvious cases are not even being addressed. So it now seems as if I am talking about the abstract. 

But the other point concerns where hon. Tanna you are insisting that employers should take on people with disability. But at the same time, how are you going to convince somebody that he employs this person who can be a “problem” to him when he can have 10 or 20. So the moment you say by law that people must employ this kind of person, then you begin to enter the whole question of “Is the law being just?”; is Government now imposing certain things on –(hon. Mwiru rose_)– Hon. Mwiru, before you come in, I want you to be an employer and you are looking for somebody to do some work for you and Government says, “You must employ this and that kind of person.” 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, please try and – 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: If they could help me by allowing me to conclude – because you are not enabling me to conclude. (Laughter) The problem we have, which is larger than being just - (hon. Mwiru rose_) - Please, hon. Mwiru, can I plead with you? This is where you undermine – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us have the point of procedure.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a point of procedure. I have someone in my constituency who holds a Masters’ Degree from Kyambogo University though he is disabled. But the minister, in his talk – I do not know why he is trivialising this matter- he is trying to suggest that disabled people are not employable. I am wondering whether the minister is procedurally right – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are out of order; that is not a procedural issue.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: He may be disabled in some form, so that is the problem. I want to conclude, Sir.

MR TANNA: I would like to thank the honourable professor for giving way. We do have provisions within our statute books. I do not know the exact percentage, but the income tax law provides that if you employ one in ten persons –(Interjection)– Yes, that is the law that I was referring to. If the ministry went ahead and created awareness that if as an employer I employed X number of such employees out of my total workforce, then I would qualify for a tax incentive at the end of the year. 

This does not seem to be clearly communicated to the business community because even colleagues here, including professor, need to understand that we have that provision. These people with masters and the people I referred to, if given - not the problem ones he is referring to –(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Yes, I am aware that you can get benefits for employing PWDs. I am also aware that many institutions have it as their policy anyway. The question is whether that handles a percentage that is commensurate with the problem we have. That is the point I was making. 

My conclusion, therefore, is that Government must do more than it is doing. However, let all of us appreciate that the problem is much larger than what the Government can address. This is because you have the generic problem starting in the background of the family and by the time you identify that a lot of information must be given –(Ms Alaso rose_)– to the parents and to the honourable member from Serere –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you accept the point of clarification? 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, with your indulgence, I want to agree with Prof. Kabwegyere from an educationist’s point of view. It is true we have those types of people. What is important, and I think this is where this discussion should lead us, is how many they are.  Without actual statistics of the people with various kinds of disabilities, we cannot make a precise intervention. 

Also, to deal with the various types of disabilities, - that is where the argument of the committee comes in -we need people who are specially trained. When they were training us to teach children with a very high IQ, they would tell us how to deal with them. You cannot keep them -when they are in P1, they can do tasks of P3, and so you keep skipping classes for them. You, as a teacher, must really admit that this kid is very unique otherwise they go haywire, and we have all sorts of examples. 

I know of a particular kid who comes from hon. Ochola’s constituency whom we watched grow. He got nine aggregates in nine subjects and when we asked UNEB what the nine for nine was in those days, he had 90’s and 90’s in everything he sat for. He came here to St Mary’s College Kisubi and got every A that you can think of. When he went to university for civil engineering, he was the best student that year. But as I talk now, that kid cannot be contained in any work environment. He thinks everybody is looking after him; the honourable me, particularly because I am a friend to their late father, wants to arrest him because Ikeep thinking there should be some intervention that will help this young man to settle down.

Let us get back to statistics first and foremost. Let us get back to specialised training. Of course, it is common knowledge that the majority of the people have disabilities that do not belong to that class that Dr Okuonzi talked about. We could start with those ones. That is our argument for this afternoon. Thank you.

5.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (ELDERLY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS) (Mr Sulaiman Madada): Mr Speaker and colleagues, I want to begin by thanking the committee for the issues raised and the overwhelming support that Members of Parliament have indicated on issues to do with persons with disability. 

I want to begin by saying that there is a lot that has been done. However, in taking this measurement, you need to look at the global analysis and scan the environment before you talk about Uganda. I want to let you know, for example, that the UN Convention on Persons with Disabilities is the latest entry. As you talk about countries, you need to look at the UN convention. It was adopted in 2006 and we ratified it in 2008. 

Secondly, when you look at the millennium development goals, which are a global concern, issues of disability - I am answering the query on 30 percent for women and no disability –have not been part of the millennium development goals. However, I am glad to report that during the UN conference that has just concluded, in the 2015 post millennium development goals, issues of disability will be part of the millennium development goals. So as you talk about Uganda, you need to look at also the global concerns. This has been part of the limitation. You may have a law but you also need to look at the funders/donors putting a lot of emphasis on issues to do with disability. 

All that said, the recommendations made herein are very good. I just want to clarify on a few things. One may say that Government is not doing a lot but we are here to account for what Government is doing so far on issues to do with disability. 

You have mentioned a number of legislations. We have a national policy on disability in Uganda for 2006 and part of what the committee has recommended has been included in the new amendment of the PWD Act, 2014 that is under print. Under that law, we are saying under clause 66 that Government will ensure that there is equipment and materials for PWDs in all schools. That is provided for in the new arrangement. 

What was the limitation of the previous law? You remember that law came as a Private Member’s Bill and when we tried to implement it, there was a legal problem. Most of the issues that were raised in that law were mainly policy issues that could not be implemented. So we went in to amend the entire law to bring a law that we could implement. I pray before you that when this law comes, we shall need your support. However, we have provided for most of these issues that have been raised. 

Secondly, my brother talked about what is provided for under the Income Tax (Amendment) Act, 2010. Under that law, government has provided that if five percent of your employees are persons with disability, you will have a tax waiver of two percent. There are results here. I am in this sector and I know that people have started employing PWDs; one of such institutions is Standard Chartered Bank. You can go and find out about this. They are now looking for a tax waiver because they employ PWDs. So, there are positive indications that these things are happening. 

There are issues of attitude, not only in Cabinet but in the entire community, right from the families which are recognised to even Members of Parliament and policy makers. Some of them are not positive about issues of disability. When you talk about issues of disability and argue out your case, they think that you are wasting money. As we talk about attitude change, we need to look at the entire structure of the society. You should not blame only Cabinet but look at the mothers, the schools, some Members of Parliament – when you come around, they say, “You are wasting time; you do not need to be there”. 

In terms of institutional arrangement, I think the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is properly mandated. If you study the mandate of that ministry, it covers equity, social protection and social cohesion. Under social cohesion and equity, we are talking about giving affirmative action to the marginalised groups by putting in place what is provided for under Article 32 of the Constitution. Article 35 of the Constitution is about the rights of persons with disability and their dignity - The state and society shall ensure all measures for full mental and potential –(Interjections)– This is what I am explaining; please, let me explain. 

I said that some of the programmes we have put in place address this. Since 2010, Government has provided in its budget Shs 3 billion as special grants to persons with disability. This is a new innovation; it was not there before. These grants are meant to create employment opportunities for those who are engaged in income generating activities –(Interruption)

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you for giving way, honourable minister. For how many beneficiaries is the Shs 3 billion?

MR MUKITALE: Thank you for giving way. Amidst this debate, I had to come in to inquire from you if you have the costing. I would like to find out if you know how much it will take to mainstream the special needs requirements at all the levels of education you are talking about. 

I know for a fact, from one of my studies in social services for special needs, that it is very expensive to provide for special needs. For countries which do not have money, the best way to go is to have these institutions where we can put our people. However, we would have the problem of having them excluded from their families and taken to institutions because you do not expect every primary school and secondary school to have this component. The advantage of having institutions is that you have all this equipment in one area and they get all the attention they need. However, it is quite expensive for a country at our level. So, I thought you would bring that out. 

MR TANNA: Honourable minister, I am glad that you enumerated the sections of the Constitution where you derive your mandate from. However, I think you will agree with me that there are several buildings that are coming up within Kampala and other cities that do not have access. What is the ministry doing within that so-called mandate that you have broadly elaborated to enforce access for persons with disabilities to these buildings?

Secondly, honourable minister, I am glad that you mentioned in your opening remarks that you are binging a law to this Parliament. I would like you to give us a commitment on the Floor; within what timeframe are you going to present the first draft to this Parliament? Give us a commitment so that many of the concerns of these Members could be saved until you bring that law, if it is within the near future. 

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, honourable minister. My concern is that the response you seem to be giving to us is actually the obvious. We would not be having this petition if it was a matter of law, policy and paperwork. It is about your inability to transform the principles that are even in the present laws, their inadequacies notwithstanding. It is the fact that your ministry is not visible. When where your people last in those schools? We have a school like Madera School for the Blind, Ngora School for the Deaf; it is as if there is no Government. It is as if these children belong to donors. 

So honourable minister, the case you should be making to this House, in my view, should be the case for money, not even the case for a law. For every law that you have brought to this House, you came with a certificate of financial implications and then you made us believe that you are able to deliver based on that law. So, for you to come here and be an apologist for laws I think is bad for us. Why don’t you tell us why buildings are still coming up without ramps? The law is there, the ministry is there and you have the people, what is the problem?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, only one Member can stand in the House at any one time. I saw you standing when the honourable member was making her contribution. 

MR SEMPIJJA: Thank you, honourable minister. Mr Speaker, to me the minister has got a lot of support from this Parliament, unlike what he is saying. I am very sure that even with the current laws that we have on disability, if you had taken advantage of them a lot would be done. 

One of the points is what he mentioned and the other one is about using your powers to gazette the schools, communities and other organisations like some local governments have done. In Masaka, you know what we did; I was with you. Up to now, the certificates – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that still a point of clarification or are you making a substantial contribution? 

MR SEMPIJJA: He knows; he will clarify on that. 

MR MADADA: Thank you, honourable colleagues. Somebody has asked what we are doing about accessibility standards. In 2012/2013, you passed a law here, the Building Control Act. Under that Act, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and UNAPD developed what we callaccessibility standards. They will be part of the regulations of that Act. It is something new. As I explained in the beginning, the comprehensive law that we have could not be operationalised because of inadequacies and we could not develop regulations. That is why we shall bring in a new law that will be enforced. 

In terms of the budget –(Interjections)– Yes, the Member asked when we are bringing this law to Parliament. It is being printed. When it comes from the printer, it will be brought here. Cabinet has already approved the Bill and it will come here. 

In terms of the programmes, -because after the law you need to have programmes - we have what we call community based rehabilitation. It is limited; it started in three districts and we are now operating in 22 districts. Under community based rehabilitation, we encourage community inclusion of persons with disability. I want to tell you that when you go to the local government, people have started electing persons with disability and not specifically under the slot for persons with disability. That is a change of attitude. The speaker in Kayunga is a blind man and that would not have been heard of before. A blind man being a speaker of a local government is an indication that the attitude of people is changing. 

I want to let you know that recently, Uganda was voted as one of the innovative countries on accessibility after what we did. These are indications that the world over, we are being accepted and recognised for what we are doing. When we started the social assistance grants empowerment, 40 per cent of the beneficiaries are families with persons with disability. So, with our meagre resources, we are trying to reach many areas.

Currently, we work with partners. We do not have a lot of money so we work with partners, civil society organisations and the private sector. I want to appeal to you; I mentioned some time back that we are starting a talent search. Somebody was talking about a blind person. We are engaged with Power Studios to get persons with disability identified in the country so as to promote their music. We are starting with eastern Uganda next month and we will be moving out, but we want people who can help us. We are doing this because we want to support these groups. With our meagre resources, we are trying to get partners to ensure that persons with disability are part of it.

Last week, I was discussing with Starkey Foundation. This is a world foundation on hearing empowerment, which supplies hearing aids to persons with disability. They have been working in Northern Uganda only but we have agreed to sign a memorandum of understanding with the Government of Uganda to ensure that they reach every part of the country. So, there are efforts to ensure that persons with disability are given affirmative action.

In education, the University and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2002 provides that any person with disability is given an extra 1.5 points, and that affirmative action has brought in many graduates. We are now carrying out research to find out how many people are getting there.

You also need to know that we are carrying out a lot of preventive measures, which include heavy investment in immunisation, which should stop some of these disabilities from occurring. Colleagues, you have talked about education. I will take this concern to my colleagues. We think that your contribution has been very wonderful. We want to appeal to you that when it comes to budgetary allocations, please support us strongly. We are not asleep; we are strong and awake and we need your support. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Madam Chairperson, would you like to restate your prayer and we take a decision? 

5.28
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Margaret Komuhangi): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I must thank Parliament for the support you have given us as a committee. We are grateful and the report is richer than when it first came. However, I am a bit disappointed because the minister is only talking about policy issues, which policies and laws are not enforced. If they were, we would not be raising these pertinent issues. 

These issues are so intricate and I will give you an example. We went to Hornby High School, which is a very organised school. It is a regional inclusive school that is supposed to offer special needs education to the entire region. There are 26 children who are visually impaired, who have hearing impairments and one girl on a wheel chair. This school has no ramps and no toilets. This girl is assisted by able-bodied children to go to the toilet. If they did not have that will, this girl would not be able to do so.

These are critical issues for the ministry to address. The teacher hon. Baba Diri talked about is a retired teacher who has cancer but who has refused to go because he must assist these children. It is so strenuous. The teacher has to prepare the lessons for these children who cannot see or hear. He has to prepare their lesson plans daily and mark them. The work is so tedious, and this is one person teaching all the subjects for the entire school. These children cannot do mathematics because this gentleman is not a mathematics teacher. They are very brilliant, they perform very well but they are pushed to second grade because they cannot do mathematics. Who is supposed to do this?

We went to Ruti Rehabilitation Centre. There are disabled children who are supposed to be rehabilitated and given vocational skills. They are supposed to be taught how to make shoes and to do tailoring, catering and others but the school is in bad shape. There are no lights or sewing machines; all the seven are not working. The raw materials for making the shoes are not there. The management of that school, which is supposed to rehabilitate disabled children, needs rehabilitation itself. 

As a committee, when we make these findings we expect the concerned sectors to be responsible and take up these recommendations seriously. Now the Minister of Education is not here to give responses, the Ministry of Health has not given responses and yet there are critical issues we have raised as a committee. We take off our time to go and dig for this information and it just goes to waste. I want to request that these sectors respond to each recommendation and give us a plan on how they are going to implement this. We are not going to listen to affirmative action that started a long time ago and that is never given.

Mr Speaker, disability is crosscutting and identifying disability is a big challenge. The parents themselves cannot identify visual impairment for a long time. The child will be taken as a slow learner when he has a visual difficulty. Who is supposed to do this for all the schools? Is it Ministry of Health, Ministry of Education or Ministry of Gender? Who is supposed to do this, because these children have a right to education?

Rt Hon. Speaker, on accessibility, all these schools have no learning instructional materials. They were produced at Kyambogo University and it was shut down, like we reported. So, where do we produce braille? Where do we get the cane stick? Where these blind children are supposed to be moving with a cane stick, they cannot move or they are led by fellow students. We raise these issues because they are very pertinent. 

He has talked about the Building Control Act; what has it changed? The bills of quantities leave the Ministry of Education and the head teachers with no control; they cannot change anything. The contractors come to start and move on without putting ramps and without providing for the special needs children.

I feel that there is a lot to be done. I am not satisfied by the minister’s response on each and every recommendation the committee has raised. My prayer, therefore, is that the sectors that are responsible come back to Parliament and give us a report on these recommendations one by one. I thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson, for that very passionate conclusion and prayer for the intervention of this House. 

Honourable members, the instructions from the committee and their requests are clear. They have made very clear findings and recommendations. The responses from the ministers, particularly the one responsible for gender, have been in the form you have heard - Constitution, laws, policies. Certainly, there are some gaps that we need to fill. So, for us to move forward with this, I think that we need to adopt the recommendations of the committee and then ask the Clerk to communicate these recommendations - extract them for the sectors responsible and then they come back to the House and make their presentation from here. (Applause)

Honourable members, we will adopt this. I will put the question for the adoption of what has been recommended here. The Clerk’s office will then extract the recommendations and forward them to the Ministry of Health, Ministry of Education and to my colleague, the Minister for Gender, Labour and Social Development, specifically the sector of disability. So, they can then come back to the House within a timeframe of – We are going on recess in 15 days and when we come back, there will be complicated debates on issues of the Budget and State of the Nation Address and things like these; so, what timeframe would we ask for this? What timeframe? 

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you so much, Rt Hon. Speaker. Considering the importance of the matters raised in the report, and now that we are considering the Budget Framework Paper, I thought that this this should be the time - within the 15 days - for Government to look at these proposals and recommendations. This is also because some of them have monetary implications. So, by the time we consider the Budget report, they should have reported to Parliament so that action can be taken.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, can we have these reports after five sittings of Parliament? I will now put the question, as I have already summarised. The motion is for the adoption of the report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on a petition by children with disabilities. I now put the question that the report and the recommendations therein be adopted by the House.

(Question out and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I have directed, the Clerk shall extract the specific recommendations from this and forward them to the responsible sectors and they will respond to us after five sittings of the House. Thank you. 

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS ON A PETITION BY STUDENTS OF THE UGANDA ALLIED HEALTH AND MANAGEMENT SCIENCES INSTITUTION, MULAGO, ON THE ALLEGED MISMANAGMENT OF THE INSTITUTION AND UNFAIR TREATMENT OF STUDENTS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let me again first start by thanking the chairperson of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development for very comprehensive coverage. (Applause) Yes, chairperson for education?

4.39
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mr Jacob Opolot): The Committee on Education and Sports received a petition -   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will give you 15 minutes to present. Please, present a summary of this.      

MR OPOLOT: I thank you, Mr Speaker. The Committee on Education and Sports received a petition from Uganda Allied Health Management Sciences Institution students at Mulago on the –

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Speaker, I know you told us that we should not be asking for guidance, but this report is on health and I am sure that it is an important report but there is no minister for health in the House –(Interjections)– even the Minister for Education is not here. It is important because talking to ourselves is not very useful, Rt Hon. Speaker. It is not.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I keep saying, this is a petition to this House and this House should take a decision on it. This House should take a decision on it because this House was petitioned and not the minister. The petition was not referred to the minister but to this House to discuss the findings of its own committee and take a decision, minister or no minister. We then communicate whatever has been decided by this House on this petition to the minister for action. So, I do not think that the absence of a minister should stop the House from processing concerns of these citizens because it is the decision of the House. Parliament has been petitioned and Parliament has got to do something.

MR WADRI: Rt Hon. Speaker, I have heard and taken into account your guidance that you have given. I am not here in any way to reverse what you have said –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is exactly what you have just started doing.

MR WADRI: No, I am not here in any way to do that, but I want to say that much as I agree with what you just ruled on –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what I said.

MR WADRI: Yes, you forecast and foresaw, Rt Hon. Speaker. You see, the Leader of the Opposition has made an appeal that we should not be talking to ourselves. Just a while ago, we watched hon. Madada, the Minister of State for Disability, labouring to explain what his sector does. Of course, he could not make it any further that is why we said we are going to ask him to come back, but at least he has had the benefit of hearing our sentiments. As we pronounced ourselves on the recommendations, he was here as a witness to the recommendations that we have adopted. 

So, when the ministers for education – I think they are around four or five –(Interjections)– They are four. When they are not here, it would be a double job on our part. Yes, we are going to agree on the recommendations as we are about to go into action, but at the end of the day, these four ministers should have been here to give us information and probably correct some of the information so that maybe we do not go with those recommendations that we are about to go with. If really they had tangible recommendations, they would keep us informed and help us take different decisions but they are not here. However, since it is your wise ruling that we go ahead, we shall subject ourselves to double work - listen to the report and we debate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know that some of the prayers in this particular petition, if you have gone through it, could actually be discussed. There is a prayer to reconnect electricity to the affected buildings, for example; would we need the minister to be here in order for the chairperson to tell us whether the electricity has been connected? This petition was from way back in 2012; has electricity since been reconnected or not? That is why I am saying that some of the issues raised by this petition could be discussed. However, if it is - I know when Members begin raising issues like this – (Interjections)– No. 7 does not require a minister? 

Honourable members, if we are to wait for the front bench on the Government side to be full before we transact any business, it will take us years to complete what is on the Order Paper. I sit in this chair and I have seen. Many times if we are to wait for ministers, we will not proceed. On what point does the Member for Buliisa rise?

MR MUKITALE: Procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure.

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I share your disappointment in the lack of attendance by the frontbench when we are discussing serious business –(Interjections)– and the disappointment of the Leader of the Opposition. 

Could I possibly plead that we allow the chairperson to present the report. Ideally, we would expect the Chief Whip to be in action now alerting the ministers to be around and if they are not here by then, we could consider other business.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Rt Hon. Speaker, let me stand by your advice and say that just before this topic came up, the Speaker ruled that those ministers that were not here be given five sittings and after that, they should come here and report. I think that previous ruling caters very well for what we are doing here. We cannot stop Parliament because some of the ministers are not here. So, Mr Speaker, let us go by your ruling and discuss this issue; whatever explanation is needed by this Parliament will be requested for by the Speaker. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we just allow the chairperson to present the report and possibly we can defer the debate? Certainly, Leader of Government Business, please do something to facilitate the business of this House when we resume tomorrow. Chairperson, you have 10 minutes. 

MR OPOLOT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to believe that the Leader of Government Business has got the instructions and we shall have the ministers here. 

Mr Speaker, as I said, the Committee on Education received a petition from the students of Uganda Allied Health and Management Science Institute, Mulago on the alleged mismanagement of the institution and unfair treatment of the students. This petition was presented before this House by hon. William Nzoghu, the Member of Parliament for Busongora North. 

Mr Speaker, I see many of my honourable colleagues looking at the document on their iPads, so I will refer them to 1.0, the introduction. You can read the prayers in the petition and later, we shall be responding to each prayer. I do not, therefore, need to read all the 14 items. 

On receipt of this petition, the committee undertook first of all to hold meetings. We had meetings with a representative of the petitioners, the governing council and administration of the institution and the Minister of Education and Sports. We also had an on-spot visit to the institution in Mulago. 

As a background to the petition, Mr Speaker, the petitioners who were students of the Uganda Allied Health and Management Sciences, Mulago informed the committee that they opted for a sit-down strike on 19th and 20 November 2012 to express their dissatisfaction over a number of issues affecting them at the institution, citing among others: lack of electricity in some hostels, poor diet, congestion in hostels, and a poorly stocked library and computer laboratory. This eventually led to the closure of the institution on 20 November 2012.

Specific Prayers, Committee Findings, Observations and Recommendations 

1. 	Prayer: Observe students’ constitutional rights and stop intimidation of students’ leadership and the entire student body and cause the Dean of Students, Mr Kaziba Buyinza Benon, to resign from service for the good of students’ welfare since he is acting as the dean of administration instead of helping out students in their struggle to have their concerns addressed. 

Findings

The findings herein are that the committee could not establish the allegations against the character of the Dean of Students and the Principal. It was, however, observed that the Dean of Students was not properly playing his role as he should. The committee observed that it was not Parliament’s duty to cause the resignation of the Dean of Students as it was not the appointing authority. 

The committee recommends as follows:
i) 	Proper channels of communication be established between the students and the administration. This would help to address the students’ grievances instead of resorting to hostile means.

ii) 	The office of the Dean of Students should effectively perform its function of taking care of the students’ welfare. 

iii) 	The Ministry of Education and Sports should investigate this matter. 

2. 	Prayer: Return Premier Hostel to the institute

Findings

The committee learnt that Premier Hostel was developed by the governing council with the knowledge of the Ministry of Education and Sports as an income-generating project to supplement the institution’s budget. The committee also learnt that the students pay Shs 25,000 as development fee per semester. 

During their on-spot site visit to the institution, the committee observed that apart from one of the boys’ hostels that was in urgent need of renovation, the hostels were generally in good condition with a new storied hostel block for the boys, spacious enough and with running water. Since there was a time interval between the time the petition was presented to Parliament and the committee visit, the hostels may have been renovated at that time. The committee also observed that there were no leakages in the water system nor broken windows or blockages. 

The committee recommends as follows:
i) 	The administration should prioritize renovation of the boys’ hostel before it becomes hazardous to the students.
ii) 	The institution should devise ways of reducing congestion that was observed in the hostels.

3. 	Prayer: Mandate the Uganda Allied Health Examination Board (UAHEB) to operate independently as an examination board and terminate Dr Rwandembo’s tenure as the executive director of the examinations board. 

Findings

The committee learnt that examination fees are determined by the board and that retakes attract Shs 30,000 per paper. The committee found no evidence that the board does not operate independently. Further, no conflict of interest was noted by Dr Rwandembo who was the principal serving as the executive director of UAHEB. 

It was observed that the examinations board comprised of different calibre of people representing different sectors. These include a representative from the Catholics, Muslims, the Anglican Medical Bureau, tutors, UNEB, the Health Service Commission, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Education, the Allied Health Professionals Council, an outstanding allied health professional, etc. These board members nominate about three people whose names are forwarded to the Ministry of Education and Sports, who select the most suitable person to become the board chairperson. 

The committee also found no evidence to the effect that students received artificial retakes as it was alleged. 

The committee wishes to point out that it is not within Parliament’s mandate to terminate appointment of government employees. 

The committee recommends as follows:
i) 	Students should always seek for redress through the established channels of handling grievances. 
ii) 	The students’ body and the institution administration should explore more channels of communication. This will create transparency and trust, thereby helping to address the hostility that may result from miscommunication. 

4. 	Prayer: Restock the institution’s library with the required basic instructional materials plus computers connected to the internet.

Findings

The committee learnt that students pay Shs 70,000 as library fee and not Shs 90,000, which was paid only once upon admission to the institution. The committee also learnt that although medical books are very expensive, the administration had managed to procure some books, connect the few available computers to the internet and subscribe to e-journals and e-books that all students can access. However, the committee noted that the library was poorly stocked. 

The committee recommends that:
i) 	The institution should put the money paid as library fee by the students to its right use. This will help to restock the library. 

ii) 	The institution should procure more computers to enable e-learning. This will enable students easily access the required information.

5. Prayer: Allow pharmacy students attain clinical practice like other departments. 

Findings

The committee was informed by the institution leadership that pharmacy students are always enabled to go for pharmacy practice as prescribed in the curriculum by the principal tutor in charge of the programme. 

The committee observed as follows:
i) 	Most institutions do not have training facilities at their campuses. This hinders students from attaining the requisite training. It was noted that since the health training institutions were transferred from the Ministry of Health to the Ministry of Education, they have suffered immense challenges including, among others, isolation of the institutions by the regional hospitals.

ii) 	There was lack of supervision by the parent ministry, that is Ministry of Education and Sports, which was one of the major causes of most problems encountered in the institution. It was noted that health training institutions were especially being neglected. 

The committee recommends as follows: 
i) 	There should be a review of the curriculum to provide for more practical lessons.

ii) 	The policy should be reviewed to revert these institutions to the Ministry of Health for quality assurance and proper supervision. These have been mentioned before in other reports.

6. 	Prayer: Provide transport to students of medical entomology and parasitology in order to facilitate their movements to and from their school located at Buganda road, which is the vector control division. 

The committee learnt that the institution put in its request to Government for funds to purchase a bus for purposes of students’ transportation but the request had not yet been honoured. 

Observations

The committee found that this was not a viable prayer because in other institutions students walk even longer distances. 

Further, the committee supports the plan to procure a vehicle for the institution. The vehicle can be used for several other transport needs and not necessarily to transport the students to the vector control division because the distance is walkable.

7. 	Prayer: Halt discontinuation or suspension of students who participated in the demonstration since the cause of the demonstration was genuine. 

Findings 

The committee learnt that: 
i) 	The governing council conducted investigations into the causes of the strike and identified 39 students who participated in the strike. The students were then summoned to appear before the governing council to give their defence, of which only 32 appeared and the rest declined. Out of the 32 students, some were pardoned while others were given punishments ranging from writing an apology, suspension for a semester or entire year. 

ii) 	The guild leadership had instigated the strike after UMEME had cut off power due to non-payment to one of the boys’ hostels and the administration had closed off one of the boys’ hostels for renovation. 

iii) 	The hostel was later re opened in its dilapidated state and power connected using a generator and solar system. 

iv)	The Ministry of Education and Sports was holding negotiations with UMEME to reconnect power to the affected buildings. 

The committee observed as follows:  
i) 	Though students are represented on the governing council, there seemed to be a communication gap between the students’ bodies and the administration.

ii) 	Though the causes of the strikes were genuine, it condemns the approach used by the students to solve the problems. Students should desist from getting very violent and destructive as means to seek redress.

iii) 	At the time of the committee investigations, disciplinary procedures were going on for 32 students.

iv) 	The actions by the students are punishable and the refusal by seven students to appear before the disciplinary committee was a sign of indiscipline. 

Recommendation

The committee recommends that students should always seek dialogue and peaceful means of addressing their grievances instead of resorting to violence.

8. 	Prayer: Reconnect electricity to the affected buildings. 

The committee recommends as follows: 
i) 	The Ministry of Education and Sports provides funds to the institution to pay off its power debt and expeditiously spearhead reconnection of power to the institution. This follows the promise by the Minister of Education to secure funds to contribute to paying the outstanding power bill.

ii) 	The Ministry of Education and Sports should consider providing solar power to all institutions as an alternative to hydropower, which is very costly.

9. 	Prayer: Cause the principal, Dr Rwandembo Wilson, to step aside and pave way for investigations of abuse of office. 

The committee could not establish this allegation, however it took note of the aloof character of Dr Rwandembo Wilson when he appeared before the committee. 

The committee recommends that: 
i) 	The Ministry of Education and sports should employ only persons who live up to the specified task.
ii) 	The Ministry of Education and Sports should investigate this matter and if Dr Rwandembo Wilson is found culpable, he should be held accountable.

10. Prayer: Expeditiously release academic transcripts of former students of medical laboratory technology that completed their training in 2008 and 2009. 

The committee learnt that the function of issuing academic transcripts was a preserve of Makerere University. The committee however observed that it is the role of the institution to ensure that transcripts are processed and issued to the students in time. 

The committee recommends that the administration fast-tracks the process of acquisition and issuance of academic transcripts from Makerere University to the affected students.

11. 	Prayer: Cause the administration to compensate students’ money spent on transport back home since closure was abrupt, untimely and unlawful without consent from the governing council, and refund students’ money (Shs 50,000) claimed for damages since there were damages caused. 

The committee observed that the actions by the students were uncalled for since the reasons identified as the main causes of the strike could have been solved through dialogue between the student leaders and the administration. The committee therefore does not agree with this prayer.

12. 	Prayer: Provide a varied diet. 
The committee was informed that food served at the institution included maize meal, rice, matooke, sweet potatoes, Irish potatoes, beans, peas, meat, chicken and eggs. The committee therefore recommends that the institution should maintain a good diet within its means. 

13. 	Prayer: Reinstate the institution’s former name. The committee was informed that the administration had changed the name of the institution from Mulago Paramedical School to Uganda Institute of Allied Health and Management Sciences, Mulago. 

The committee was also informed that this was done unconstitutionally without an Act of Parliament. This is a Government public institution not a private institution. The committee, however, learnt that the administration through the Ministry of Education and Sports had filed for a change of name from Mulago School of Paramedics to the Uganda Allied Health and Management Sciences and this was accepted. 

The committee further learnt that the rationale behind the change of name was due to the fact that the former name was limiting. This is because the institution was no longer training paramedics only but had grown to include training in various health sciences. 

The committee observes that the institution’s change of name did not require an Act of Parliament and neither was it illegal nor unconstitutional. 

The committee recommends that sensitisation of the relevant stakeholders should always be carried out before any implementation. This will bring everybody on board and thereby minimise misconceptions.

14. 	Prayer: Refund of tuition fees expended. 

The committee was informed that seven students, the guild leaders inclusive, had spent all their tuition in an attempt to save the rest of the students to make justice prevail through media conferences on various television and radio programmes, transportation and communication, documentations, renting outside the school in order to keep around while awaiting dialogue as had been promised by the administration during the closure time, feeding themselves and medical expenses.

The committee, however, learnt that at the time of the strike, 19th  and 20th November 2012 and the subsequent closure of the institution, most of the guild leadership had not yet registered for the semester of the academic year 2012/2013 which had ended on 30th September though an extension was given. This meant that their actions were not sanctioned by the students since it is upon registration that one is recognised as a bona fide student of an institution.

The committee observed that impacting upon the governing council or administration to refund tuition fees expended by students is not within Parliament’s mandate. Even if it were, this kind of refund would not be justifiable. The committee disagrees with the prayer.

General Observations

The committee observes that:
i) 	There was lack of supervision of the health training institutions by the Ministry of Education and Sports. 

ii) 	Most institutions were incurring outstanding electricity bills. This was as a result of hydro power becoming too expensive to be afforded by an ordinary institution.

In conclusion, the committee notes that the lack of supervision by the parent ministry was and is a major cause of most problems encountered in the various institutions. It was noted that the health training institutions were especially being neglected.

Further, the committee noted that most problems were caused by the policy shift in the management of health training institutions, by moving the institutions from the Ministry of Health to the Ministry of Education and Sports.

Furthermore, lack of effective communication between the student leadership and the institute administration is another cause of most of the underlying problems and counter accusations.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee, therefore, begs that the House adopts the report of the committee and that the concerned sectors implement the recommendations on a petition by the students of the Uganda Allied Health and Management Science Institute, Mulago.

I beg to lay on the Table the documents relating to the proceedings of the committee meetings. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are those the minutes and some other documents?

MR OPOLOT: Yes, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: let the records capture the minutes and the attachments.

MR OPOLOT: With that, Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the report of the committee on this petition. As I said at the beginning, some of the issues might have been overtaken by events but some of the issues are still outstanding. I wonder how we should proceed; maybe we should stop at this time and defer debate or should we conclude this matter? Should we defer debate?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, this House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 O’clock.

(The House rose at 6.12 p.m. and adjourned until 30 April 2014 at 2.00 p.m.) 

