PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTSECOND SESSION - THIRD MEETINGTUESDAY , 4 APRIL 2023PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA7809Tuesday, 4 April 2023be safe of blood, if it collects 1 per cent of its total population. In other words, for Uganda, with a population of 45.7 million, plus the population of refugees, is expected to collect 473,000 units of blood.However, this financial year, the resources allocated for collecting blood are for only 300,000 units. It is less by about 273,000 units, according to the WHO standards. When we reviewed the half-year performance, the target was 150,000 units, but Uganda Blood Transfusion Services (UBTS) collected 170,000 units of blood and used the resources for the subsequent quarters. Now, to cover the deficit of around 2,700 units, the Government had to look for resources. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prayers?DR RUYONGA: My prayer is that the Government should allocate more resources to UBTS to the tune of around Shs 9 billion so that it collects more blood. Mr Speaker, in May, there will be no supplies for collecting blood from people and we shall end up having stock outs in blood yet you cannot substitute blood with water. We need those funds so that we are able to collect more blood to save the lives of our people. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable Minister of Health.IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentSECOND SESSION - 22ND SITTING - THIRD MEETINGParliament met at 2.13 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, we are excited to welcome back our two colleagues, Hon. Allan Ssewanyana and Hon. Ssegirinya Muhammad. (Applause) We are happy to see our colleagues being able to join us in deliberations in this House.Colleagues, I do not want to waste time. You can see we have a very ambitious Order Paper. Therefore, I want us to go straight to business, but I will first allow a few matters of national importance, starting with Hon. Ruyonga Joseph. 2.16DR JOSEPH RUYONGA (NRM, Hoima West Division, Hoima City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the stock out supplies used for collecting blood from the National Medical Stores (NMS).According to the World Health Organisation (WHO) guidelines, a country is considered to 7810 MINISTERIAL STATEMENT COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR2.18THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Ms Margaret Muhanga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the honourable member for the question.Mr Speaker, we are in dire need of blood in our blood bank. We also have regional blood banks. We sometimes drum up support for people to come and donate, but what they donate sometimes is not enough. Remember, we have people above 50, who cannot donate blood and those with comorbidities. We are scaling up our collection and I will bring a full report of how we are scaling up this collection of blood to have our blood bank equipped with enough blood for everybody. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, the prayer was very clear. It was about allocating more money and we are in the budgeting process. Chairperson of the Committee on Health, take note of that. The Chairperson of the Committee on Budget and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development are also here; it is not a matter we need to open up to have a much wider discussion when the prayer was clear –(Members rose_) No, colleagues. We are always guided by the prayers. Do you want to amend someone’s prayers?2.19MR JOHN MAGOLO (NRM, Bungokho County North Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On 9 February 2023, the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives issued a communication to all Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs) to forward the Parish Development Model (PDM) resolutions of bank signatories to the Registrar of Cooperative Societies at the ministry, for certification. This communication disempowers and renders the work of commercial officers at the district redundant. Besides, this form of bureaucracy is self-defeating as it creates unnecessary delays for the beneficiaries to access the PDM funds on time. We are aware that most of these beneficiaries are farmers and their activities are tied to the farming season. PrayersOne, I pray that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives withdraws that communication as it has created unnecessary delays in the disbursement of the PDM funds to the beneficiaries.Secondly, the lead agency of the PDM should verify information that is issued about the PDM funds to ensure coordination. I beg to submit. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Trade minister?2.20THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Hon. Faith Magolo, for the point you have raised. Colleagues, for SACCOs to function very well, they must be registered by the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. So, the registration is okay and necessary. However, we take note that we should not use it to delay the release of funds to the SACCOs under the PDM. We will ensure that we do not stand in the way of the release of funds so that the beneficiaries, who have waited for so long, can start accessing. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, we shall expound this matter when handling the Parish Development Model, which I want to ensure we handle today.2.21MR GABRIEL OKUMU (NRM, Okoro County, Zombo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance about a highway robbery, which occurred along Paidha-Nebbi Road at a place called Kaya on 24 March 2023.7811THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 4 APRIL 2023Grace Kijjambu, a driver of a vehicle registration number UBB 949L was allegedly robbed of Shs 30 million after shooting his car tires. The robbers trailed his car with a motorcycle. They put him at gunpoint, took the money, and rode away swiftly.Our prayersOne, since the business community in Paidha is anxious, we request Government, through the Ministry of Internal Affairs, to give assurance to the business community about the security of the area. Secondly, since Paidha is situated at the border of Congo and Uganda, we request a report on the border security status. Otherwise, this is not the only incident that has occurred in the recent past. I submit, Mr Speaker, and I thank you for the opportunity. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. On this matter, I will guide the Minister of Internal Affairs to visit Paidha. It is very important to meet the community and reassure them. This is not a matter where we need to come back and bring another statement on the Floor. We clog our Order Paper and that is why you find we have very many issues that are still pending for long. This is a matter where we need to deal with the community. So, Government Chief Whip, link up with the minister; he goes to the community together with the Member of Parliament and other leaders of the area, and he reassures them so that the people feel safe in that area. 2.24MR XA VIER KYOOMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I am rising on a matter of national importance regarding the road in my constituency and in Ibanda District, that stretches from Bisheshe, Rwenkobwa, Nyansiimbu, Kasinga, Nyamarebe-Rushango  and Kamwenge. This road actually connects Ibanda to the rest of the country as well as other districts like Kamwenge and Kitagwenda. The contractor started work on this road in early 2021. One part of the road was worked on and the other part was abandoned with open trenches, culverts were left just on the road surface and piled heaps of murram. Now, because of the heavy rains, it has become totally impassable because all the motorists and road users are using one part of the road. Trucks are stuck and they cannot move any farther and all the economic activities have been negatively impacted on.My prayers are two:1. To request the Minister of Works and Transport to urgently attend to this road. I have really put it to his attention and that of the Executive Director, Uganda National Roads Authority and nothing has been done. 2. To identify this contractor and other similar contractors who breach their contracts with an aim of blacklisting them according to the provisions of the PPDA law. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government?2.26THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Mr Speaker, we are aware of the abandoned work that is around the country. We are trying our best - even today, it was one of our items on the agenda - to look at the abandoned work. I am going to call the Ministry of Works and Transport to get in touch with the honourable Member of Parliament together with my ministry to see how that issue can be rectified. I thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. - Let us trust the word of the Deputy Prime Minister. Colleagues, in the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation from Kasilo Town Council, Serere District. They are represented 7812 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTby Hon. Elijah Okupa and Hon. Hellen Adoa. They have come to observe the proceedings of this House. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The delegation is led by Mr Odeke, the chairman of Kasilo Town Council. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Also, in the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have students and teachers of Malcolm X Academy from Makindye Division, Kampala District. They are represented in Parliament by Hon. Allan Ssewanyana and Hon. Shamim Malende. They have come to observe the proceedings of this House. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) You can stand up so that colleagues join in welcoming you. Leader of the Opposition, do you have something to say?2.28THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join you to welcome our two colleagues, Hon. Allan Ssewanyana and Hon. Muhammad Ssegirinya, who happen to be from our side of the political divide, back to the House. (Applause) They have been a voice of the voiceless in their constituencies. For close to two years, their constituencies have actually missed out on that voice. I would also like to thank the wisdom they have exhibited in getting here and beating the Police Spokesperson, Mr Fred Enanga, at his own game, who was anticipating a procession and he had promised to clamp down on it. Mr Speaker, I hold this view given that this would be the best time for them to be accorded an opportunity to make their maiden speeches. I am still of that view that this would be a golden opportunity for them and their constituencies and now that some of their own are here to hear from them. I request, Mr Speaker Sir. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, we have very clear rules, especially when you make statements of personal explanation that are clearly provided for under our rules. The procedure is very clear that you have to link up with the Speaker and you are given substantive time on the Order Paper to make that statement.The honourable colleagues will get in touch with the Office of the Speaker because they have their full rights as honourable Members of Parliament, and we are all excited to have them back and we would want to see them speaking on the Floor. So, at the right time, it will be given. Hon. Silwany had an announcement to make regarding the Anglican Chaplaincy. I feel he can communicate it better than how I would have.2.31MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity you have given us. Mr Speaker, Members of Parliament - the Anglicans, Catholics, Muslims and all the other religions - tomorrow, we are going to host the Archbishop of Uganda, his Grace Kazimba Mugalu at Parliament. All honourable Members are invited. We shall be in the Conference Hall at 5.00 p.m. Please come and we rejoice in the love of the Lord. We shall be celebrating Easter Carols tomorrow as the Anglican Chaplaincy, and you are most welcome. Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Next item. - Hon. Okupa, do not access the microphone without my permission. Colleagues, I want that to be made very clear. As long as I am chairing, if you pick and switch on a microphone, please know that I cannot give you audience. So, help us with the correction.[The Deputy Speaker] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR7813THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 4 APRIL 2023MR OKUPA: Thank you. Mr Speaker, Hon. Silwany in his communication just said that the “Archbishop of Uganda”, but there is no “Archbishop of Uganda”; it is the Archbishop of the Church of Uganda. You cannot say, “Kabaka of Uganda”, but “Kabaka of Buganda”. (Laughter) That must be corrected.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you for the correction.STATEMENTS BY MINISTERS ONI) THE STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF THE SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS (SDGS) IN UGANDATHE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister?2.33THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): Mr Speaker, allow me to begin by laying on Table the following reports; 1. The Sustainable Development Goals progress report 2020/2021.2. The Roadmap for the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals in Uganda 2020/2021 – 2024/2025. 3. The V oluntary National Review Report on the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development Goals. 4. The Uganda Annual Sustainable Development Conference Report 2022, themed, “Building effective models to accelerate the Sustainable Development Goals in the post-COVID-19 era”. 5. The High-Level Political Forum 2022: A Synthesis of Key Highlights of the High-Level Political Forum 2022 Report. 6. Fast-tracking Uganda’s commitment to the 2030 Agenda: The National Secretariat Report. Mr Speaker, I am only going to present a summary because the reports are many and you have given me 10 minutes, for which I am grateful. Mr Speaker, the reports cover the achievements made, challenges and the way forward in the implementation of the new SDGs roadmap, which is aligned to the NRM Manifesto, National Development Plan (NDP) III, the other Government strategies and other international development commitments. This report, therefore, highlights the efforts made in the coordination, monitoring and reporting of SDGs, the SDGs roadmap, the first national SDGs conference, the high-level political forum and the SDGs report of the conference that took place in July 2022. In all of these key events and interventions, the reports point to the key observations and actions required to guide SDGs’ implementation. The SDGs were adopted by all United Nations member states in 2015. It was done as an annual call to action to end poverty, protect the planet and ensure that all the people enjoy peace and prosperity by 2030. Through the pledges of “Leave No One Behind” and “Serve the Farthest First”, countries committed to fast-tracking progress for these farthest people, who are left behind. The 17 SDGs, with a total of 169 targets and 232 indicators, recognise that action in one area affects outcomes in others and that development must balance social, economic and environmental sustainability. The SDGs are unique in that they cover issues that affect us all. They reaffirm our international commitment to ending poverty permanently everywhere. They involve us all to build a more sustainable, safer and more prosperous planet for all humanity. Uganda recognised the importance of SDGs’ contribution to the country’s social development and long-term development planning framework. Consequently, in 2016, the 7814 MINISTERIAL STATEMENT [Ms Lumumba]Government instituted a national coordination framework, under the leadership of the Office of the Prime Minister, which created an enabling environment for the State and non-State actors to achieve the implementation of SDGs. In Uganda, the SDGs are being implemented under the five-year national development plan, i.e., NDP II 2015/2016 – 2019/2020 and NDP III 2020/2021 – 2024/2025 and the long-term development agenda of Uganda Vision 2040. The Office of the Prime Minister and other key stakeholders believe that with only seven years remaining to the end of the 2030 Agenda, there is need for Parliament to be apprised on the SDGs progress and share Cabinet’s approved recommendations to accelerate the achievement of the SDGs. The objectives of this presentation are mainly to:i. Appraise Parliament on the progress of the implementation of the SDGs in Uganda.ii. Share the critical SDGs implementation challenges that have emerged during the implementation and coordination of SDGs, and;iii. Share Cabinet approved proposed measures to accelerate the attainment of SDGs targets within the framework of our national development plan, and Government’s Last Mile Strategy – the Parish Development Model. This paper and the issues raised therein have been developed during an analysis of trends and factors affecting SDGs implementations and stakeholders’ consultations. All these issues were further consulted on internally with the technical leadership and top management of the Office of the Prime Minister and all the MDAs of Government, the National Planning Authority, UBOS and the different ministries. We also did consultations with the United Nations country team, civil society organisations, SDGs Reference Group, the private sector, academia, the Interreligious Council of Uganda, and non-governmental organisations. During this reporting period, Uganda continues to register progress in SDGs implementation through;i. Development of the new roadmap for the implementation of the SDGs 2020/2021 – 2024/2025, which provides catalytic and strategic interventions for the acceleration of SDGs implementation. I have already laid the report on the Table. ii. Presentation of Uganda’s Second V oluntary National Review in 2020 aimed at sharing experiences, successes, challenges and lessons in order to accelerate the implementation of the 2030 Agenda. This process has informed the roll-out of V oluntary Local Reviews at local governments, which enables reviews of SDGs progress at sub-national levels. I have also attached the report to that effect. iii. The Government conducted an annual assessment on progress of SDGs and developed an annual SDGs Progress Report 2021. This report highlights progress, bottlenecks and recommendations for each goal, within the context of the National Development Plan III. I have laid it on the Table. iv. The Government has also initiated a nation-wide forum that brings together all stakeholders with an interest in the SDGs implementation process called “Uganda Annual Sustainable Development Goals Conference”. The first annual conference was held in June 2022, preceded by regional forums. This year, the Government will host the second annual Sustainable Development Goals conference in June and it will be preceded by regional meetings. I have also attached a report.What I want to report to you, Mr Speaker, is that we would go and make reports, as the 7815THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 4 APRIL 2023Executive, about the implementation of SDGs in this country, without involving Parliament and the Judiciary. However, in June 2022, we had consultations and discussions, where the Speaker of Parliament, the Rt Hon. Anita Among and the team, represented Parliament. The Chief Justice and the team were also part of the discussion. v.  Uganda participated in the High-Level Political Forum on Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) in New York, where the Government shared the experiences from the SDG Conference and key models and voluntary national reviews were presented. I have also attached the report that we presented in the UN. Mr Speaker, although Uganda has registered significant progress in the attainment of SDGs, there are concerns about the likely negative impact of COVID-19 on the progress realised so far. The effects of COVID-19 will live with us and we have to devise measures on how to live with the effects of COVID-19. There are also challenges related to limited financing of SDGs, data challenges, low levels of awareness of the local leaders to integrate SDGs within the local development initiatives and low levels of digitisation. The Office of the Prime Minister presented a Cabinet Memorandum on the status of SDGs implementation to the Cabinet meeting, which was held on 10 October 2022. Under Minute 359 CT (2020) 130, the Cabinet approved the following recommendations to accelerate the attainment of the SDG targets within our National Development Framework.1. The Ministry of Health to work with the Prime Minister and address the persistent malaria outbreaks in the country. 2. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to follow up with Uganda’s Ambassador to Abidjan on the pledge made by the Government of Abidjan to give a grant to the Government of Uganda to support programmes directly benefiting persons with disabilities because we had identified that this was part of the team, where we had not paid a lot of attention as Government. 3. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to fast-track the implementation of the Integrated National Financing Framework as a means of mobilising resources globally and nationally to support sustainable development.4. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to also revisit Uganda’s Domestic Resource Mobilisation Strategy and associated policies that take into consideration these emerging realities of underfunding the different SDGs. 5. Cabinet also approved that the Office of the Prime Minister, together with the Ministry of Information, Communications Technology and National Guidance, localise and popularise the Sustainable Development Goals. 6. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to create investment in agriculture to foster food security and stabilise food supply chains through policy initiatives to encourage value addition, support the central role played by e-commerce and expand the digital information infrastructure in the country. This will ensure that data remains supreme in our planning and improve the sector of agriculture, and also take advantage of being a food basket in the region and make sure that our neighbours are not left hungry since we can – if we do what we are supposed to do in terms of prioritising data as a supreme actor in terms of planning, it will help us to even reach out to the neighbours. 7. The Uganda Bureau of Statistics to continue to expand on the SDG indicators that have 7816 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTdata points in Uganda. The development of statistical plans by different entities should also be encouraged.8. The Ministry of Public Service and the Uganda Bureau of Statistics to reinstate the position of statisticians in the structures of Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) and local governments for effective and efficient delivery of the quality data required at both national and local government levels for SDGs and other Government programmes, most importantly the Parish Development Model. 9. The Ministry of Local Government to train local leaders to integrate the SDGs in the Parish Development Model implementation and all local development plans, including the new cities. 10. The Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation to strengthen the engagement and mobilisation of the public and private stakeholders with digital innovations and support them to scale up. 11. The Office of the Prime Minister, mostly the secretariat that falls under me, to conduct a comprehensive documentation to identify the people left behind – those at the risk of being left behind where they are found and in what areas of service delivery they have been left behind. 12. The SDG Secretariat to also take on the additional role especially to coordinate and follow up on the African Union Agenda 2063. This is because the 2030 Agenda and the African Union Agenda 2063 are both mutually reinforcing international and regional development strategies that support the national priorities of Uganda. 13. The Office of the Prime Minister to always present a progress report both to Cabinet and to Parliament about the status of the implementation of SDGs. 14. The Government of Uganda, coordinated by the Office of the Prime Minister and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, to always present Uganda’s voluntary national review report to the High-Level Political Forum in New York in the UN and also get ready to make a presentation for the High-Level Political Forum Report in New York 2024, where Uganda will be the hosting State. In conclusion, it is important to note that the successful implementation of Agenda 2030 requires an integrated approach, partnership and participation through inclusion and inclusive political processes and responses, effective and accountable institutions. It will require various stakeholders to identify solutions for planning, budgeting, implementation, monitoring progress towards achieving SDGs as well as tracking where and how funds are spent and assessing the impact of these initiatives on the lives of the people we lead especially key interest groups. Mr Speaker, let us all work together to make the earth a better place to live for all, leaving nobody behind, and serving the furthest first. For God and my country. I thank you. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Clerk, capture the whole statement on the Hansard, for purposes of reference in future because she has read the executive summary. The statement is very detailed. (The Statement is hereby attached.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, such a statement – the minister has made it very clear – is for information purposes. So, it is for us to sit down and read. It helps us when we are processing business in the House and tracking the progress being made on SDGs. I will allow five Members. Honourable minister, is there something you needed to add? [Ms Lumumba]7817THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 4 APRIL 2023MS LUMUMBA: Just one sentence, Mr Speaker. The reports I have laid on the Table - we have given every Member a hard copy and they are in their pigeonholes. I just wanted to communicate that. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I will start with Hon. Ruhunda, Hon. Timuzigu, Hon. Kirabo - Hon. Byakatonda, I will pick you on the next topic. Then I will pick Hon. Namugga. Leader of the Opposition, you can guide me: who is the shadow minister – Kiboga, those are the five I am picking. Colleagues, this is for information purposes, you will forgive me – when you look at our agenda, if we had a resolution to make, I would have allowed a very wide debate, but if it is for information purposes, the practice in the Commonwealth is like that. Two minutes each. 2.52MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Central Division, Fort Portal City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for giving this information. I hasten to add that these Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), as we speak, are very far from the local population including the local government structures. When you go to the districts and the new cities including Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA), you will find very scanty information on how they align their development plans with the SDGs yet this is well embedded in Vision 2040. Mr Speaker, we have not made an effort of getting our technical officials, right from the local governments to the higher levels to realign and make this data user-friendly such that we can make use of it and guide the development process. Good enough, the Minister of Local Government is here, so, it is my view that they mainstream the SDGs into every local development plan within the country. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.2.54MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I take this opportunity to thank the minister and the secretariat for the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). However, I would like to request the ministry to understand that without fighting corruption as one of the goals in our SDGs, there is no way we are going to implement them effectively. Otherwise, whatever we shall try to do, corruption will undermine it. Secondly, SDG No.13 is concerned with mitigating climate change, but the achievements are not clear in the book. Therefore, to improve the achievements or implementation, we need to remind this country that every day, we lose forest cover and wetlands yet it is not mentioned in the report. Honourable minister, you need to mention that Uganda is losing wetlands and forest cover consistently and, therefore, it will undermine all the efforts in implementing Goal No. 13 of SDGs. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, when a colleague finishes speaking, at least recognise his or her submission. I might take it that you have not understood what he has said.2.56MS AGNES KIRABO (NRM, Youth Representative, Central): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the minister for the statement about the SDGs. My concern is about SDG No.4, which is education. I would like to thank the Government and the ministry for trying to preach the word of enrolling students or our young people down there for Universal Primary Education (UPE) and Universal Secondary Education (USE). However, I want them to note that these Government schools have no space. Back in the 1990s, they had space because we were very few, but now, we are very many; mostly the youth. We have given birth - our students are studying in a very unpleasant situation. 7818 MINISTERIAL STATEMENT [Ms Kirabo]The second SDG I would like to comment about is No.1, which is about poverty. I would also like to comment about the PDM. Mr Speaker, I represent the young people of the entire Buganda region. Last week, Luweero District launched the Parish Development Model. I saw people testifying that they were receiving funds on their individual accounts. I did not agree with that policy; so, I would call upon Members to agree with me that this will put our funds at risk, a complicated accountability and a total loss of this - (Member timed out.)2.58MS GORRETH NAMUGGA (NUP, Mawogola County South, Ssembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the presentation and appreciating that maybe, Uganda needs to take a new direction on budgeting. In relation to what you mentioned in the report, I think it is better we start looking at Uganda’s economy by rethinking a new direction of the human rights approach to budgeting.Mr Speaker, when you look at the implementation of the SDGs -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, can we please listen to the Member?MS NAMUGGA: This calls for a new reallocation strategy. Whatever they are looking at requires resources and you all know that we have a challenge with the resource envelope of this country. Somebody spoke about corruption – it is true, there is a lot of corruption, but what does it take to fight corruption? I would like to appreciate the Opposition’s side that launched its budget speech on 31st. Mr Speaker, can the Government review the strategy of the Opposition with the theme of “Rethinking Uganda’s economy”, by rethinking the human rights approach to resource allocation? Otherwise, all these factors are being considered. We are all here looking at final service delivery; ensuring that the common person’s welfare is improved. So, I implore the honourable minister to borrow from the budget of the Opposition’s side, that was read. I implore you to get this document so you can implement the SDGs rather than just talking about them. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, I would like to suggest that the alternative policy statement or alternative budget statement by the Opposition is not meant just for the minister - because the minister from the Government side presents and the shadow government presents. Then, it is we, the Members, who end up with a comprehensive and final document. Therefore, I urge each one of us to read whatever document comes here; whether you like it or not, whether it is from your side or not, for information purposes, it will help you. What Hon. Namugga Gorreth emphasised was that you should read the alternative budget proposals presented by the Leader of the Opposition because it is statutory and provided in rules. It is recognised and it is one of the documents we consider when processing the budget. 3.01MS CHRISTINE KAAYA (NUP, Woman Representative, Kiboga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the minister for sharing with us. I belong to the Uganda Parliamentary Forum on Sustainable Development Goals (UPFSDGs) and so, I would like to bring to the attention of the House that every year, we are provided with the voluntary national reviews. These reviews highlight the types of SDGs to be reviewed every year. For 2023, we have been directed on the SDGs to be reviewed, which I thought would form part of our report here. This year’s 2023 SDGs under review are Goal No.6, which is on clean water and sanitation; Goal No.7, affordable and clean energy; Goal No.9, on industry, innovation and infrastructure; Goal No.11, on 7819THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 4 APRIL 2023sustainable cities and communities, and SDG No. 17 on partnerships for the goals. However, Mr Speaker, the last time I approached our Secretariat, I did not find any permanent and pensionable staff. They are contract staff that I felt are not accountable to us. Therefore, we need to know this with the secretariat that is responsible for following up the implementation so we are able to get a report from our minister every year. Different countries register their participation in the political forum and Uganda has registered once, but our performance is measured based on the number of voluntary national reviews that we have participated in internationally. So, we request that even when we have not participated in the national reviews, let us get a periodic review of the line target –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable shadow minister, I would advise that this is a very comprehensive statement, which the minister has presented, that would need at least an alternative in terms of your assessment on what is being achieved. And we can use Rule 53 of our Rules of Procedure, where the Leader of the Opposition is given leeway to present a statement on any matter, and that statement would be debated. Okay? And in doing that, he can appoint any of the shadow ministers, or any of the people from the Opposition to make that statement on his or her behalf. I picked and loved your submission, but the space I have does not allow me. So, my guidance would be that you take the opportunity of rule 53 and then you give a comprehensive statement; we will give you more time to give us that information to share. Now, LOP, you want to make a statement when I have just told your – (Laughter) 3.04THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the Prime Minister for this statement. However, the fundamental question would be: When we shifted from the Millennium Development Goals, which were eight in the number, to the Sustainable Development Goals, which are 17 with 169 targets - and much earlier before the Millennium Development Goals, Africa had the three enemies: poverty, disease and ignorance, which graduated into eight Millennium Development Goals, then eventually into 17. What is all this about?Is Africa and Uganda in particular part of the subjects for experiment? Are we guinea pigs? Because if you looked and dissected the eight Millennium Development Goals, they were actually skewed for the developing countries. Now later to look uniform, they brought 17 universal Sustainable Development Goals. And if I was there pondering over the most difficult of the 17, number 13 - that is combating climate change and something there - the developed countries that are experimenting on us are the highly industrialised, the biggest emitters of greenhouse gases. And you know, the artificial boundaries we have in our countries do not have walls that would do block the carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide from polluting these ends where we are least industrialised. Mr Speaker, the statement is hollow because it mentions that the Parish Development Model (PDM), which is devoid of implementation strategy -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, would you mind getting a more kind - because you started by appreciating; so, did you appreciate the hollow statement?MR NAMBESHE: No, let me be fairer to the Prime Minister for the statement and for aggrandizing Government for coming up with the Parish Development Model, which is going to be the last mile strategy in attaining the 17 Sustainable Millennium Goals. To be sincere in my fairness, this is a mirage; it is like chasing a mirage because we have seen many initiatives and interventions right from - 7820 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTthe best was actually the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture, Bonna Baggagawale, Entandikwa , and recently Emyooga, which are mere tokens. Now we see the PDM - to be sincere, it is devoid of implementation strategy. Would it be the one that would raise our ray of hope that it will deliver us to the much “Promised Land”, Canaan? Mr Speaker, the whole Cabinet had to sit with the Ministry of Health to discuss how to combat malaria; malaria has been here for ages. Would it require a whole Cabinet to grapple with a two-day meeting, to discuss how to stop it when the countries by the way have already secured vaccines for malaria? And even they are in the advanced stages of destroying the mosquito, which is the cause of malaria. But here, meetings upon meetings, now we are awaiting PDM miracles to combat malaria. Honestly, Mr Speaker, I would differ. However, let me conclude that this country, for years - I am concluding -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable LOP, if you had listened to me properly, you would have taken advantage of rule 53. You are making my work difficult.MR NAMBESHE: That is where I was going. (Laughter) That is why I would like to come up with an alternative statement to this House. However, the challenge we have is that you hardly borrow a leaf from some of these good raft of proposals which we make.As I conclude -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who?MR NAMBESHE: Government, of course; the party in power.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Because when you say, “…you hardly…” - (Laughter)-  MR NAMBESHE: The party in power. Recently, we came up with the brilliant ideas in that Alternative Budget Speech, but I highly doubt whether the powers that be have gone through it or have something to borrow from it. And that is why a serious regime would want to nurture a very strong Opposition that is creative and innovative. However, the regime we have has issues. Mr Speaker, as I conclude, since 2014, we have never had a census. Now, here we are and the minister in her statement, on bended knees, is requesting for assistance for our persons with disabilities. The million-dollar question could have been: Have we prevailed over UBOS to conduct a census to know how many persons with disabilities we have, so as to be in the know whether this Government with the meagre resources we have, cannot take care of our own persons with disabilities - that we should be on bended knee to ask this country called Azerbaijan- I am getting a muscle pull pronouncing the name of this country? Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, LOP. I think what I got out principally, is that we must get solutions for Africa from Africa, not problems identified with, to go on graduating. And that is why we stood our ground in a bipartisan manner - all of us here - and supported, for example, the issue of developing our energy sector because of the energy poverty we face. The people who were stopping us, Europe constitutes 10 percent of the world population. Okay? But they pollute 25 percent of global gas emissions. Now, Africa, we are 20 per cent of the world’s population; we pollute only three per cent of the global gas emissions. I do not know and I ask myself: do they want us to go in a pollution competition for them to find-? And they say, “No, no, don’t develop your oil and gas sector; you are going to pollute the environment.” But they are burning coal every day. Therefore, the solution is what I pick from Hon. Nambeshe; on top of other many things are lessons he has really brought on the Table, that as Africans, we have to look at solutions. However, we should remember that we are now in a multipolar world and, so, have to work within the global framework of countries [Mr Nambeshe]7821THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 4 APRIL 2023in tackling most of these challenging issues. Honourable minister, did you want to conclude?MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the honourable members for the comments they have made. I also want to single out the shadow minister - the Woman MP for Kiboga - who took off time to go to the Secretariat to get details. I appreciate her for that. (Applause)She also raised the issue that the people working at the Secretariat are on contract. Yes, they are, but are paid by development partners, not the Government of Uganda. That is a serious matter and we are still grappling with it. In addition to that, the coordination work done by the Secretariat is still funded by development partners, not the Government of Uganda. As the Office of the Prime Minister and the Executive or Government, we must find a solution to it. It would also show our commitment. She also brought out the issue of the annual reports. Yes, we make them. I pledge that as long as I am still the minister in charge of SDGs in the Office of the Prime Minister, I will make the annual reports. That is the only way we can bring it to the attention of Parliament and also use this forum to inform the country about what is happening. That is when we shall also be following the different SDGs that are of priority for that particular year. Mr Speaker, allow me also to inform you that when it comes to water and sanitation - SDG No.6 - we have been to the UN to make our report and I will have to come here and make a report. Where it requires that we do not even have to wait for the annual one, Mr Speaker, I will put our prayer to you that we could be accorded some little time and we report on the progress as per the particular SDG, as time goes on. On the issue raised by the Leader of the Opposition, yes, it is true we left the Millennium Development Goals and went for Sustainable Development Goals. When we talk of the 17 Sustainable Development Goals, the indicators and the 232 targets, they do not apply everywhere. We only go for those that are applicable to us because these are for everything on earth, above the earth, on the ground and below the sea. The Speaker has explained the issue of pollution. We are one continent that contributes less, yet we are the ones with the mitigation factors, especially the forests. When you look at the forest coverage in the whole world, the biggest is in Africa. Therefore, we offer solutions, yet there is little that is accorded by those who cause the problem to those who offer the solution. Anyway, those are for discussions.On the issue of the Parish Development Model as a Last Mile Strategy, I assure the Leader of the Opposition that we are in it together. We, as leaders in this country at this time, it is our responsibility to make it work. What we maybe have to improve on is the time, space and forum for discussion so that we appreciate the challenges and find solutions together to whatever challenge we are faced with. It is a programme that covers all the SDGs. The only issue is that we have taken on and put forward the first pillar of financial inclusion. If you look at it, it will be able to cover the biggest issues to do with poverty and also provide the different facilities to the people.The other issues raised by Members were pieces of advice. Hon Alex Ruhunda advised us to go and localise these SDGs and make them aligned to our development programmes. What I want to say is that our National Development Plan III is 96.6 per cent aligned to the SDGs. We just need to do a little more alignment, but most importantly, make sure that we work with everybody while implementing them.Hon. Timuzigu raised the issue of corruption. It is a big thorn to all of us, but we cannot name it as an SDG because it cuts across. It is an issue we must deal with to make sure we achieve all of the 17 SDGs. 7822 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTHe also raised the concern that forest cover is not included. However, this issue is included in our high political-level report, from page 42 to page 45. When you look at it, we are losing our forest cover at 12 per cent, not six per cent as he stated. On the issue to do with education, the Government had a programme of School Facilities Grant (SFG) that constructed primary schools. A lot more effort was also put in secondary schools. However, being that there is peace in this country, people are enjoying and producing and it is still under these discussions that we have to be –  (Interruption)MS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you, for giving way. You have said that corruption should not be mentioned in this discussion because we are focusing on SDGs only. I thought you were talking off-shoot because corruption denies the country resources to target areas, which an SDG is pointing at. Therefore, it is very important that we plug that particular hole, which is taking a lot of resources. Let us not ignore the pandemic of corruption in the country. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, please, conclude.MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, when I was talking about the issue of corruption raised by Hon. Timuzigu, I said - because he said: “Can you also name it as an SDG?” I said we cannot name it as an SDG, but it is something that we recognise as impacting the implementation of the 17 SDGs. We cannot name it as an SDG to stand on its own, but we must all work together to make sure we fight it. Rethinking -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, let us stop there. Our time has gone. This was for information purposes, so, I do not really want us to prolong it.MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Just a minute, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, conclude.MS KASULE LUMUMBA: On the issue of rethinking our budgeting and looking at SDGs as human rights – they are human rights and that is why the NRM Government took them up. Water is a right and that is why we must have a source of safe water in every village. Education is a right and that is why we have it as “education for all” – at primary, secondary and tertiary  institutions. Even health is for all. What makes us not achieve  them at 100 per cent are the issues that we must discuss. As leaders, we must find solutions. We recognise them as rights for all, but we have not been able to make it possible for everybody. Where is the problem? We must hold that discussion. I thank you, honourable members, and all the members of the SDG forum. Let us keep working together. What we require to make us happy is what everybody else requires. As leaders, we must make sure that we serve the farthest first, leaving nobody behind and working with everybody. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Point of procedure, Hon. Okupa.MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The procedural matter I am raising is in relation to always having a correct record of what is captured on the Hansard.The Opposition Whip stated 169 targets needed to achieve the 17 SDGs. Hon. Lumumba talked of 213. I think we must correct the record. The correct figure is 169 targets that were adopted by the 191 UN Member States that were set to achieve the 17 SDGs. So, we must capture the correct record, which is 169, not 213. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 169 targets and 232 indicators as per your own record. MS LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, it is 17 SDGs, 169 targets, and 232 indicators. [Ms Lumumba]7823THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 4 APRIL 2023THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, thank you. The good thing is that the whole statement will also be captured for future reference purposes. Next statement. STATEMENT ON THE NORTHERN UGANDA SOCIAL ACTION FUND (NUSAF-IV)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, you have 10 minutes.3.24THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (NORTHERN UGANDA) (Ms Grace Kwiyucwiny): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I presented this statement last week; there is only some little information that I have added, and I am going to summarise it.This is a brief to Parliament on the Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF).The Northern Uganda Social Action Fund is an affirmative action financed by the World Bank. It is committed to addressing high poverty levels and social economic disparities in greater Northern Uganda. Northern Uganda Social Action Fund I and II, focused on infrastructure development while NUSAF III focused on support to households; it ended in June 2021.Northern Uganda Social Action Fund was implemented and focused on a number of activities that included agriculture and animal husbandry, fish farming, environment conservation, trade and value addition, water and roads.Having implemented it, a number of achievements were registered bearing in mind that this targeted the real grassroots households. This included increased household income and assets like livestock, poultry, bicycle, radio, mobile phones, beddings, kitchen facilities, solar lighting and roofing materials and increased household food security and household savings.Despite Government intervention, the poverty indicators in Northern Uganda are still high. If you go to page three, you will see a table, which shows the trends of poverty prevalence; we have picked nine subregions.The causes of high poverty in Northern Uganda are attributed to overreliance on subsistence farming, lack of perennial cash crops, dependency syndrome, limited skills, lack of value addition, low productivity, land fragmentation, limited employment opportunities, environmental degradation, low access to financial credit, and poor mindset.Following the registered achievements, Cabinet, in January 2022, authorised the Office of the Prime Minister (OPM), together with the Ministry of Finance to design NUSAF IV .It is proposed that NUSAF IV will have a subregional focus and will support sustainable livelihood and shock-responsive interventions to build household resilience. The project will target 39 per cent of the poor households in the subsistence economy.NUSAF IV is estimated to cost $220 million as a loan and $40 to $50 million as a grant. It will cover West Nile, Acholi, Lango, Teso, Karamoja, Bukedi, Elgon, Bunyoro and Busoga.The components are:i. Sustainable livelihood support;ii. Strengthening safety net for enhanced resilience and human development; andiii. Transformational delivery system.It is envisaged that these are going to complement the Parish Development Model, especially in the areas of production storage, processing and marketing, which is pillar one; enhancing financial inclusion is pillar three; enhancing mind-set change is pillar five and management information system, which is pillar six.The progress so far made is that there has been established an inter-ministerial committee to 7824 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTdesign the NUSAF IV , and we have a number of ministries involved.The Office of the Prime Minister has since submitted the NUSAF IV Project concept profile and pre-feasibility study to the Development Committee of the Ministry of Finance.  The Ministry wrote to the World Bank on the 3rd in preparation for external borrowing for NUSAF IV . The World Bank has facilitated four design missions for their technical team to jointly work with the Government in the design. A pre-appraisal mission ended last week. Consultations were made with some district chairpersons, RDCs, Chief Administrative Officers and NRM chairpersons. We plan to have consultations with the Members of Parliament too. Achievements so far made are that we have refined the project development objective and theory of change. We have outlined the key interventions by component. We have discussed the geographic and household targeting parameters. We have also discussed the national social registry, and we are going to review the aid memo and the proposed fund’s flow.The next steps will be to have further consultations with MPs and regional leaders. We have appraisal and negotiations between the Government of Uganda and the World Bank. We secured the World Bank Board approval, Cabinet approval, approval of Parliament and the full-scale implementation. All these are plans to take place between April and July when we will have full-scale implementation. In conclusion, the NUSAF project design is on track despite the challenges of COVID-19. We should have actually designed NUSAF IV when NUSAF III was still running, but it was not possible. The next challenge is about limited resources and reduction in the overall resource envelope for affirmative action and this tremendously slowed down the consultative process.Our prayer is that the NUSAF IV Project be supported and approved by Parliament, and included in the proposed budget for the Financial Year 2023/2024. Also, given the enthusiasm and eagerness of the people and their leaders for NUSAF IV , we pray the programme will be better implemented once we take off for the benefit of our people getting out of poverty. I beg to report.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Colleagues, this is a clear update. Consultations are still ongoing, and so, there is no way we can start debating and submitting on the document still under development. Please bear with me. And I can see all those standing up are Members of Parliament who are going to be consulted this April. Two - clarification is only sought when a Member is on the Floor. I do not have anyone on the Floor. Next statement. Yes, point of procedure, Hon. Aisha Kabanda.MS AISHA KABANDA:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Wouldn’t it be right for you to guide the honourable minister to first do an audit on NUSAF I, II and III before she brings in NUSAF IV? This is because we do not even know what was done previously. We have diverted from the original definition of NUSAF. Wouldn’t it be wise of you to guide them to first do an audit?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I think that would not be for me to do at this stage. Why? NUSAF is coming here for approval and these are some of the questions you will raise. Please prepare to ask questions such as: did you carry out an audit? What is the basis of doing all these? Otherwise, rule 80 ties me down. I do not want to engage into anticipation because things are still being done. MS ROSE OBIGAH: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In the recent iron sheets distribution, it was reported in the newspapers that NUSAF gave out iron sheets. Wouldn’t [Ms Kwiyucwiny]7825THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 4 APRIL 2023it be procedurally right for the minister to put this as part of the achievements other than just rubbishing it? I am saying this because it came at the time “Karamoja iron sheets” developed “legs.” Were these NUSAF iron sheets? If they are, it should be part of the achievements. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right, Mr Speaker?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Under Rule 80(2) of our Rules of Procedure, we gave this assignment to the Committee on Presidential Affairs and they have not brought a report. Therefore, there is no way I can start making comments by saying, do this and that. Honourable minister, would you like to say something beyond what you have presented?MS KWIYUCWINY : Just to confirm that NUSAF III had an evaluation report and I could not present it here. When we go to consult, all those details will be given. However, let me also make it clear that NUSAF does not give iron sheets.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Next statement. Colleagues, let me make it very easy: if you want our record to be clean as a Parliament, when a minister clearly puts it that consultations are ongoing - and they are just going to consult Members of Parliament from the areas that are going to benefit – now it becomes difficult - you have an avenue where you are going to raise all issues to do with that project. I request that we move to another item. This came as an update because we wanted to know whether NUSAF had ended or something new was being designed. I think we have got very critical information. I do not see the ministers for the next two statements here and, I had not yet received the statements. Colleagues, let us look at the Order Paper and handle a very critical item that has a budgetary implication. I wanted to give it enough time, but I think we can use 20 minutes for the Chairperson of the Select Committee on the Inquiry into the Operations of the National Council of Sports, to give her report and then I will guide further. MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE INQUIRY INTO THE OPERATIONS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF SPORTSTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson of the Select Committee, Hon. Laura Kanushu, you have 20 minutes and then we shall go to the Parish Development Model. I was informed that ramps for Persons with Disabilities were worked upon. I want to thank the Clerk because by the time a Member raised it, the Clerk and the team were already working. So, they expedited the process. The feedback taken is that they are very steep. However, since they were not meant for the complainants, I will wait to hear from the representatives of Persons with Disabilities.3.37THE CHAIRPERSON, SELECT COM-MITTEE ON THE INQUIRY INTO THE OPERATIONS OF THE NATION-AL COUNCIL OF SPORTS (Ms Laura Kanushu):  Mr Speaker, I do not want to give a comment on the ramps because there is an accessibility standard for this Parliament to make access for Members of Parliament with disabilities. I want to implore them to look at it. Before I present, I would like to lay on the Table, the minutes of the meetings for the Select Committee on the Inquiry into the Operations of the National Council of Sports. I beg to lay. I also beg to lay on the Table, the annexes that are referred to in the report. Mr Speaker, I would like to request that we skip the first pages. The report has been uploaded and let me go straight to page 5 just to give a background on where we are coming from. On 8 November 2022, the Rt Hon. Speaker, while congratulating the She Cranes Netball team for emerging No. 5 in the First Worldwide Netball Championships in New Zealand, raised a concern over funding of the sports subsector, despite Parliament appropriating funds for the same. The Rt Hon. Speaker thereafter, 7826 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTdirected the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to address the House the following day on the releases made to the sports subsector.Subsequently, on the 9 November 2022, Hon. Evelyn Anite, the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Investment and Privatisation), presented a statement on the status of releases of the budget for the sports subsector for Financial Year 2022/2023. She revealed that Parliament had appropriated a total of Shs 47.81 billion to the National Council of Sports, of which Shs 19.2 billion (40 per cent of the approved budget) had been released for the first quarter of the Financial Year 2022/2023. Arising from the debate on the statement, Members raised concerns over variations in the figures presented by Hon. Anite and those presented by Hon. Peter Ogwang, the Minister of State for Sports.In the plenary sitting of 10 November 2022, Hon. Asuman Basalirwa moved a motion to resolve that a select committee be constituted to thoroughly investigate the matter, pursuant to Rule 190 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. Consequently, a select committee of seven Members was constituted to inquire into the operations of the National Council of Sports (NCS) in Quarter one and Quarter two of Financial Year 2022/23. The members included the following:1. Hon. Laura Kanushu – Chairperson;2. Hon. Solomon Silwany – Member;3. Hon. Geoffrey Ssolo Kayemba – Member; 4. Hon. Iddi Isabirye – Member;5. Hon. Donald Katalihwa – Member;6. Hon. Agnes Acibu – Member; and 7. Hon. Margaret Makhoha. Mr Speaker, I implore you to look at the terms of reference – I talked about them; and I think we can skip the methodology. I would also like to skip the overview, which talks about the mandate of the National Council of Sports, the operations and governance and management of the National Council of Sports. Let us straightaway go to term of reference one.TOR 1: To ascertain the approved budget for the National Council of Sports for the Financial Year 2022/2023 and the budgetary amounts communicated by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development The committee established that on 20 May 2020, Parliament, in line with Section 14(1) of the Public Finance Management Act, appropriated Shs 47,812,199,000 for the National Council of Sports for the Financial Year 2022/2023. The committee was informed that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development communicated their approved budget of Shs 47,812 199,000 to the National Council of Sports in the approved estimates of revenue and expenditure (recurrent and development) for Central Government votes for the year ending 30 June 2023, as indicated in the table below. Mr Speaker, I implore honourable members to look at the table. The committee confirmed from the submissions that the National Council of Sports had indeed a total of that amount. The observation of the committee is that the budget of Shs 47,812,199,000 communicated by the Ministry of Finance to the National Council of Sports is in tandem with the total budget for the National Council of Sports appropriated by Parliament for this period. In this regard, the committee commends the Ministry of Finance for diligently executing its mandate.TOR 2: To establish the actual budget releases to the National Council of Sports vis-à-vis the budget approved by Parliament for the Financial Year 2022/2023 The committee established that the Ministry of Finance had, as at 31 December 2022, released [Ms Kanushu]SELECT COMMITTEE REPORT7827THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 4 APRIL 2023a total of Shs 19,614,267,328 to the National Council of Sports for the first quarter one and quarter two for the Financial Year 2022/2023, to facilitate wages, gratuity, support the various sports federations and associations as indicated in the table. The committee found out that in quarter one, the Ministry of Finance released Shs 9,365,010,657 to the National Council of Sports, representing 19.6 per cent release performance. The committee further found that the total release for quarter two by the Ministry of Finance to the National Council of Sports was Shs 10,157,749,062 representing 21.25 percent release performance. The committee further found out that whereas the cash flow plan for the National Council of Sports for quarter one was Shs 7,808,953,878, the Ministry of Finance released a total of Shs 9,365,010,657, giving a surplus release amount of Shs 1,556,056,779. However, in quarter two, the Ministry of Finance released a total of Shs 10,157,749,062 against the cash flow plan for the National Council of Sports, which was Shs 23,154,073,563, leaving a deficit of Shs 12,996,324,501. The committee was informed that at times the National Council of Sports has received late releases from the Ministry of Finance, which affects the planned outputs of the council and national sports federations. For instance, the National Council of Sports revealed that the first release for quarter one was done on 15 July 2022, and an additional cash release on 25 September 2022, which affected the facilitation of the council’s planned activities. Subsequently, the council and some federations had resorted to running their budgets on unauthorised credits from moneylenders and contributions from well-wishers. The observation of the committee is that the budget performance in releases from the Ministry of Finance against the approved budget to the National Council of Sports was at 41 per cent by the end of quarter two.The total releases by the Ministry of Finance, in quarter one, to the National Council of Sports exceeded the approved cash flow plan by Shs 1,556,056,779, under the non-wage component of the budget and Shs 10,157,749,062 was released contrary to the approved cash plan of Shs 23,154,073,563 leaving a shortfall of Shs 12,996,324,501 in quarter two. This affected the implementation of planned outputs for the National Council of Sports. Late release of funds by the Ministry of Finance is contrary to Regulation 14 of the Public Finance Management Regulations 2016, which provides thus, “The Accountant-General shall release funds to the votes every three months of a financial year and at any other time, as the Secretary to the Treasury may determine and these releases shall be by the 10th day of the first month of the period.” This in turn affects the smooth implementation of activities of the council and the sports federations. The recommendation is that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should ensure timely releases of funds in order to enable smooth operations and the execution of planned outputs of the council and federations. The council and federations should desist from illegal borrowing, since that contravenes Section 36 of the PFMA, 2015, and may expose them to unguaranteed liability risks. The council and federations should explore possibilities of obtaining additional funding from partners and private sponsors to invest in the development of the sports subsector. TOR 3:  To examine the criteria used by the National Council of Sports to appropriate budgets to sports federations and associations The committee established that Section 3(2)(h) of the National Council of Sports Act requires the National Council of Sports to approve expenditures of national sports federations. As such, the budgets for national sports federations are incorporated under the budget line - “Transfer to other Government units”, 7828 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTwhich falls under the subvention (recurrent) component of the National Council of Sports budget. The committee was informed by the National Council of Sports that it apportions budgets to sports federations through council resolutions based on prioritisation of sports, which have a comparative advantage for Uganda as a country. However, the committee could not verify this assertion since there was no evidence of such resolution in the minutes of the board meetings of the council, which the committee reviewed. Accordingly, the committee did not find a documented criterion on apportioning funds to the national sports federations. Indeed, most of the federations the committee interacted with stated that they were not aware of the criteria used by the National Council of Sports to apportion the budgets. They further informed the committee that the council only requested them to submit their annual budgets and work plans, but did not involve them any further in the budgeting process. Most federations alleged that in order to receive funds, the General Secretary, who is also the accounting officer of the council, calls and requests them to first submit a requisition for a specific amount of money, which is then determined by him before the funds are transferred to them. For instance, the President of the Uganda Boxing Federation informed the committee that the General Secretary of the National Council of Sports called him to submit a budget of Shs 500 million for which he did not - he only received Shs 133 million for the federation.He further stated that he did not know how the General Secretary came up with the figure of Shs 500 million and later on the Shs 133 million, which was transferred. Nonetheless, the committee was not provided with evidence to authenticate this allegation. Observations of the committee: a) There are no policy guidelines that the National Council of Sports bases on to apportion budgets to the national federations. The apportioning of budgets is left to the discretion of accounting officer. The lack of policy guidelines to inform budgetary appropriation to the sports bodies creates a policy vacuum that is prone to abuse by the accounting officer. This affects the prioritisation of activities that are critical to the development of the sports subsector. The recommendations on this particular term of reference are:a) That the Ministry of Education and Sports should, with immediate effect, develop guidelines for apportioning funds to the national sports federations in order to ensure certainty in decision making, for transparency and accountability;b) The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should disseminate releases to both the accounting officers and subventions to enhance transparency in the budget process; c) The Accounting Officer of the National Council of Sports should strictly adhere to the provisions under Section 45(4) of the PFMA and remit the subventions received, on behalf of the national sports federations, in accordance with the approved cash flow. Failure to do this, the accounting officer should be held personally liable for contravention of this specific legal provision; and d) The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should explore mechanisms of releasing funds directly to federations in order to eliminate the possibility of unfairness by the National Council of Sports in the process of apportioning funds to national federations and associations, as is the case with the Parish Development Model, upon building capacity of the federations and sports associations to be able to manage Government funds appropriately. [Ms Kanushu]SELECT COMMITTEE REPORT7829THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 4 APRIL 2023TOR 4: To inquire into the disbursement by the National Council of Sports to the various sports federationsAs noted earlier, the committee established that budgets for the national sports federations are incorporated under the budget line “Transfer to other Government units”, which falls under the subvention (recurrent) component of the National Council of Sports budget. This budget line comprises funds for the following:i. Support to major international games from Team Uganda, which include Olympic/Paralympic games, Commonwealth Games, All-Africa Games, East African Community Games and Islamic solidarity Games; ii. Facilitation of national sports federations and associations for qualifier games; andiii. Support to representative clubs in continental championships or tournaments. Consequently, as required by Section 45(4) of the PFMA, the Accounting Officer of NCS is mandated by law to transfer the said funds to support the activities of the different sports federations and associations according to the annual cash flow plans issued by the Secretary to Treasury, as required by Section 15 of the PFMA. Releases by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to the National Council of Sports to support activities The committee established that out of the total approved budget of Shs 47 billion for Financial Year 2022/2023, Shs 38 billion was appropriated to federations under the budget line “Transfer to other Government units.”  Of this amount, Shs 7 billion was released by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in Quarter 1, while Shs 8 billion was released in Quarter 2, totalling Shs 15 billion – as you may see in the table there. The disbursements are in those two tables. The committee noted that there were inconsistencies between the amounts released by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to National Council of Sports for federations and the amount disbursed by NCS to those federations.  Whereas a total of Shs 15.479 billion was released by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for federations in Quarters 1 and 2, a total of Shs 15,374,430,984 was disbursed to the federations for the same period, of which Shs 7,911,109,550 was for Quarter 1 and Shs 7,463,321,434 for Quarter 2, as indicated in the table.From the above table, the NCS disbursed an additional Shs 757,627,749 above what was released in Quarter 1 and Shs 862,589,888 less than what was released in Quarter 2. However, the NCS did not provide an explanation for this variance.The NCS provided the committee with a breakdown of the disbursements to the various federations and major international games as indicated in the table below. Mr Speaker, again, I would like to implore you to look at the table. From the above table, the committee noted that NCS disbursed Shs 9,348,826,024 to 46 out of the 51 federations and associations in Quarter 1 and Quarter 2 of Financial Year 2022/23. It further noted that the NCS disbursed a total of Shs 6 billion for major international games (Commonwealth Games and the 5th Islamic Solidarity Games). The council informed the committee that during Quarter 1 of Financial Year 2022/2023, it disbursed Shs 4,865,000,000 and Shs 1,160,604,960 to facilitate the activities associated with Team Uganda’s participation in the Commonwealth Games held in Birmingham, England and to facilitate activities associated with Team Uganda’s participation in the 5th Islamic Solidarity Games 2022, held in Konya, Turkey.The council further informed the committee that during Quarter 1, it disbursed a total of 7830 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTShs 7.463 billion to support national sports federations and associations. The committee was informed that whereas the approved budgets for support to major international games (Commonwealth Games and the 5th Islamic Solidarity Games) was Shs 8,599,985,000 billion, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development released only Shs 7,153,481 billion only for the games in Quarter 1.For Commonwealth Games in Birmingham, again, I to refer you to the table. It gives a clear picture. The one for the Islamic Solidarity Games is on page 23. Page 24 has a table on the disbursement to federations and associations for qualifier games. There is also a table for funds disbursed to federations in Quarter 2 – on pages 25, 26 and 27. Findings of the committee on the disbursement to national federations The committee established that whereas Section 45(4) of the PFMA that mandates an accounting officer, who receives a subvention on behalf of another entity, to remit the subvention to the entity in accordance with the approved cash flow plan for the subvention, the accounting officer acted contrary to this provision.The committee established that most federations received less money than what had been approved and others did not receive any funding from the council, which has in turn affected the implementation of their planned output. For instance, representatives of FUFA, FUBA and UNF informed the committee of their withdrawal from participating in qualifier games and final tournaments due to lack of funds, despite having presented work plans to the National Council of Sports. The committee noted severe implications on the country’s performance in international games, which have, in some instances, attracted financial penalties and liability to the country. A case in point was when the She Cranes withdrew from the World Cup qualifiers that were scheduled to take place in South Africa in August 2022 due to lack of funds, which caused the country’s standing to drop from the sixth to seventh position at the World Netball Ranking and fined £5,000. The committee found inconsistencies regarding funds disbursed to the Uganda Rugby Union during Quarter 1. Whereas the council informed the committee that it released a total of Shs 458 million to the union, the committee found that it had actually transferred an additional Shs 224,112,000 on 27 July 2022, which the NCS did not reveal in its submission to the committee. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, I can see you would need about one-and-a-half hours to read the whole report and I am not going to open up debate today. I want us to have the debate on Wednesday next week. This will let Members have enough time to read through this report and make consultations because it is a big report. If I may request, can you do a summary - because we shall capture the whole report verbatim on the Hansard - for ease of reference? And then Members will have time to read it in detail throughout this Easter period.MS KANUSHU: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. I will go to the final recommendations - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are trying to clear off most of these things, you know, April and May are usually for the budget. I do not want us to interfere with the budgeting process, honourable colleagues, especially your attendance and participation in the sectoral committee meetings to scrutinise the budget deeply.So, I would like us to finish the Parish Development Model. Tomorrow, we handle issues of the supplementary so that by the time we break off, we know we have cleared most of the issues on the Order Paper.MS KANUSHU:  Honourable members, let us go to page 37, which has the following recommendations: [Ms Kanushu]SELECT COMMITTEE REPORT7831THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 4 APRIL 2023a) The committee recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports should fast-track the sports policy and amend the sports law - and I am sure this has been overtaken by events - to provide a robust legal regime for better governance, management and development of the sports sector; andb) The committee also recommends that Parliament speeds up the passing of the Sports Bill, which it has done – again this has been over taken by events - streamlining interventions to improve the sports sector. And on page 39, the committee recommends that the National Council of Sports should ensure that there is capacity building of the national federations and associations in order to comply with the laws governing their existence and operations, as mandated under Section 3 of the National Council of Sports Act. The committee also recommends that the Auditor-General should carry out a forensic audit on all associations and federations that have received Government funding for the last five years in a period not exceeding 30 days from the date of the adoption of this report. The accounting officer of the National Council of Sports should be held accountable for disbursing funds to federations despite falling short of the minimum requirement, yet it is mandated to oversee and audit the federations.Additionally, the council should halt the disbursement of funds to any federation that falls short of the requirements under the law. Honourable members, because I did not read that specific term of reference, the committee realised that the council continued to disburse funds to federations and associations that had not accounted for specific amounts that they had received in the previous year. So, this is where this recommendation is coming from. On page 41, the committee recommends that Government should take deliberate steps to provide funds for the development of sports facilities and renovate existing ones that have been run down in order to ensure sports development in the country. The Ministry of Education and Sports should ensure that its strategic plan emphasises the development of sports infrastructure, as highlighted in Government programmes, such as the NDP III. Again, this comes from the fact that most of the members who appeared before the committee from the federations expressed the fact that there are no facilities for them to do sports, to an extent that they do not even have where to train from. So, this is where this recommendation comes from. On page 47, the committee recommends that the National Council of Sports should put in place comprehensive and long-term strategies for a sustainable strategy for the management and development of sports disciplines in the country. The National Council of Sports should carry out its mandate of overseeing the management of federations and should take deliberate steps to ensure that they are staffed, trained and conduct capacity building. The Ministry of Education and Sports should design an appraisal mechanism for the National Council to assess the performance of federations since they are mandated, under Section 3 of the National Council Sports Act, to facilitate their development. The committee recommends that the Inspector General of Government conducts an in-depth investigation of allegations of corruption made against the Accounting Officer of the National Council sports.Mr Speaker, again, it is in the report that certain federations made allegations against the Secretary-General of the National Council of Sports. One of the allegations was that he gives them a specific amount of money, but asks them to account for more money than they received. While we did not get concrete evidence, these allegations came to the 7832 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTattention of the committee, and that is why we are making this recommendation. We made a study visit and there were good things to learn from South Africa and how they are running their sports sector and we wanted to borrow a leaf from there. Mr Speaker, it should be noted that the operations of the National Council of Sports are pertinent to the development of sports in the country since it is mandated to develop, promote and oversee sports activities in Uganda, on behalf of the Government, in collaboration with the national sports federations and associations. The committee applauds the Government of Uganda for its efforts towards the promotion of the sports sector, which can be evidenced by the country’s achievement nationally, regionally and internationally. However, it notes that there is need to streamline its management, funding, legal and policy frameworks, putting into consideration emerging issues.Whereas the subsector is guaranteed and the institutional framework is established under the National Council Act, the ambiguity of the council’s funding structure, which trickles down to the national sports federations and associations, has raised matters of transparency and accountability, which are key performance indicators of good sports governance. Despite the laws being in place, there are still challenges of poor sports governance that have brought negative effects on national sports teams and sportsmen. The subsector has evolved from being merely a recreational and social activity to being impactful in terms of socio-economic revolution. Indeed, if well-structured and managed, it has the potential to boost local tourism, spread resources across the country, improve national branding internationally and build social cohesion, among others. Therefore, the committee also calls upon Government to implement the recommendations above in order to ensure development of sports in the country. Mr Speaker, before I take leave of the Floor, I want to say that this report has a recommendation for a forensic audit of the National Council of Sports and all federations to be carried out in not less than seven days after the adoption of this report. Another important recommendation that this committee makes is that for all federations and the NCS, a forensic audit should take place and, but also, that the allegations that came to the attention of the committee should be investigated to a logical conclusion. I beg to report.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Madam Chairpersons. Hon. Alex Ruhunda, do you have a procedural matter? I hope you are not going into the report.MR RUHUNDA:  No, I am not going into the report. Mr Speaker, the procedural point I would like to make is: we had a debate here concerning the lack of football training facilities for the Uganda Cranes and having our team have to go to Cairo. And I notice that this report is talking about the lack of development of sports infrastructure, and the minister was tasked to come up with a comprehensive report to that effect. The current Government Chief Whip, when he was in that office, had made efforts to develop two stadiums for the country namely, Buhinga Stadium in Kabarole District and the Akii Bua Stadium.Mr Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that we combine these two because they are intertwined, such that we can fully exhaust the way forward, as far as the sports infrastructure and governance of sports is concerned in this country? I am saying this because I know that you have ruled that the presentation be done, but that the debate will take place on Wednesday next week.Otherwise, I beg to lay some of the information I received from the minister at the time, Hon. Obua, such that it is part of this debate. This is the evidence on the feasibility studies that were done, with the figures and facts.[Ms Kanushu]SELECT COMMITTEE REPORT7833THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 4 APRIL 2023THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please lay. He has said the source is the former sports minister, who is the current Government Chief Whip. After laying them, I think he will be able to verify. We shall share them because these are our documents, colleagues. MR RUHUNDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay a summary status of Akii Bua and Buhinga Olympic stadia given to me by Hon. Obua while he was the Minister of State for Sports.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, is our statement ready? We need to work on it and make a decision.  4.13THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang): Thank you, Mr Speaker. To me, it is a question of the Order Paper; when you will give me time as the minister for the sports subsector to come and make a presentation on issues Members raised regarding the ongoing works at Namboole. The other one was a question of infrastructure across the country. It is true and I want to confirm – and Hon. Hamson Obua is here - that the Government of the Republic of China did pledge to give a grant to Uganda to construct Buhinga and Akibua stadia. However, as I said the other time, the Government of China, again, confirmed to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that they lost interest in funding the two projects, whose documents the Hon. Alex Ruhunda, Member of Parliament from Fort Portal City, has laid on the Floor. Secondly, Mr Speaker -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are you submitting your statement? MR OGWANG: No, before I submit, I need to first say one or two things because I want to confirm -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, then what will your statement contain?MR OGWANG: Mr Speaker, can I comment on the report? First of all -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, honourable minister, let us move together. I want to propose – and let us agree – that if the debate is on Wednesday, you will comment on the report on Wednesday because we need you here on Wednesday. If I allow you to comment, then I also will allow the shadow minister to comment yet my projection was 4.00 p.m. So, honourable minister, bring your statement on Wednesday and we shall handle it together with - colleagues, when I am speaking, allow me to speak. Please, “I don’t finish quickly.” (Laughter) That is on a lighter note - some people get bored so, we need to – Anyhow, honourable minister, as long as your statement is ready - and I want to guide the ministers that when a statement is ready, submit it to the Clerk so we are able to design the Order Paper. It is not that you first get our permission and then submit the statement. Kindly have it ready and then on Wednesday, we shall give you space to also comment on the report. We shall give it enough time. Honourable members, when the Speaker has guided - I do not know why Hon. Sarah wants me to “finish” -(Laughter)- when I have guided properly, in terms of the next step on an item, then the procedure does not apply. Can we go to the next item? [Member rose_] What is it and under which rule are you? Kindly refer to the rules. MS KABAHENDA: Mr Speaker, I am rising under rule 83. When you talk about Buhinga Stadium, you are talking about the Rwenzori Region where I come from. So, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that when the minister is bringing his statement, he gives justification - do you mean to say China did not give reasons, they simply lost interest? Can we get justification why China had to lose interest? Maybe the Government was supposed 7834 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTto do counterpart funding? After gaining interest, they then lost it; what happened? Can we even see a copy of the letter they wrote? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, I am looking at the rule you referred to; rule 83 - you referred us to a rule that talks about the behaviour of Members and you ended up violating rule 80. I already guided properly that the minister brings the statement on Wednesday. Now you want the minister to comment on issues which will be in the statement because that is when anticipation comes in. I request that we are patient. Let us hold our guns and wait for the minister on Wednesday. Shadow Minister of Education and Sports, you were insisting on a procedural matter - under rule? MS NABUKENYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform the House that the Committee on Education and Sports produced a report on the issue of Buhinga and Akii Bua stadia. I will not leak the report details, but all those issues were raised, including the questions on the responsibility of the minister. So, it is very important - because it is in the Business to follow – to have the report presented because there are many answers to most of the questions.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that report also about sports? MS NABUKENYA: Yes, and specifically on the two issues. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me go back and review with the Clerk. We will see how best it can fit in. Colleagues, rule 78(4) says when you rise on a point of procedure, you must state the rule. I have been lenient, but when I see you saying, “Procedure” repeatedly – now, I am going to strictly start applying the rule. (Laughter)  Hon. John Musila?MR MUSILA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I am not speaking about anything -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Under what rule? If you stand up -MR MUSILA: Under your own Chair, Mr Speaker - (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Musila -MR MUSILA: Mr Speaker, you excited especially the honourable ladies here when you said that you do not finish quickly. Thank you. (Laughter) 4.20MS ROSE OBIGAH (NRM, Woman Representative, Terego): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Paralympics team had their own winner, who should have gone to Birmingham. However, this small innocent girl from Moyo, with one hand, who won the Paralympics and was all over the newspapers, was unable to go because of funding. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the report to capture this so that next time we are able to facilitate those under-18 to participate in games outside this country, to raise our flag? Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable Member, you have debated. So, on Wednesday, I do not expect you to debate because that is a submission on debate. Let us go to the next item. Honourable Member from Kiboga, you have a point of procedure? MS KAAYA: I am sorry, Mr Speaker, for not quoting the rule, but last week, I formed part of the select committee to investigate the investment in the development of the stadia. However, the committee is composed of only four members; I think it was an oversight. We needed to be five members in order to bring out a quality report. So, I request that we reconstitute the committee to five members. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me go back, consult with the Clerk and first get the facts clearly before I commit myself on anything. [Ms Kabahenda]SELECT COMMITTEE REPORT7835THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 4 APRIL 2023Let us go to the Parish Development Model. I have spoken to the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget about the next item on the supplementary budget and got to know that they were not yet ready. So, it is better we proceed to the next item. Hon. Aisha, you have a procedural point?MS AISHA KABANDA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker . I rise under rule 45. Two weeks back, I asked a question, rightly through the Clerk to Parliament. Some questions have been answered this time and there are also questions on the order of business to follow. My question is not reflected anywhere. My procedural point is whether I can be guided on what I should do next. Is it due for answer or not?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, kindly share it with me in the office. I will ensure that it goes on the Order Paper and it is answered. MS AISHA KABANDA:  Most obliged, Mr Speaker. However, we did not understand whether you were asking a question from us or asserting about the time to “finish.” Were you asking or asserting that you take long to “finish”? (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I request you to avoid such issues, especially during the month of Ramadan. (Laughter) MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE SUB-REGIONAL OVERSIGHT REPORTS ON THE PARISH DEVELOPMENT MODEL (PDM)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, I want to guide on this item. Last week, Lango Subregion made a comprehensive report on this matter. This programme is structured in a national manner and so, some issues are crosscutting. If we are to present all the 18 sub-regional reports, we may repeat ourselves here, day after day.I am of the view that we use the report from Lango as a benchmark. I have even seen some of the reports, and in some regions, only two Members have signed. So, a Member will present a report on behalf of Members who have not even signed it. Around 10 per cent, generally. Then, I have not received the report from Acholi Sub region - but most of the issues are crosscutting. I propose that we open up the debate now then you pick out - if there are unique issues you found in your area that were not captured under for example, the Lango subregion report, bring such issues to the fore. Otherwise, we shall need more than a week of handling just the Parish Development Model reports. 4.25MR BOSCO OKIROR (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. However, I have a humble request: we did prepare these reports - if you would only allow that we just lay them on the Table so that they are captured. Otherwise, preparing and not laying them would be a bit of a challenge on our side.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Were they laid before? MR OKIROR: Not for the remaining subregions.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think what he is raising is very important. Leaders from the different sub regions can lay the documents on the Table. We can call subregion by subregionWest Nile Subregion4.27MR ISAAC OTIMGIW  (NRM, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay a report of the Parish Development Model oversight for West Nile Subregion, signed by the Members. I beg to lay.Bukedi Subregion4.27MR RICHARD OSEKU (NRM, Kibale County, Pallisa):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay a report of the performance of the 7836 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTPDM monitoring by the Bukedi Subregion Members of Parliament.Busoga Subregion4.28MS AGNES TAAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Mr Speaker , for Busoga Subregion, we had uploaded the report for all Members. The chairperson who has the copy is not around. I had only prepared to present. We will participate in the debate. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, we are an e-Parliament. Since it is uploaded on Alfresco, lay it; we shall capture it.MS TAAKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Bugisu SubregionTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I request honourable colleagues who are laying to come to the frontbench so that we do not waste a lot of time moving around. 4.28MR JOHN MAGOLO  (NRM, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Mr Speaker, this is a report for Bugisu Subregion on the status of the Parish Development Model as per the terms given to us by the Speaker. I beg to lay.Teso Subregion4.29MR BOSCO OKIROR (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): Mr Speaker, this is the report of Teso Parliamentary Group on regional PDM implementation monitoring from 6 to 24 February 2023. I beg to lay the report and the annexures therein. Karamoja Subregion4.29MR JOHN BOSCO NGOYA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the PDM monitoring report for Karamoja Parliamentary Group for the nine districts. Ankole Subregion4.30MR BASIL BATARINGAYA  (NRM, Kashari North County, Mbarara): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the joint monitoring report on the Parish Development Model for Ankole Subregion. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Rutahigwa is here. Come and lay the report. We even have the commissioner present.Western (Kigezi Subregion)4.30DR ELISA RUTAHIGWA (NRM, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Kigezi report is already uploaded. I beg to lay it. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.Western (Bunyoro Subregion)4.31MS JANEPHER MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kagadi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Bunyoro subregion report is also uploaded. I beg to lay. Western (Rwenzori Subregion)4.31MR RICHARD GAFABUSA (NRM, Bwamba County, Bundibugyo):  Mr Speaker, I beg to lay a joint monitoring report on the status of the implementation of the Parish Development Model for the Rwenzori subregion. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Western (Tooro Subregion)4.31MR BRIGHT AMOOTI (NRM, Kyaka Central County, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay a report on the Parish Development Model implementation for Tooro subregion. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. [Mr Oseku] REPORTS ON THE PARISH DEVELOPMENT MODEL7837THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 4 APRIL 2023Central (Buganda Subregion)4.32MS BETTY NALUYIMA (NUP, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the report on the Parish Development Model for the central region - Buganda. It is already on the network. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is someone from Sebei around?MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been checking through for these reports on my iPad, but I have not seen the Bunyoro report –(Interjection)–  I beg to be guided.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Sarah Opendi, the report for Bunyoro was received in our office and it : was uploaded. We shall ensure that you receive it. (Applause) Honourable colleagues, the question I put for debate is that this House adopts reports of subregional oversight visits – honourable colleagues, I made it clear that I have not received the report from Acholi in the office. Therefore, they cannot lay what they have not submitted to the Clerk and the Office of the Speaker. Oh! The youth also did their report – please, if there are interest groups, which have reports, I will give them a chance.4.34MR BONIFACE OKOT (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the report on the Parish Development Model, titled, “The Status Report on the Implementation of the Parish Development Model by the Youth Members of Parliament.” THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. This is a special interest group. Honourable colleagues, the question for debate is that Parliament adopts the subregion oversight reports on the Parish Development Model. Debate opens now, for 60 minutes.Honourable colleagues, this is how we are going to do it: I will start from the back, then to Hon. Koluo, Hon. Flavia, the Member for Makindye-Ssabagabo and then to the Member for PPP, Hon. Milton Muwuma and then I will come here. Honourable colleagues, you participated and have all these issues. Let us use two minutes so that other colleagues can also participate in the debate; let us be fair. 4.36MR NELSON OKELLO (UPC, Maruzi North County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I also want to thank your office for giving us leave to go down to the constituencies.As far as the PDM is concerned, there are many issues, particularly in regard to allocations in parishes. For example, in Apac, one of the parishes - Abedi in Apac Subcounty, has 20 villages. Other parishes have 10, nine, three or even two villages. However, they are given a similar allocation. Apac District has 33 SACCOs and Apac Municipality has 20 SACCOs, which gives a total of 53 SACCOs. So far, a total of Shs 32 million has been disbursed to the SACCOs’ accounts. The big challenge, Mr Speaker, is that the community cannot access funds from the SACCOs’ accounts. This is a planting season and we are getting the first rains – in the north, our first rains begin in March to April. The parishes that have selected agriculture as their enterprises cannot access those funds and they are in a dilemma. The Office of the Prime Minister is coming up with guidelines after guidelines. Let them come with a single set of guidelines and allow our farmers to access these funds.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Clerk, I do not think those were two minutes. Please, in the interest of allowing more Members to participate, we need more time.7838 MINISTERIAL STATEMENT4.39MR JOSEPH KOLUO (Independent, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I further thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving us the opportunity to do the monitoring of these funds. Similar to what my brother has just raised, in Toroma County, we have about 30 SACCOs. According to the documents we have, the money is on the accounts in the selected banks. However, when these groups go to the bank to withdraw the money, there is no money. This is very bad because this is a planting season; these people need to buy seeds. Finally, the support staff, who are supposed to sensitise the beneficiaries, do not have any facilitation. They even fear reaching out to these communities because the communities become wild, and this is hindering the running of the programme. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.4.40MS FLA VIA NABAGABE (NUP, Woman Representative, Kassanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In Kassanda District, I actually realised that most of the SACCOs have not yet received funds. Although the district claims to have received the money – we spoke to some district technocrats and they said they sent it - the SACCOs’ records reflect there is no money on their bank accounts. I think this is something we need to take into consideration and see that funds are disbursed as soon as possible. I also realised, according to some of the SACCOs that we spoke with, that there is an element of non-inclusivity and bipartisanship within the SACCOs and how they are recruiting some of the members that are recipients of the funds. Most of these SACCOs are occupied by NRM cadres. We do not know whether the Parish Development Model was brought up to only cater for NRM cadres because, they say, this is their money and so, they are occupying every seat and they want all the funds for themselves. My recommendation is that the NRM party should not hijack the Parish Development Model because this is supposed to benefit everyone. Finally, we also realised that there is lack of coordination regarding agricultural inputs for most of our farmers in the SACCOs. These were promised, but farmers do not have the right information. Our recommendation is that information should be well coordinated. Who disperses information to these SACCOs? Who is in charge of giving them seeds and agricultural inputs that they need? The rainy season is here, but farmers have received nothing. These are some of the submissions and reports that I got from Kassanda District. Thank you very much. 4.42MR DA VID SSERUKENYA (NUP, Mak-indye-Ssabagabo Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to appreciate the Government for coming up with this pro-gramme. However, I have three recommenda -tions:1. We need to come up with a monitoring and evaluation programme so that we can monitor this money. You cannot succeed with such a huge sum of money without monitoring and evaluation. So, we need to come up with some funding for that.2. We have to come up with a Ward Development Model because we have very many people in the cities compared to villages. I will give you an example: in my constituency, I have a parish called Masajja Parish that has 150,000 people. If you are giving them Shs 100 million, this is very little money. Therefore, we better leave the Parish Development Model for villages and come up with a Ward Developmental Model for the cities. REPORTS ON THE PARISH DEVELOPMENT MODEL7839THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 4 APRIL 20233. Lastly, I want to recommend that we skill the beneficiaries because we are targeting the most needy. These are people who know nothing; they cannot do any business and will just “eat” the money. Therefore, it is better we first skill them before we give them the money. Thank you very much. 4.44MS AISHA KABANDA (NUP, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is a disconnect between the Electoral Commission and Local Government. In 2019, new parishes were created and they became electoral areas and councillors were elected for those areas. However, while allocating money, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, together with the Ministry of Local Government, did not consider these parishes. In my district, two parishes were created: Kakubo and Kamugombwa and they were left out. The old parish is saying they are not going to share with them because they are not part of them. Letters have been written and the Minister of Local Government is saying they have never gazetted those parishes and they do not know them. This disconnect between the Electoral Commission and the Minister of Local Government is causing a problem. Secondly, the guideline that says that SACCO leaders should not get money is also self defeating. In all fairness, people who manage funds should also be given an opportunity to benefit; they are part of them. Guidelines have been released that they will not benefit or they will be the last to receive funds. They have lost morale to manage their own colleagues because of this. I beg that those issues be addressed. Thank you. 4.45MS SANTA OKOT (PPP, Aruu North County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Parish Development Model is very good on paper, but delays will make people lose interest in it. Even if the Acholi Parliamentary Group has not laid their report on the Table, I have heard that individual SACCO members are being told to open up accounts in banks. How many accounts shall we open in those banks? For example, if a local person opens an account in the bank and has borrowed maybe Shs 200,000 for maize seeds, and maize takes about three to four months to mature before the person starts getting money to service their loans, how many accounts will be closed? We need to streamline these issues.The second issue that I want to report on is in line with what Hon. Aisha Kabanda reported. Two parishes in my constituency have not been included in the second batch of the purported Shs 25 million, which was sent to the account. These are Gorokon Parish and Omeda Parish in Aruu North Constituency. I wanted it to be on record because I already told the Minister of Local Government about this issue. These parishes have already been created and in the case of Omeda and Gorokon, they even registered with the cooperative society and they have the certificate. Therefore, we do not know why they were left out of the Shs 25 million which was sent to the accounts. I personally sent three groups to check on their bank accounts. They went to the bank and the bank stopped them from checking the account, meaning that the money is not there. Everybody is saying the money is not there because I tasked our Chief Administrative Officer –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let Mama conclude.MS SANTA OKOT: I want to conclude that on Women’s Day, I tasked the Chief Administrative Officer to give the women proof that that money is on the account. The CAO was tactful and said, “I am not a signatory to those accounts. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development sends money straight to the parish SACCOs.” He could not give us an update. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have allowed Hon. Santa Okot an extra minute because she is the Chief Whip of the People’s Progressive Party. (Laughter)7840 MINISTERIAL STATEMENT4.48MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. The discrepancies in disbursed amounts to different parishes is a key observation across all parishes in the country. I have a parish that got Shs 17 million, another got Shs 25 million and another one has got Shs 45 million, but we were flagging them off at the same time. When rating them, how will their performance be rated? These are issues that we want the minister to address.Regarding facilitation and budgets for parish chiefs, these have been kept aside yet we are asking them to monitor what they have not been involved in. We appeal to the minister to look for something to facilitate the movement of the parish chiefs. The issue of the ever-changing guidelines - Every morning, there are different guidelines for this programme and at midday, different guidelines come up. We may end up losing out totally if this is not addressed. Finally, Mr Speaker, is the issue of the same beneficiaries in all Government programmes. Those that benefited from Bonna Baggagawale are the ones benefiting from Emyooga and they are the same people in the PDM hence, we are not addressing what this programme envisaged. Thank you very much. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I am picking another round. Let us use two minutes. 4.50MS LAURA KANUSHU (NRM, PWD Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concern about the Parish Development Model is on the 10 per cent that is designated for persons with disabilities at every parish. We had a number of them in Kyankwanzi to consult on the Parish Development Model as well as other things and the problem has been exclusivity. Mr Speaker, our understanding was that per -sons with disabilities in a particular parish would be allowed to constitute themselves into a SACCO to be able to get their 10 per cent. For example, if Shs 500 million is going to a parish, 10 per cent of that money should go to persons with disabilities. To our disappointment, as Members of Parlia -ment representing people with disabilities, they have been refused to come up with their own SACCOs and are being told to join the other SACCOs. As Members of Parliament, how do we then monitor that the 10 per cent designated for persons with disabilities is actually being utilised by them? We would like the minister to come out clearly and tell us whether the 10 per cent was a lie to persons with disabilities. Otherwise, they are not getting it. They are being told, “Go and join other groups”. These are the most vulnerable people in the whole country – (Interruption)MS AISHA KABANDA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. If you recommend that 10 per cent in a parish be given to the disabled persons in that parish - and that was a recommendation by the ministry - you presuppose that if Shs 500 million is given to a parish, 10 per cent goes to the disabled people. You may find a parish with one disabled person; so, do you suggest - (In-terjections) - Can I pose my question? Do you suppose that the Shs 50 million would benefit that one person in that parish?MS KANUSHU: Hon. Kabanda, first of all, there can never be one person with a disabili -ty in a parish since there is a whole executive. The leadership of persons with disabilities is from the village and there are at least five or six members. When we went to monitor, they did not tell us that they had only found one person with a disability. The comment was, we have been refused to come up with our own SACCOs as persons with disabilities. Therefore, how do we access the 10 per cent?Mr Speaker, there is a leadership structure of persons with disabilities at every level in this country, including the parish. So, it cannot be one person at a parish. [Mr Oseku]REPORTS ON THE PARISH DEVELOPMENT MODEL7841THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 4 APRIL 2023THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Col-leagues, this is very easy. What Hon. Aisha and Hon. Kanushu raised are for information  pur -poses; for the minister to go and study further and find out whether there are parishes that have not formed SACCOs or where disabled persons are not benefiting.As representatives, I think we would have done our part - For example, in a certain area, you may have disabled people who do not quali -fy for the PDM money since there are other qualifications needed to get that money. Both Members have valid arguments, but it is now the minister in charge to take the information and come back with very clear solutions.The colleagues that I had picked – [Member rose] - Which part of your body is disabled? (Laughter)4.55MR BONIFACE OKOT (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to start by stating that empowered youth are a very strategic resource for development. I have four core concerns. One is that young people need clarity from the minister as to whether the 30 per cent that had been proposed in the implementation guide-lines is for membership or funding. Just like the PWDs, many young people have been told they cannot form their SACCOs, but should in-stead join the other SACCOs.My second point is on the timing of the inter -ventions. The young people have been clear that this is an agricultural financing model and therefore, it must be cognisant of the planting seasons. In the past, we have had programmes where inputs or support is delivered at the wrong time and we waste a lot of taxpayers’ money.My third point is on inclusion of the youth in the guidelines. It is stated that the parish youth council chairperson will be part of the commit -tee, but we have noted, Mr Speaker - (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conclude, be-cause the youth are a huge constituency.MR BONIFACE OKOT: Asante for the sup-port, Mr Speaker. The young people are unhap-py that in some areas, there has been nepotism and the elected youth parish chairpersons have been relegated or excluded from the guidelines yet they are supposed to be part of the com-mittee. They want to deliberately and meaning -fully be included in the SACCO leadership, if there is a quota for them. My final point is on information. There is a lot of contradictory information about the Parish Development Model. Our prayer is that they harmonise these guidelines, but also that the guidelines be translated in the local languages because the majority of the people that we are attending to are illiterate. We need these guide-lines to be simplified to them in the local lan-guages. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Naigaga, hold on a little. Youth MPs are few; so, let them supplement what their colleague has said and we know that the youth are sorted.4.58MS AGNES KIRABO (NRM, Youth Repre-sentative, Central): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This PDM programme is very good for the young people, but this policy of dispersing money on individual accounts is not right. I thought what we agreed and passed was to wire money on group accounts for groups that have planned projects of implementation and not in-dividual accounts. These funds are exposed to the risk of compli -cated accountability or even failure to account for the money. Otherwise, we are going to make a total loss of this money, if they do not revise that policy. Thank you.4.59MS PHIONA NYAMUTORO (NRM, Youth Representative, Female):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to add a voice of emphasis on access of the PDM funds by young people in the country. The ministry had clearly ga-7842 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTzetted 30 per cent of the PDM funds for the youth, but there is a variation that on the parish committee, there is a select position of secre-tary for youth yet there is no representation on the SACCO leadership. Moreover, the SACCO is where the money goes. That is the biggest challenge; that young people cannot access the money from the SACCO. Most importantly, Mr Speaker, we have faced lots of challenges from revolving funds such as these right from the times of the Youth Liveli -hood Programme (YLP) because of lack of ca-pacity building. Our question is, when does the ministry intend to build the capacity of these young people before they can access the fund? Without financial discipline, we are worried that this money will go to waste. We also request that since the amount is 30 per cent, it would be very important if the ministry could have guidelines for the young people to follow so that their groups are exact on what enterprises they can set up and how best they can benefit. Thank you. (Applause)5.00MR BERNARD ODOI (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. One of the challenges that our people are facing is actually determination of the “poor among the poor”. Aware that most of our communities are generally poor, it is a huge problem that the leaders of SACCOs in our places have not determined who is “poor among the poor”. This leaves so many of our young people isolated from this project that would otherwise be beneficial to them. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Naigaga?5.01MS MARIAM NAIGAGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have two issues to raise to the minister. One is the lack of staff in strategic positions at the lower local governments. As we speak, some parishes in some districts do not have parish chiefs, some subcounties do not have agricultural extension workers and community development officers yet, as per the presidential directive, we did not have to beg the Ministry of Public Service to have these strategic positions filled. I want to re-echo the issue of inequalities and inconsistencies in the release of funds. Mr Speaker, we received funds in two batches; the first batch was from the Ministry of Local Government, the mother ministry of the lower local governments. It is quite unfortunate that it released less money and as Namutumba District, out of the 111 parishes, only 53 received the first batch of Shs 17 million and the second batch from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was cross-cutting and it was very clear; each parish got Shs 25 million.We want the Minister of Local Government to clarify this because they are the custodians and the mother of the lower local governments. I beg to submit. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Shartsi, Hon. Katenya and Hon. Ameede.5.03MS SHARTSI MUSHERURE (Independent, Mawogoola North County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The challenges of the PDM are immense and just like Emyooga, we will continue to have challenges, but I wanted to inform you that Ssembabule District, and in particular my constituency of Mawogola North, has 117 beneficiaries from three parishes. By the end of this week, beneficiaries from 65 parishes, which make up Ssembabule District, will have received their money. As we vouch for community mobilisation, information and mindset change, there are good stories to tell. I am following up as the Member of Parliament, knowing that this is part of my role of oversight and I just want to emphasise that this is a Government programme which must work. For those who are keen, just like Emyooga, I have good stories to tell. People have returned [Ms Nyamitoro] REPORTS ON THE PARISH DEVELOPMENT MODEL7843THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 4 APRIL 2023funds and Emyooga is working. The PDM can also work, but we have a lot of work to do. However, there is a good story from Ssembabule. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 5.04MR ISAAC KATENYA (Independent, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on two issues, especially on the first and second pillars. I wanted to ask the Minister of Local Government regarding the first pillar on production, storage, processing and marketing and the second pillar on infrastructure development and economic services. Mr Speaker, some people will soon start producing crops from their gardens and other areas, but we do not have preparations for storage and the money, which has been provided, does not cater for food storage facilities. On the issue of infrastructure development, after the disasters in the Elgon zone, we are facing problems of roads, especially feeder roads in parishes and subcounties. The money you provide is very little and people keep on asking us about the bad roads and yet the PDM programme provided for this infrastructure. When will you provide these funds and how much money did you budget in this Financial Year 2023/2024 for the development of infrastructure under the PDM so that we can be in position to tell our people? We have questions that we cannot answer. Moreover when changing guidelines for the PDM, you do not inform us, as Members of Parliament. We go to the radios and people call us, but we do not have answers to some of the questions we normally face from the public. Mr Speaker, I think the Minister of Local Government should be in position to make clarification on these three issues. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Okiror and then Hon. Lematia. 5.06MR BOSCO OKIROR (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have two observations to make. I associate myself with the able submissions of colleagues, but specifically from Katakwi, there is a challenge that can only be resolved by the Minister of Local Government. We have the funds, which have been sent to SACCO accounts, but the stakeholder training in respect of the Parish Development Model management information system and the financial inclusion system has not been done. The Ministry of Local Government has not trained the various stakeholders in the district. We cannot access or transfer any money until members have been trained in those two systems. This has incapacitated access to these resources. All this speaks to one thing: the purpose for which we are having the PDM is to boost our agriculture sector, and the planting season is coming and it is moving at a very terrific speed. The rains are falling, but we are not sending staff to go and train people to access the money. You will give this money during the dry season and it will be used for solving other issues and not the intention of the PDM. At the end of the day, we are working in futility. This brings me to my second point. I think it was an error for us, as the Parliament of Uganda, to allow the issue of seeds to be removed from – They used to give to Members of Parliament seeds to give to the constituency and they used to be delivered timely. We were guided that this money is going to be put in the PDM; so, when are we getting this money because this is the planting season? We are only creating havoc and contributing to famine in our own country because of our delays. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Lematia?5.08MS RUTH LEMATIA (NRM, Maracha East County, Maracha): Mr Speaker, thank you very much for giving me this opportunity. I want to speak on the discrepancy in disbursing 7844 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTthis money. In Maracha, when Shs 7 million was given out, 15 parishes missed and when Shs 25 million was given, three parishes missed. I do not know when that is going to be corrected.In addition, the money which has arrived there – Last week, when I asked my people whether they are using the money, I was told that people are not very familiar with the use of this money. They have only given funds to a few SACCOs to see whether it will work well. I think this is because training on how to use this money was not thoroughly done. Thank you very much. 5.09MS STELLA ATYANG (NRM, Woman Representative, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also associate myself with my colleagues. The Parish Development Model was supposed to reach the community by last year, but it is two years down the road and it has not yet started. Out of the Shs 100 million that was supposed to have been taken to the community, only Shs 17 million has surfaced on the groups’ accounts in my district.There was Shs 25 million, which was circulating and it was said to have been released and put on the groups’ accounts, but that Shs 25 million has not yet reached the groups’ accounts. I wonder what has happened to it. Mr Speaker, what is also affecting us is non-allocation of funds to cater for the preparation of these groups. There is no money to facilitate mobilisation of groups by the respective office that is concerned at the district; that is the commercial office and that office is too understaffed to cater for the whole district. There is need to recruit more staff to help in terms of preparation as well as mobilising and monitoring of these groups. Mr Speaker, the delay in the implementation of the Parish Development Model is as a result of changing guidelines. The concerned district officials have failed to do their work well be-cause of the changing guidelines. They have been instructed to hold on and they cannot do anything without instruction from the respec-tive – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon-ourable colleagues, earlier on, I told you that we had not received the report from Acholi sub-region. The Chairman of the Acholi Par -liamentary Group has submitted the report to the Clerk and we can use this opportunity to also lay it on the Table so that it forms part of reports. It was the only sub-region, which had not yet finished.MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF SUB-RE -GIONAL OVERSIGHT REPORTS ON THE PARISH DEVELOPMENT MODEL Northern (Acholi Subregion)5.12MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Mr Speaker, thank you for this opportunity. Allow me to submit the re-port on the Parish Development Model by the Acholi Parliamentary Group. I beg to lay.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. MR AKOL: I also kindly request you to give me time.5.12MR SAMUEL OKWIR (NRM, Moroto County, Alebtong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank you for giving me this chance. The Parish Development Model was an idea very well thought out. However, I have two or three issues to raise. First, everybody is commenting about the change in the guidelines. By now, all parish-es should have received about Shs 200 mil -lion. However, we are talking of Shs 37 mil -lion while others are talking of Shs 25 million. Could this be a delaying tactic? Moreover the guidelines are being changed time and again. Is it because we do not have the money?Secondly, some parish chiefs who are sup-posed to handle these people are not receiv -ing their salaries and some have spent three to four months without a salary. This brings the issue of extortion that we are hearing on the ground because somebody leaves their home [Ms Lematia] REPORTS ON THE PARISH DEVELOPMENT MODEL7845THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 4 APRIL 2023on an empty stomach to go and work yet in the evening, they have to present something for the family.The third issue is that we are pumping a lot of money on this Parish Development Model and some of the key infrastructure is being left out, especially the roads. I do not know what we are going to use to carry the big output that we shall get from this Parish Development Model if we do not have infrastructure like roads to take produce to the markets. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will start with those who were here as we started plenary – Now some have started complaining. (Laugh-ter) I can see that most of you were not here and the ones who were not here are the ones saying, “Yes.” I will pick the Member for Iban-da and then the Member for Vurra – Everyone who has spoken today, first take your seat. After the Member for Vurra, I will pick Dr Ku-gonza, the Member for Ntungamo, Hon. Os-eku, Hon. Aleper, Hon. Katalihwa, UWOPA chairperson – Oh, UWOPA has spoken. So, I will pick Hon. Balmoyi, Hon. Otimgiw, Hon. Ogwal, the Member for Mbarara, the Member for Rukiga and then I will come back. Honourable colleagues, I am going to give you time.5.17MS JANE BAINOMUGISHA (NRM, Wom-an Representative, Ibanda):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Parish Development Model can transform this country in terms of develop -ment. However, I would like to emphasise the need for monitoring and routine sensitisation of the beneficiaries of these SACCOs.In my constituency, most SACCOs received the money, but there is a challenge of acces-sibility of these funds. We need to know when we are taking off to use this money.The second issue is that the objective of this Parish Development Model is to benefit the poorest persons in the constituency. Howev-er, you realise that the banks are using only one language. I request the ministry to put up guidelines so that these banks can use a friend-ly language, especially for the local people. They need a language that they can understand, especially when applying for these funds. I beg to submit. 5.18MR YOV AN ADRIKO (NRM, Vurra Coun-ty, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In Vurra Constituency, we have 32 SACCOs. Out of those, 11 groups received their money. How-ever, what I have seen on the ground is that the money never reached the true beneficiaries. They opened accounts, but when they go and check their accounts, they find that there is no money. What is the problem? If the money is there, why is it that when they go, they do not get it? This means there is something going on or maybe they have embezzled the money and are trying to dodge the beneficiaries. I request the Minister of Local Government to be serious, particularly with the local govern-ments because I have seen a challenge there. At the Central Government, we have tried our best to send money to the local governments, but those people are using tricks to embezzle this money. People are not benefiting from this programme. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.5.20MS ZUMURA MANENO (NRM, Woman Representative, Obongi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In Obongi District, we have 28 par -ishes meaning that we have 28 SACCOs that are supposed to benefit from the Parish Devel-opment Model funds. Funds are being given to the parishes, but the beneficiaries are not ac-cessing these funds. I wonder why. We need to do something so that the beneficiaries are in position to access their funds. Secondly, everyone in this House knows the amount of money that a parish chief gets as a salary. They do not have gadgets, transport and computers for keeping the data of the Parish Development Model. I request that the ministry provides computers and transport for the parish 7846 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTchiefs for easy mobilisation of members and keeping the data of the Parish Development Model. We also need capacity building for the parish chiefs instead of the heads of departments being trained on the Parish Development Model because it is the parish chiefs who are in touch with the communities. They should be trained and given capacity to empower the communities with whatever knowledge they get from that training. Lastly, in Obongi, the Parish Development Model has not yet been activated. Now that the President is moving around talking about wealth creation, the technocrats are running up and down; they want to disperse the funds without training the beneficiaries. If these funds are given to the beneficiaries without them receiving the training, it is going to be the same story as that of Emyooga and the Youth Livelihood Programmes. Thank you so much. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, allow me to make a general observation, which will help me in managing the House. This House is cosmopolitan, but people from the same region like sitting together. You want me to pick you yet you are from one region. We need to get ideas from the whole country. No, it is a general observation. You find Ankole seated together, Lango seated together and West Nile seated together. I have three MPs from West Nile seated together over there, I have three MPs from Ankole seated together - Allow me to advise you. I am advising you on why I will keep on skipping you. I cannot pick three people who are seated together and are from the same region as if there are no people on the other side. So, colleagues, learn to distribute yourselves, mingle and be friends with people from other regions. Move around and mix, and not with the same agenda - you know. Do not be like Hon. Sarah Opendi who only sits with people from Rwenzori and yet she is from there. (Laughter) Let us move on to Hon. Emely Kugonza and Hon. Balmoyi.5.23DR EMELY KUGONZA (NRM, Buyanja East County, Kibale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In Kibaale District, Buyanja East County, which I represent in this august House, we received the PDM funds. When we went there for assessment, the beneficiaries had not yet received the done so. However, this weekend, the first disbursement came and the people are very excited. I would like to mention a few things about the Parish Development Model. The anchor of the PDM is actually the SACCOs; SACCOs are globally known to be member-formed, member-managed and member-used financial institutions. That gives the members who started them the power to run them. What is happening right now is that the Government is actually empowering the communities. We must also realise that we are dealing with a very sensitive group; people that have not been in the money economy. These people have had fears about money and the bureaucracy that we have subjected them to has denied them access to the programme. They have developed even a greater fear for money. In addition, in many cases, we are dealing with people who are illiterate yet all the forms that they get from the banks are in English; a language they do not understand. They are even asking us, the Members of Parliament, whether they will not be taken to jail after some time. These are some of the things that we need to address. The implementing agency must come up with a programme that empowers SACCOs to work. That is why they are getting certificates from the Ministry of Trade, as per the SACCO Act, to be able to operate - (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Balmoyi.[Ms Nabbanja][Ms Maneno] REPORTS ON THE PARISH DEVELOPMENT MODEL7847THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 4 APRIL 20235.25MS SHARON LAKER (NRM, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Gulu District has 47 parishes and so far, two parishes of Bungatira and Paicho have been enrolled to partake of the Parish Development Model funds. However, as I speak, Paicho only got Shs 25 million out of what they should have gotten. About three weeks ago, the President was in Gulu visiting the Acholi subregion. He was calling the wanainchi  to come and testify about the Parish Development Model. They said that money was being extorted from them by the commercial officers and other technical people.This weekend, the State House Anti-Corruption team was in Gulu and they arrested the commercial officer of Gulu City. What the technical people are saying is that the ministry did not provide funds for the parish chiefs and commercial officers to move around, sensitise the people and carry out their other activities. That is the reason they were extorting money from members; Shs 5000, Shs 20,000 and so forth. If they do not go to the communities, they will be faulted for failure to perform their duties. I would like the Ministry of Local Government to go back to the drawing board and restructure or craft a better method of how PDM can succeed otherwise, this is already looking like a failed project. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Clerk, are we still within the two minutes each? I doubt it. I am noting Members who speak and walk out after submitting. Next time, I will not pick you; you will stand up several times and I will just keep quiet because you want to speak and go. We are not here to just go on the Hansard; we are here to deliberate on serious issues and you can only deliberate well if you listen and learn from others. I have noted some of you. I had picked you, Hon. Aleper.5.28MR MOSES ALEPER (NRM, Chekwii County (Kadam), Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My first issue is on false reporting by the Centre. The money that was supposed to have been released around February this year actually landed in the accounts just last week. This type of reporting actually is misleading the masses.We go with the understanding that the money has gone to the districts and we go and start witch-hunting people at district level. This should stop. This actually is very characteristic of the money that is supposed to go for similar programmes in the country.Secondly, in my district of Nakapiripirit, no parish received the money. Therefore, even the community facilitators from the commercial office did not carry out any training. They are just starting to train people now. The next disbursement of money will surely arrive very late and I am sure that nothing much will be done. The SACCOs for the Parish Development Model were supposed to operate in such a way that one programme feeds into another. The seeds should have been there so that the crop is harvested and the enterprises that should have gotten the money to buy the products would have done exactly that. There is, however, a disruption that is going to affect the implementation and success of this programme. I also want to bring it to the attention of the country that we should not just live on false hope. This year, this programme will not meet our expectations. I think we have to be realistic and face the truth squarely. I bed to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable col-leagues, I am afraid we have reduced the whole parish model to one pillar. Even when you look at the reports, questions or comments, we have reduced it to only a pillar of financial inclusion; saying, “Where is the money?” Ugandans and their love for money -(Laughter)- But there are other pillars. I am interested in hearing someone tracing beyond - and Hon. Apea has gone beyond. I am interested in us looking at other pillars and tracing their performance so that even in the budget, we can ask, how are we reporting? 7848 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTMaybe you want us to have another session where we discuss the parish model minus the financial  inclusion pillar. Let us not make our work very easy. We have Hon. Agnes Apea and you can take advantage of her. Honourable member, stand up, I want Members to recognise you. She is among the people who designed this programme before becoming a Member of Parliament -(Applause) - She has played a very critical role. I am tell -ing you so that you take advantage of a col-league in the House. Honourable colleagues, let us not discuss the PDM in a light manner. We discussed the Bud-get Framework Paper; so, where are the oth-er pillars in the paper? They have submitted ministerial policy statements. Where are the pillars?The Leader of the Opposition submitted an alternative budget proposal. Where are all the pillars of the Parish Development Mod-el? Only then will we have a more structured debate. Otherwise, when we talk about issues like, “We have not received money,” everyone will fit into the debate. We are not here for purposes of just fitting into the debate. Let us make serious recommenda -tions for the Executive to go and consider. I just wanted to give that guidance. 5.33MS JOSYLINE KAMATENETI (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As a country, we have a lot of hope in the Parish Development Model. However, we have not considered Government organisations like NARO and NAGRC&DB, which are responsible for breeding. This Parish Development Model is based on a four-acre model where you find half an acre for coffee, another half for poultry and piggery projects - However, when people get money, they get piglets or chicks, which are not of good quality. As Parliament, we should put our priorities right by supporting the Ministry of Agricul-ture, Animal Industry and Fisheries because NARO and NAGRC&DB all fall under agri-culture. Let us task them to train our farmers and provide them with quality breeds such that we get quality output since in agriculture, we have three steps: input, production and output. Two, we need to work hard as leaders. We should be the torchbearers, we must look for markets , we must encourage people to form unions, and we should register people accord -ing to their production lines. If you have 10 or 40 parishes in your constituency, first find out how many people are doing piggery or poul-try projects such that we help them by, may-be, getting quality drugs because people buy fake drugs. You find that with all the money you have given them, they have bought fake drugs and all the chicks are dead. Therefore, as leaders, we really need to work very hard to support our people.Lastly, exclusion of LC1 chairpersons –(Mem-ber timed out.)5.35MR RICHARD OSEKU (NRM, Kibale County, Pallisa): Mr Speaker, there is a prob-lem to do with how the implementation of the Parish Development Model is going on. Just like you have mentioned, there are several pil-lars that are supposed to feed into each other so as to realise success in this programme. However, Government’s approach was to intro-duce the issue of financial inclusion. The target people are the poor. They needed a mind-set change before they could get into implemen -tation or accessing this money. That is one of the biggest problems we have and we need to emphasise the issue of mind-set change. Secondly, if the parish is the administrative unit where we implement this programme, the Min-istry of Local Government must put its books right. Like it has been said, very many parishes are still missing; they are not captured. They have prepared their groups, but they are not going to get the money. Therefore, we need to hear from the minister on what they are going to do about these parishes. [The Deputy Speaker] REPORTS ON THE PARISH DEVELOPMENT MODEL7849THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 4 APRIL 2023In Pallisa, for example, we have a total of nine parishes that are not included. In Agule there are two; Ariet and Kachinga. In Kibaale - I have been to the minister’s office for three years, but they have failed to correct this problem. One subcounty has only one parish yet they subdi-vided it into four parishes. They have a coun-cil, but the ministry has failed to address this problem. The other thing is that we are crying about money in this country. The Government claims to have sent – (Member timed out.)5.38MS CAROLINE KAMUSIIME (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukiga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The PDM is a good pro-gramme meant to help the poor, but the biggest challenge we have, especially in Rukiga, is that it was a rushed programme. People were not given enough time to study it and understand. When you go to the hard-to-reach areas, some people do not even know about the Parish De-velopment Model. Again, I will go to the issue of facilitation, es-pecially of parish chiefs. They were not given funds to move around yet these are the people who reach our local people. They were neither given time nor funds. I am requesting that in future, such an important programme should be given ample time so our people can understand and benefit from it. Otherwise, as I moved through Rukiga, I noticed that majority  never benefited because they were not sensitised. The other issue is that in Rukiga, only 13 par -ishes have received funds and 17 are still lack -ing. Now that the minister is here, I would like to know when all these parishes are going to receive the money. Thank you. 5.39MR MOSES OGWAL  (NRM, Dokolo North County, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I associate myself with the presentation of Lan-go, but there are a few areas that I would like to add. In our observations, the elders had a chal -lenge because of the environment of the SAC-CO. They are taken up very fast. If you have defaulted, you have a big challenge. The elders gave us information that they are not ready to go for a rushed process; they need to be taken in a different way. We should have some incentives, far more and above what we are providing, to bring the elders and the dis-abled on board. The other issue we noted was that we need to have the youth and women on board, as we agreed. More importantly, we noted that if you are supposed to give somebody money, you must give it to them if the only problem is money. However, if the problem is money and other things, then you have a problem. Therefore, we need to restructure ourselves in such a way that all those issues are cleared. That is why I would say, one, for agriculture to be promoted, you must look at breeds, skills and the market. That means you need to involve other stakeholders, especially the bigger private sector, to support. If it is a market then you have to arrange - how many enterprises are you going to have? You need a few so that you combine most of the items. As Dokolo District, we are preparing a solution paper with - (Member timed out.)5.41MS MARGARET AYEBARE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. All of us are rotating around money or financial inclusion because all the things require money. Mindset change, mobilisation - almost all pillars involve money.Mbarara District has 43 parishes and almost all of them have received money save for one parish of Nyamiriro where my brother Hon. Basil comes from. However, no one has accessed that money. One reason is that people have been told to open individual accounts. People have been calling me - some of us represent rural areas. Mbarara District is a rural area and people are told to go to Mbarara City where the banks are, to open accounts. 7850 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSome of these women do not have transport to travel, they do not even know how to read English to open the accounts. May I know whether these people can be allowed to open accounts in SACCOs that are everywhere? There are able SACCOs like Rwanyamahembe SACCO, Rubindi Farmers’ SACCO which are near my people. I am asking the minister, kindly, let me know whether people can open accounts in SACCOs that are near them.5.42MR DONALD KATALIHWA (NRM, Mwenge County South, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have three areas of concern. One of them, which is very serious, involves the dragging processes of the PDM. The energy that the PDM started with raised a lot of anxiety. However, I would not be lying to you if I said that people are getting disappointed these days. The energy was too high, anxiety was high, but nothing is coming out. People walked distances and had several meetings for over a year, but up to now, they have not received money. Mr Speaker, can we have your guidance on this? When should we have a deadline to have all districts or all ready groups receive money on their accounts rather than keeping on with this dragging process? The second issue is capacity building. Many Members here are talking about capacity building. My question is, how special is the PDM money that people have to be trained for over a year to manage Shs 1 million? Why should we assume that people cannot manage Shs 1 million to do agricultural production in their farms? Why can’t we give people money to start their work? The planting season is passing, but they are not cultivated because they have to be trained on how to buy seedlings. The last issue is information flow to our people regarding the PDM and previous programmes. We used to have coffee coming from UCDA, seedlings from NAADS and so on. However, today, all these are not being provided. We have questions from our communities; where is coffee? Where are the seeds? If you tell them that all the money has gone to the PDM, they may think you are politicking. Can we have clear information for – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.5.45MR ISAAC OTIMGIW (NRM, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Last time when you dispatched us to the constituencies for the PDM, we were supposed to receive the disbursements that had been sent to our districts. They were supposed to be put in our pigeonholes, but that was not availed by the relevant ministry. Therefore, we went to the district without knowing what the amount was. To date, they have not availed us with how much money has been given to each district regarding the PDM. This makes it hard for us to do oversight. Mr Speaker, whenever we come up with a project to uplift the livelihoods of our people, we come up with a blanket perspective. However, sometimes we need to look at the UBOS statistics. Yes, we talk of 39 per cent. For example, in West Nile, over 80 per cent of people fall below the 39 per cent. However, there are other districts where the number is less and they are receiving the same amount. Where is the equity in this aspect? Those are some of the things we need to look at. Another aspect we found is that there is no sensitisation. Most of these people do not even know how or where they are supposed to start their repayment plan from. Are they supposed to take the money to the district? Are they supposed to take it to the parish? That issue has not been addressed. In addition, the training is now done in reverse. We were supposed to have started with training. However, now the money is in the accounts, though not accessed. That is when they are doing training. I propose that we do things better next time. With this, I move a motion that we end this debate. (Laughter)REPORTS ON THE PARISH DEVELOPMENT MODEL [Ms Ayebare]7851THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 4 APRIL 2023THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rule 77 does not allow me to debate, but I have a representative who debates on my behalf - she is the one who went through my constituency; so, please, welcome the Woman MP, Mitooma . (Laughter)5.46MS JULIET BASHIISHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Mr Speaker, I wish to report that by the time I did my oversight visit, Mitooma District had not received funds; it was among those districts that were missing. For that matter, some of the parishes, as my sister Hon. Kabanda has said, Bukiriro - I am forgetting another one from the Deputy Speaker’s constituency. They were not considered because they were newly created. Secondly, when we were ushering in the PDM, we were convinced that one of the pillars would be complete mind-set change. However, to my surprise, people still believe in dependence rather than productivity. The moment a Member of Parliament tries to visit a home to help them with knowledge, when you leave without giving something, they are on to you. We have a challenge; the moment you send us out, they know you are sending us with money. Even the leaders at the district are waiting. You call them for a discussion and they want you to give them transport and lunch. I visited an office in the district and when I went to the production office, he sent me to the commercial office, and then all the councillors were following me because they see us as their messiah and they needed to have lunch that day. I request that we have a secretariat at the district because when you go there, you find they are all uninformed about what is taking place. I request that as you have a secretariat at the national level, let there be a secretariat at the district. Lastly, there is a problem of coordination at the parish level. Most of the parishes are actually briefcase parishes, including my own. They do not have offices, land and even the old parishes have run down headquarters. Therefore, you cannot even follow up the parish chief because they do not have addresses. I request that as you do whatever you do, make sure that the parishes have headquarters. Thank you, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, the issue of money and perceptions is an issue which will not go away; you are an MP in every aspect. That is why when you stand, even before being nominated, when you just announce that you are standing, they start calling you “honourable” because at that time, you have money. So, you are an MP meaning “Money Person”. (Laughter)When you get elected, to the people that you had running around and calling for meetings and yet you were not giving them money, you remain an MP – “Mean Person”. (Laughter) After spending everything and you lose an election, you still remain an MP – “Miserable Person”. (Laughter) So, whichever way, you are an MP. (Laughter) Therefore, remain MPs and be strong. We allowed leaders to submit their views and we considered that they had spoken, which is wrong. Let us just do a very quick round and I will start with Karamoja. Honourable member, we are not speaking in terms of districts, but subregions and you clapped when Rwenzori represented you. (Laughter) However, I will allow you to speak for Tororo.5.51MR JOHN BOSCO NGOYA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the case of Karamoja, out of the 493 gazetted parishes across the subregion, only 393 were reported to have received funds on their accounts. Most of the districts have already done training, formed SACCOs and registered them under the Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS). Unfortunately, they are still waiting for the money. Again, we are talking about this region that is famous for the wrong reasons; iron sheets and goats. So, the PDM becomes a timely thing and everybody is actually yearning for it. 7852 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTWhile the PDM committees have generated plans as a result of the training they have had, the rollout has not been very easy because the money for administration, which is supposed to go to the parish chiefs, has not been forthcoming. This is why in Karamoja we are really yearning for this PDM fund to be released - as well as the iron sheets and goats to be returned. The other bit that we learnt when we were having consultations in Napak was that the Parish Development Model committees decried the lack of guidelines or circulars to accompany releases of the money. The commercial officer indicated that they had written severally to the ministry to ensure that they give them a circular instructing them on how they should utilise the money and it had not yet come. Of course, there are fears on how you can spend funds without getting instructions – (Member timed out.)5.53MR RICHARD GAFABUSA (NRM, Bwamba County, Bundibugyo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. We shall continue talking about money under PDM because out of the seven pillars of the PDM, only two pillars have been talked about i.e. Financial Inclusion and the Parish-Based Information Management System. We are not seeing anything on the rest: social services, governance, administration, etc. A Member raised the issue of the ever-changing guidelines. In our region, especially my district, there are complaints that in addition to the changing guidelines, there are also different instructions coming from different sources. The Ministry of Local Government says this, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development says that and the Office of the Prime Minister says the other and they do not know who to follow. Can we come together, as Government, and agree on what to communicate and when?A colleague has already raised the issue of parish chiefs not having addresses where people can find them. They sit at the subcounty and some parishes are very far away from the subcounty headquarters so, it is not easy to follow them up. On the issue of disbursements, Mr Speaker, as we talk, we have entered the last quarter of the financial year. Ideally, every parish should have received –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us have Ankole and then Hon. Aol. 5.55MR BASIL BATARINGAYA (NRM, Kashari North County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am the Chairperson, Ankole Parliamentary Group. There are seven pillars, as we agreed here. However, today, we only have the Minister of Local Government, particularly – I think – because of the financial inclusion pillar. (Interjections) Yes, because the money is disbursed through his ministry –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is the overall ministry in charge of coordination of the Parish Development Model.MR BATARINGAYA: Yes. However, this money is destined, first of all, to the agricultural sector for production, storage, processing and marketing. This, to me, is not being addressed at all.Secondly, production, storage and processing needs electricity, water and good roads to transport the produce. When is this going to be addressed if we only focus on disbursing money to the people? Thirdly, how will our people access quality seeds, seedlings and breeds, especially those in hard-to-reach areas in the rural districts? Lastly, parish chiefs do not have offices where to operate from, but –(Member timed out.)5.58MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I worked previously as a rural [Mr Ngoya] REPORTS ON THE PARISH DEVELOPMENT MODEL7853THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 4 APRIL 2023development worker and when I saw the formation of groups for the Parish Development Model, I just concluded that this programme was dead on arrival. You cannot ask somebody who lives very far away to come together with a person who is near yet they have not been interacting with each other. We rejected very many groups in the villages and parishes and recommended the formation of new groups that had to include people with disabilities, the elderly, the youth and the women. This was a failure already.Secondly, you may recall that in the Financial Year 2021/2022, we budgeted for Shs 17 million per parish. In Gulu City, they received about Shs 4 million or Shs 3 million. Where has the Shs 12 million or Shs 13 million gone? This is very bad. We found that some officers like the Resident City Commissioners and Resident District Commissioners also decided to put their hands in that money. We said here that these funds should be for the poor. We can only plan for administration – (Member timed out.)6.00MS ROSE OBIGAH (NRM, Woman Representative, Terego): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am one person who listens to instructions and I have sat amongst colleagues who are not from West Nile. (Laughter)Mr Speaker, I still have a parish that has not received the PDM money. Terego has parishes that have up to 20 villages. Honestly, we will be cheating the other parishes that have 20 villages. I have another parish that has only four villages. It would be good if the ones that have more villages are catered for. Terego has never benefited from redesigning of villages and parishes. We are still in colonial times, meaning there is no village in Terego that has less than 300 able-bodied people. That is the least.That aside, Mr Speaker, my proposal is that the PDM be treated as a project with project managers so that we focus and give them terms and conditions other than burdening the already overburdened social workers, from community development officers to subcounty chiefs. Honestly, there are other things that are supposed to be done in the district apart from the PDM. Lastly, my people are asking when the seeds are coming. Terego does not get rain like here at the centre. I would be grateful to get feedback today on when the seeds will be delivered. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, wait a bit. Honourable minister, I need you to get all the reports because the issues that Members are raising here have been considered in the reports.Honourable minister, I need you to get these reports with their observations and recommendations. Comb through them because most of the issues are cross-cutting and give us a written response on issues that are crosscutting. Those that are not crosscutting; those that are unique to areas should be highlighted as unique to those areas. Honourable minister, I have given you one week; on Thursday next week, I will give you space on the Order Paper to submit the responses based on the recommendations and observations from the reports of subregions because I do not want colleagues to feel that you picked their reports, read them and laid them on the Table, but nothing was done. I want you to comb through them thoroughly and on Thursday, we shall handle only two items: the Parish Development Model where we shall start with the statement that will be giving responses on the reports, and then the Prime Minister’s Time. House adjourned to tomorrow at 2 o’clock. (The House rose at 6.03 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 5 April 2023 at 2.00 p.m.) Ursron 2o4oTHE REPUBUC OF UGANDAOFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTERPIOT9.11APOII.O (AGGWA ROAO. P.O. 'OX 341, KAMPALA. UGANOATETEPHONES G.ncr.ltrn! 0417 770500, W.b ww opm !o u!,E-m.rl pt@opm ao ll!ln any correspondence on thrs sublect, please quote No GD/13/23'1,46 March,2023Rt. Hon. Anita Annet AmongThe Speaker of the Parliament of UgandaKAMPALA flhan)*@ glslcz(-'t"@*aoa" P-F€t',1r\ "tlz3Rt. Hon,IPRESENTING THE REPORT ON UGANDA'S STATUS OF THEIMPLEMENTATION OF SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALSBEFORE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAIn September 2021, the Government of Uganda launched the SDG Roadmap202L / 2025 whrch operationalizes Uganda's SDG Institutional CoordinationFramework and provrdes priorrty actions to catalyse the implementatron ofSDGs during the NDP III period. The framework coordinated by the Officeof the Prrme Mrnister recognizes the conkrbution of Mimstries, Departmentsand Agencies and non- state actors including the United Nations, CivilSociety Orgaruzatrons, Private Sector and other development partners. TheSDG Roadmap also ouflines implementation structures, a timeframe for theroadmap implementation and resource mobilization strategy. It alsoprovides revrewrn& monitodng, evaluatiory and reportrngA Publrc Sector that rs responsrve and accountable rn steerrngUganda towards raprd economrc growth and developmentIn accordance to the new SDG Roadmap, Parhament and Members ofParliament have a significant role to play in mobrhzrng and allocatrngresources, providing oversight in the implementation of the SDGs, andplaying different other roles as champions, advocates, mobilisers, andambassadors for the SDGs due to their proximity to people in theirConshtuencresThis year, the Office of the Prime Mimster presented a CabinetMemorandum CT (2022) 130 on the Implementation Status and Progress ofthe Sustainable Development Goals and the 2030 Agenda to a Cabinetmeeting held on 10th October 2022. T"he aim of the Cabinet Paper was to;apprise Cabinet on the progress on the implementation of the SDGs inUganda, share the critical SDGs implementatton challenges that haveemerged during the implementation and coordination of SDGs and seekCabinet approval of the measures to accelerate the attainment of SDG targetswithin the framework of our Nafional Development Plan and Government'sLast Mile Strategy - the Parrsh Development Model. The Cabinet meetingapproved the proposed measures to accelerate the attainment of SDG targetswithin the framework of the NDP III as highlighted in the Action Extractfrom Minute No .359 (CT 2022)Preparations for the Country Progress on SDGs rmplementation commencedin 2020 The issues rarsed therein have been developed following countrywide consultations and an analysis of trends and factors affectrng SDGrmplementation. For instance, the SDG progress repofi 2021, andthe@A Publrc Sector that rs responsrve and accountable rn steerrngUganda towards raprd economrc growth and developmentVoluntary National Review 2020 were developed through analysis ofGovernment policies, programs and interventions This analysis helped inidentifying the gaps and recommendations for SDG implementationThe issues were addrtionally developed following stakeholder consultationsincluding the regional SDG dialogues where Local Govemment leaders wereengaged and provided feedback on what Govemment needs to do to fasttrack SDG implementation. The regronal SDG forums also provided anopportunity for the young people and chrldren to raise key pertinent rssuesconcerning their understanding and particlpahon in the SDGs.The National SDG conference of which you gave a key note address and theHigh-Level Political Forum further amplified the key concerns and issuesaffecting traction of SDGs. For instance, the rssue of coordinatron monitoringand reporting on the Afrrcan Union Agenda 2063 in both of the two events.All these issues were further consulted on internally with the technicalleadership and Top Management at the Office of the Prrme Mimster andexternally with key Government Institutions (National Planning Authority,UBOS, Minisky of Finance and Ministry of ICT) that are core to the SDGCoordination f ramework-The purpose of this communication, therefore, is to request you to presentthe Uganda's Progress rn the Implementation Status of SustainableDevelopment Goals Report to Parliament for information.kA Publrc Sector that rs responsrve and .ccountable rn steerrngUganda towards raprd economrc growth and developmentPlease receive assurances of my highest consideration.Justine Kasule Lumumba - Rt.Hon.MINISTER FOR GENERAL DUTIESAOCAL-POINT MINISTER FORSDGS, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTERCopy:Rt. Hon. Deputy Speaker of ParliamentRt. Hon Prime Minister of UgandaFirst Deputy Prime Minister and Mrnister for East AfrrcaSecond Deputy Prime Minister and Deputy Leader of GovernmentBusiness in ParliamentThrd Deputy Prime Minister and Minister without PortfolioGovernment Chief WhrpMinister of Finance, Planning and Economic DevelopmentHead of Pubhc Service/Secretary to CabinetClerk to Parliament of UgandaPermanent Secretary, Office of the Prime MinisterSenior Technical Advrser/ Head SDG SecretariatA Publrc Sector that rs responsrve and accountable rn steerrngUg.nda towards raprd economrc growth and development{tr,r}OF THE SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALSAND THE 2O3O AGENDA(Parlianrent Paper by the Miflister for General Duties/Focal -Point Minister for tlte Sustainable Deaelopnrcnt Goals, Olficeof tlrc Prinrc Minister)March 2023A1l7;-OFFICE c,FTHE PAIME MII\ItSTERTHE IMPLEMENTATION STATUS AND PROGRESS1EXECUTIVE SUMMARYThe Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), were adopted by all UnitedNahons Member States rn 2015 as a universal call to actron to end poverty,protect the planet and ensure that all people enloy peace and prosperrtyby 2030 Through the pledge to Leave No One Behind, countrrescommrtted to fast-track progress for those furthest behrnd frrstThe 17 SDGs, rvith a total of 169 targets and 232 rndrcators, recognize thataction m one area wrll affect outcomes rn others, and that developmentmust balance socral, economrc and envuonmental sustarnabrhtyThe SDGs are umque in that they cover issues that affect us all Theyreaffirm our internatronal commrtment to end poverty, permanently,everyrvhere. They involve us all to burld a more sustainable, safer, moreprosperous planet for all humanrtyUganda recogmzed the rmportance of the SDGs' contrrbutron to Uganda'ssocral development and long-term development planning frameworkConsequently, rn 2016 the Government instituted a NahonalCoordmation Framework under the leadershrp of the Offrce of the PrrmeMinister that created an enabling environment for the state and non-stateactors to achleve the rmplementation of the SDGs In Uganda, the SDGshave been implemented under the five-year National Development Plans(NDP n 2015/16 - 2079 /20 and NDP l 2A0/21. - 2024/25) and in thelong-term development agenda of Uganda Vrsion 20402The Oflice of the Prrme Minister and other key stakeholders beheve thatwith only seven (7) years remaining to the end of the 2030 Agenda, therers need for Parliament to be apprrsed on the SDG progress regrstered andshare Cabrnet approved recommendahons to accelerate the achrevementof SDGs.Thts Parhament paper presents Uganda's progress rn the rmplementatronof the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) agenda 2030 It alsohrghhghts achievements, challenges, and recommendations in thermplementahon of the new SDG roadmap, whrch rs ahgned to the RuhngParty Manrfesto, the Thrrd National Development Plan (NDP III) andother Government strategres and development frameworksThe oblectrves of this paper are marnlv to;i Apprrse Parhament on the progress ot the implementatron of the SDGsrn Uganda;ii Share the crrtrcal SDGs rmplementation challenges that have emergedduring the rmplementatron and coordrnatron of SDGs, and,tti Share Cabrnet approved proposed measures to accelerate theattarnment of SDG targets withrn the framework of our NationalDevelopment Plan and Governmenf s Last Mrle Strategy - the Par$hDevelopment ModelThrs Parliament Paper and the rssues raised theren have been developedfollowrng an analysrs of trends and factors affecting SDG rmplementatiorystakeholder consultatrons All these $sues were further consulted onrnternally wrth the techmcal leadership and Top Management at the3Office of the Prime Mlntster and externally with the key GovernmentInstrtutrons (Natronal Planmng Authorrty, UBOS, Mrnrstry of Frnance andMrmstry of ICT) that are core to the SDG Coordrnatron lrameworkThrs report rndrcates that progress has remarned uneven and that thecoronavirus 2019 (COVID-19) pandemrc has slorved dorvn the gams madeon some of the SDGs However, with coordrnated efforts, there rs stillhope that Uganda wrll make positive strides m achrevrng the SDGs by2030Durrng thrs reportrng period, Uganda conttnues to regrster progress inSDG tmplementation through,i Development of the new Roadmap for the Implementatron of theSustarnable Development Goals 2020 /27-2024/25 which provrdescatalytic and strategrc rnterventrons for the acceleratron of SDGsrmplementahonrr Presentatron of Uganda's Second Voluntary Nahonal Revrew(VNR) m 2020 aimed at sharng of experiences, successes,challenges and lessons in order to accelerate the implementatron ofthe 2030 Agenda This process has informed the roll out ofVoluntary Local Reviews at Local Governments whrch enablesrevrew of SDG progress at sub-nahonal levelslll. The Government conducted an annual assessment on progress ofSDGs and developed a Nahonal SDG Progress Report 2021 Thisreport hrghlights progress, bottlenecks and recommendatrons foreach goal rvithrn the context of NDP IIIiv The Government has also initiated a natronrvrde forum that bnngs4together all Stakeholders wrth an rnterest in the SDGlmplementahon process called "Uganda Annual SustarnableDevelopment Goals Conference. The frrst annual conference washetd rn June 2022 preceded by regional forumsUganda parhcrpated m the Hrgh-Level Polrtical Forum onSustainable Development in New York where the Governmentshared experrences from the SDG Conference and key models andVoluntary Natronal RevrewsThough, Uganda has regstered srgruficant progress in attainment ofSDGs, there are concerns about the Lkely negatrve rmpact of COVID-19on the progress reahzed over trme. There also challenges related to llmitedfinancrng for SDGs, data challenges, low levels of awareness of the LocalLeaders to Integrate SDGs wrth Local Development Initiatrves and lowlevels of drgrtrzahonThus, I led the Offrce of the Pnme Minister to present a CabinetMemorandum on status of SDGs implementatron to the Cabrnet meetingheld on 10th October 2022 under minute No 359 (CT 2022)'130 TheCabinet approved the followrng recommendatrons to accelerate theattamments of the SDG Targets wrthrn our nahonal developmentframeworksr. The Office of the Prrme Mmrster Ministry of Health, led by the Rt.Hon. Prime Mrnlster to convene a meetmg wlth the Mrnrster ofHealth and concerned stakeholders to devise means to address thepersistent outbreaks of malarra rn the country.5ii Mrnistry of Forergn Affairs, Mrmstry of Gender Labour and SocralDevelopment, should follow-up wrth Uganda's Ambassador toAzerbaqan, Amb. Muhammad Tezrkuba Krsamrra on the Pledgemade by the Government of Azerbalan to grve a Grant to theGovernment of Uganda to support Programs dtrectl1, benefitrngPersons wrth Drsabihhesrrr Mrmsky of Health, to submrt a Paper to Cabrnet explainrng therncrease of malarra cases rn the Countryrv Mrnistry of Frnance Planmng and Economic Development should,fast track the implementatron of the Integrated National FrnancrngFramework (INFF) as a means of mobrhzrng resources globally andnahonally to support sustainable development MoFPED needs torevrsit Uganda's Domestrc Resource Mobthzahon Strategy andassocrated pollcies that take into consrderatron these emergmgreahhesv The Ministry of Information, Commumcahons Technology andNational Gurdance, to work wrth Offrce of the Prrme Mrmster topopularize the Sustamable Development Goals.vt. Mrrustry of Agrrculture, Ammal Industry and Frsheries, to mcreasernvestment in agrrculture to foster food secunty and stabilzrng foodsupply charns through pohcy rncentrves to encourage value additiorysupport the central role played by e-commerce/ and expand the6drgrtal rnformahon mfrastructure rn the country. This will ensure thatdata remains supreme and an rmportant part of pnvate sectorgrowthvii Uganda Bureau of Stat$trcs, should contrnue to expand the numberof SDG rndrcators that have data pornts rn Uganda The developmentof statrstlcal plans by drfferent entitres should also be encouragedvrrr Ministry ot Public Servrce and Uganda Bureau of Statstlcs, to re-rnstate the posrtion of Statistrcrans m the structures for MDAs andHLGs for effective and efficrent dehvery on the qualrty data requredat both nahonal and local Govemment levels for SDGs and otherGovernment programs Lke Parrsh Development Model1XMrmstry of Local Government, to tran local leaders to rntegrate theSDGs rn the PDM rmplementation and the all-local developmentplans - includrng the new cities.x. Mrmstry of Scrence and Technology, to strengthen the engagementand mobrlzatron of the pubhc and prrvate stakeholders wrth digrtalinnovatrons and support them for scale upxr The Office of the Prrme Minrster (SDG Secretarrat), should conduct acomprehensrve documentatlon to identify the people left behrnd,those at a risk of being left behind, where they are found and in whatareas of servrce delvery they have been left behrnd1xu The SDG Secretarrat should take on an addttronal role of coordrnatmgthe follow-up on the Afnca Unron's Agenda 2063 srnce rt has not beenwell coordrnated srnce rts adoptron Thrs s because the 2030 Agendaand Afncan Union Agenda 2063 are both mutually rernforcingmternahonal and regional development strategies that support thenatronal pnontles of Ugandaxrir- The Offrce of the Pnme Minister should present the SDG progressreport and status of rmplementatlon to Parliament as a means ofmobiltzrng members of Parhament rn locahzahon of SDGsxrv The Government of Uganda coordrnated by the Offrce of the PrrmeMrnrster and Mmrstry of Forergn Affairs, should present Uganda thirdVoluntary Natronal Revlew (VNR) report to the High-Level PoliticalForum in New York rn 2024 and thrs requrres concerted elforts by allthree arms of Government.In conclusion Uganda has progressed rn the implementahon of SDGs,everyone rs needed to reach the ambitious SDG targets. Achreving theSDGs requrres partnershrp of governments, prrvate sector, crvrl societyand citizens to make sure we leave a better planet for future generattons.The creatlvrty, knowhorv, technology and financral resources from all ofsocrety $ necessary to achieve the SDGS m everl. context1.0 INTRODUCTION81.1 OVERVIEW1 11 This report presents the progress made by the Government ofUganda rn the rmplementatlon of the Sustarnable DevelopmentGoals (SDGs) Agenda 2030. The reports cover the achrevementsmade, challenges and the lvay forward m rmplementatron of thenerv SDG roadmap, which is ahgned to the RuLng Party (NRM)Mamfesto, the Third Natronal Development Plan (NDP III) andother Government strategies and development frameworks.1.1.2 Thrs report therefore hrghhghts the efforts made rn thecoordrnatron, momtoring and reporting of SDGs, the SDGsroadmap 2021-2025, the first natronal SDG conference, the High-level political forum on SDGs. In all these key events andrntervenhons, the report pornts to the key observahons and actionsrequued to gurde rmplementatron2.0 BACKGROUND2"1 In 2015, Member States of the Umted Nahons adopted the Agenda2030 for Sustarnable Development at the 69th Session of the UNGeneral Assembly where Uganda held the UN Presidency throughHon Sam Kahamba Kutesa for that year2.2 The lTGoals burld on the successes of the Mtllennium DevelopmentGoals, whrle rncludrng new areas such as clrmate change, economrcnequality, rnnovatron, sustalnable consumptron, peace and iustice,among other priorities The goals are rnterconnected -the key to9success on one will involve tackling issues more commonll,assocrated wrth another2.3 Honorable It4embers of Parhament, Uganda has over the years beena frontrunner in rmplementrng the 2030 Agenda for SustarnableDevelopment and the attendant 17 SDGs. Thrs unrversal plan forall countrres across the globe focuses on endrng povertv, protectingthe planet, and ensurrng prosperrty for all The 2030 Agendaprovides a focus for the rnternahonal commumty's developmentefforts untrl 2030 The 17 goals and 169 targets provide a yardstickby rvhrch progress is measured24 On 10th October 2022, the Office of the Pnme Mrmster, led by myoffice, under Cabinet Memorandum CT (2022) 130 presented aCabrnet Memorandum on horv Govemment is progressing in thermplementahon of the SDGs, wrthrn the context of the 3rd NatronalDevelopment Plan25 Colleagues the Cabinet Action Extract from mrnute No. 359 (CT2022) 130 of the meeting held on 10th October 20222 5.1 Noted the progress and achtevements made on the tmplementationof SDGs,2 5 2 Noted the crrtrcal SDGs implementahon challenges that haveemerged during the rmplementation and coordrnation of SDGs,and;102 5 3 Approved proposed measures to accelerate the attainment of SDGtargets wrthm the framework of our National Development Planand Government's Last Mile Strategy - the Parsh DevelopmentModel2.6 PROBLEM STATEMENT2 6 1 The Offrce of the Pume Mm$ter and other ke1, stakeholders behevethat with only seven (7) years remaimng to the end of the 2030Agenda, there is need tor Parhament to be apprised on the SDGprogress registered and seek pohc1, gutdance and directron on howto accelerate the SDG rmplementation2 6 2 The Offrce of the Prrme Minister further beheves that the SDGs arernterlinked and hence require a multi-sectoral approach totmplement mterventrons that can accelerate SDGs achievement Allthls requires Parhament blessrng and gurdance It rs hoped that theguidance provrded will further strengthen coordinahorypartnershrp burldrng and inclusrve rn these remarmng years of thedecade of actlon113.0 OBJECTIVES OF THE SUSTAINABLE DEVELOMENT STATUSREPORTHonorable Members of Parhament, the ob;ectives of thls statusreport on rmplementation of sustalnable development goals rs to,31 To apprise Parhament on the progress made rn the implementahonoI the SDGs rn Uganda,32 Share the critrcal SDGs rmplementation challenges that haveemerged during the lmplementatton and coordmatron of SDGs,and,3.3 Share the Cabrnet approved recommendatrons to accelerate theattainment of SDG targets wrthm the framework of our NationalDevelopment Plan and Governmenfls Last Mrle Strategy - theParrsh Development Model4.0IMPLEMENTATION STATUS AND PROGRESS OF THESUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS (SDGs) AND THE2O3O AGENDA4.1SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS COORDINATIONFRAMEWORK41,1,Uganda's development journey has been gurded by the SDGNational Coordrnatlon Framework It was a deliberate and rvell-planned effort to harmomze the contribuhon of Mrnrstrres,Departments and Agencres It also recognizes the contrlbutron of12TIIIIIIthe non-state actors includrng the Umted Natlons, Crvrl SocietyOrganizatlons, Prlvate sector, and other development partnersSrnce adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustamable Developmentrn 2015, Uganda has been steadfast m rts efforts to reahze theasprrahons of her people (Attached as Annex 1 is the NationalSDG Coordination Framework)412The coordinatron framework rs anchored on the TechnrcalWorkrng Groups (TWGs) under drfferent Mrmstrres,Departments and Agencies (MDAs), whrch are chaired by therespectlve oversrght instrtutrons wrth specific roles namely. (r)The Natronal Plannrng Authonty (NPA) which ensures thatplanning frameworks at all levels are well ahgned with the SDGs,(rr) Uganda Bureau of Stat$tics (UBOS) whrch coordrnates dataproduction for SDGs, (ru) Mrnistry of Frnance Planning andEconomrc Development which ensures resource mobrlizatronand financing for SDGs, (iv) Mrmstry of Information,Communication, Technology and National Gurdance whrchcoordinates commumcatron and popularrzation of SDGs (v)Office of the Prrme Mmrster which is the overall coordrnator ofthe rmplementatron architecture4.2 UGANDA'S NEW NATIONAL SDG ROADMAP 2O2O/202I -2024/2025421, On 15 September 202^1, $e Prrme Mimster, the Rt Hon RobinahNabbanja launched Uganda's second natronal "Roadmap for theII13Implementatlon of the Sustarnable Development Goals rn Uganda2020 /27 - 2024/25" (Attached as Annex 2 is Uganda's NewNational SDG Ro admap 2020/2021-2024/20251.422The new roadmap r focused on a vrsron to create "A Transformedand Prosperous Uganda in the Decade ot Action" and rs gurded bythe 5 ob;ectrves to (r) promote poltcy revreiv mechamsms andcoherence processes for the SDGs (rr) revitahze the SDGTechnical/Programme Workmg Groups and make them moreeffectrve (ni) promote locahzatron, popularrzation andmarnstreaming of the SDGs rnto programmes, MDAs and LocalGovernment plans (rv) enhance local resource mobilization effortsfor SDGs and (v) map out new partnerships and promote theFotential of exrstrng ones rn order to harness synergres of the wholeGovernment.4.2 3 Honorables, the SDG Roadmap outlmes rmplementationstructures, a trmeframe for the roadmap rmplementation and aresource mobrhzatron strategy It also provides reviewing,monrtoung, evaluatiory and reportrng mechanrsms, as well as nskmrtrgahon measures. Finalty, the roadmap presents a ResultsFramework and Cost Estimates for the perrcd 2020 / 21. to 2024/25.424The implementahon structure relates to the mechantsms that wrllfacrlrtate the rmplementatron of the SDG roadmap In thrs, keystakeholders have specrfic roles they will have to play for thesuccess of the roadmap Stakeholders rnclude actors from14Government, Development Partners, UN system, Ctvrl Socrety,Prrvate Sector, Academra, and Medta.4 2 5 The SDG Secretarrat continues to play a catalytic role and engagestrategic stakeholders and to ensure coherence among all theI echnrcal Workrng Groups4.3INTEGRATION AND LINKAGES OF SDGS TO BUDGETS,POLICIES AND PROGRAMMES4 3."1Honorables, the UN Inter-Governmental negohations on theSDGs rn 2015 corncrded with the preparation of Uganda's secondNatronal Development Plan (NDP II) Government used thrsopportunity to rntegrate the SDGS framework rnto the plan,resultrng in a 69% integration level During the development ofNDP III (2020/21- - 2024/25), appropriate measures wereundertaken to ensure that all sectors, agencres and localgovernment levels include SDGs rn their plans and strategies--NDP III rs at least 90% ahgned to the goals432 As such, the targets of SDGs are rmplemented through plans,strategies and projects by all Mrrustries, Departments andAgencres (MDAs), and Local Governments (LGs) through therrday-to-day activities, pro;ects and programsGrven the rmportance of localtzation and populanzatton of the2030 Agenda, SDG Secretariat rs coordrnatrng the development of15434435locahzahon gurdelnes to gulde the process coherently andcomprehensively among partners and stakeholders across theCountry.Parlament and Members of Parhament play a srgmftcant role rnmobilzrng and allocatrng resources, provrding overstght tn theimplementahon of the SDGS, and playrng drfferent other roles aschampions, advocates, mobrlsers, and ambassadors for the SDGsdue to their proxrmrty to people in therr Constituenctes To thtsend, the SDG Secretariat works tn partnershrp wrth the UgandaParliamentary Forum for SDGs to support the strengthening ofIegrslators' understandlng and actions In SDG implementatlon.Non-state actors, who rnclude Development Partners, CrvtlSociety Orgamzations, Rehgtous Leaders and Prtvate Sector, arerepresented at all levels of the SDG Coordinatton Framework Thework of non-state actors is complementary to govemmentmitratives and are algned to nahonal development Pnorrhes.Some of the initiatrves that the Government has undertaken tothrs end rnclude the following;i. Private Sector Platform for Sustainable Development GoalsThe Private Sector SDG Platform rs a natronally owned multi-stakeholder mechamsm to address varrous aspects of prtvatesector engagement rn the SDGs. The Platform, which is managedby the Office of the Pnme Miruster with support from the Pnvate16Sector Foundatron Uganda (tlSFU) and the Unrted NationsCountry Team offers a nahonal mechanism to engage wrth theprrvate sector rn the 2030 Agenda tn a comprehensrve and hoLstlcmanner The Platform was offrcrally launched by the PrrmeMrnister, Rt Hon Ruhakana Rugunda on May 4, 2021Civil Society Organizations SDG Core Reference ttGroupThe SDG Secretauat works closely wrth all Crvrl SocretvOrganizatrons rn Uganda through the SDG CSO Reference groupthat rs coordinated by the Uganda National NGO Forum. Thegroup launched a "Tondeka Mabega" Campargn as an effort tosupplement Government efforts to leave no one behrnd. Thevarlous CSOs have also been mstrumental rn supportlng specificconsultattve processes wrth vulnerable groups including Personswrth Disabrlitres, Minorr$r Ethnrc Groups and Women Groupsiii. The Youth Coalition for SDGsThe Youth Coahhon for SDGs is an rnihatrve composed of youth-led orgamzahons/companres from around the Country workrngtowards achieving the SDGS and workrng under the ausprces ofthe SDG Secretarrat. The youth partrcrpate n activities to rarceawareness on the SDGs and lead by example rn implementation174.44 4-l442PRESENTATION OF UGANDAS SECOND VOLUNTARYNATIONAL REVIEW (VNR) 2O2OHonorable Members of Parhament, you may need to note that rnJuly 2020, Uganda prepared her second Voluntary NatronalRevrew (VNR) Report and presented rt to the UN Hrgh LevelPolrtrcal Forum on Sustainable Development VoluntaryNahonal Revrervs (VNRs) are armed at facrhtatrng sharing ofexperiences, successes, challenges, and lessons learned, with avrew to accelerating the implementahon of the 2030 Agenda(Attached as Annex 3 is Uganda's 2nd Voluntary NationalReview Report),It is also rmportant to note that accordrng to the SustainableDevelopment Solutrons Network and SDG Center for Afrrca,results rndrcate that Uganda was more than 50"/" on track toachrevrng SDGs by 2030. Among the 52 Afrrcan countnes,Uganda ranked 18th rvrth an overall score of 54.88 (hrgher thanthe regional avera ge of 52.7 n 2020) Also, the Global SustarnableDevelopment rcport 2022 by the Sustarnable DevelopmentSoluhons Network (SDSN) places Uganda rn the 5th posrtion inAfrrca after (Benrn, Nrgerra, Ethtopra, and Morocco) regardmgGovernmenf s commrtment rn the coordrnatron andimplementation of SDGs1A4434444.5451In addrhon to the VNRs, the Government of Uganda has alsorolled out Voluntary Local Revrews (VLRs), a new approachadopted by UN member states to reYiew progress at sub-natronallevels The VLR process seryes as a rval,for local governments toengage crtrzens rn the SDG review process, whrch contributes tostrengthemng accountabrlrty and rncreases inclusrve governanceIn 2020, the UN Economic Commrssion for Afrrca (UNECA)piloted the VLR process m four selected countrres rncludingUganda, where it was carried out rn Ngora drstrrct Results fromthe Ngora VLR rndrcate that the drstrrct has rntegrated the 2030SDG Agenda and asprrations ot Agenda 2063 rn the drstrrctdevelopment processes, feasrbrhty studies and budgetsPRODUCTION OF THE NATIONAL ANNUAL REPORT ONSTATUS OF IMPLEMENTING THE SDGS 2021In October 2021, flte Government conducted an annualassessment on progress made on the rmplementatron of the SDGsand developed a National SDG Progress Report 2021 The reportouthnes progress made under each goal, highlghts bottlenecksper SDG and sets out recommendations wrthrn the context of theNDP III (Attached as Annex 4 is the SDG Progress report 2021).Below are the key hrghlights from the SDG Progress Report.194.52453Honorables, you may wrsh to note that SDGS are momtored andevaluated by 232 global indrcators of whrch 201 are apphcable toUganda Currently Uganda has 119 rndicators wrth data pomts(59%), 24 mdicators are globally computed (127") and 58rndrcators rvrthout data pornts (29%).Goal 1; No Poverlr,The level of poverty in Uganda reduced shghtly ('I l't ) fuom 21. .4percent rn 2016/17 to 20.3 percent rn 2020 / 2^1. Cvrenlly, there areabout 3 5 mrlhon persons hving below the poverty Lne and theproportron of populatton hvrng below the nahonal poverty Lnerncreased srgnrficantly in urban areas (2 2) t e, from 9 5 percent mFY 20^16/^17 to 1^l7 percent rn FY2020/21 compared to rural areas(1 8) re, from 252 percent nF\ 20-16 /-17 to 234 percent rnFY2020/2^1. The urban poor are more concentrated in othercitres/towns in the country rather than urban greater Kampala(Kampala, Mukono and Wakiso).Results show an rmprovement in housrng condrtrons whrch rs acrrtrcal factor m poverty reductron For example, the percent ofhouseholds with grass thatched roofs reduced to 23 percent20^19 / 2020 lrom 24 n 201.6 / 20'17 Addrtionally, total Governmentspendrng on essentral servrces such as educatiory health andsocral protectron rncreased from 22 40 percent rn 2020 lo 231.percent in 2021. However total Government spendrng on healthreduced from 9.2 percent to 7 3 percent for the respectrve years204.5 4Thrs poses a huge threat to poverty eradication since health is akey determmant of labor productrvrtyIn order to reduce further the poverty levels, GoU rs scalmg upefforts through expanding socral protechon programmes such asSocial Assistance Grants {or Empowerment (SAGE), providingstart-up capital for vulnerable persons such as "emyooga",boosting rnvestments rn agrrculture sector through theAgrlculture Credrt Facilrty (ACF) and low interest financlngthrough the Uganda Development Corporatlon (UDC) and therecent established Parrsh Development Model Govemmentshould also approprrate more funds for the health sector to fosterlabour productivrtyWhile Goal 2 Targets Zero hunger.The proportron of food poor persons in Uganda rncreased by 2percent (from 37 to 39 percent) between 2016 and 2020 Thrsmeans that nearly 3 rn every 10 households rn Uganda do notconsume sufficrent quanhty of food with the proper nutrientcontent Rural households were twrce as more hkely to be foodpoor than the urban households (47% and22% respechvely) as at2019/20 The Eastern and Northern regrons consrstently had thehighest number of food poor households wrth 5 rn every 10households considered food poor between 2016 and 2020.2145 5Addrhonallp there was a declme rn the Total offrcral flows(offrcral development assrstance plus other olficial flows) to theagrrculture sector frorn72,353,784 n2020 to 35,97^1,934 n202^LThe recommended actlon pornts to address the bottlenecksrnclude,(t) Provrsion of good quality agrrcultural rnputs such asdrugs, seeds, pestrcrdes to rmprove the quality of productson the marketGi) Ensure adequate food storage at all levels local, regronaland natronal The few avarlable food reserves (e g, thoseoperated by the Grain Council of Uganda and thoseestabhshed wrth support from World Food Programme rnspecrfrc dstrrcts) are small and they are mostly grarn silosowned by Prrvate Entities(iir) Provrde food secunty facrhtres and or rnfrastructure at thehousehold level and overalt public health level e g,granarres, farmer field schools, and school gardens to feedchildren while at school(rv) Ensure approprrahon of adequate funds for the agrrculturesector to support development interventions.On Goal 3, about Good health and wellbeing,The malarra Incidence per 1000 populatron rose to 340 rn 2019from 242 rn 2018 In FY 2020 /21., malarra was the commonestcondrtron among admrssrons for all ages accounting for 39.5percent (635,586 cases compared to 722,679 cases inF\ 201-9 /20)22of all admrssrons There was a notable rn.rease rn totalrmmunrzations from -1,864,074 n F\ 20L9 / 20 to 2,394,-195 (28 4%)n 2020/21- In addrtron, the proporhon of the populatron wrthaccess to affordable medicmes and vaccrnes (essentral medicinesand health supplies - basket of 40 commodrhes - such as antr-malarral, antrbrotrcs, neonatal care medrcrnes etc.) on asustainable basrs increased from 11.5 percent rn 2016 to 35 8percent rn 2020, shghtly hrgher than the 35 percent NDP III targetby 2020/21-.Addrtionally, the number of new HIV infechons per 1,000unrnfected populatron reduced from "1.6in20^17 to^141n2018 Thecorrespondrng figures rn 2019 and 2020 were -12 and ^Lrespectrvely Thls shows a steady declneAccording to the Annual Crrme Report, the death rate due to roadtraffic mjurres rose from 76 percent rn 2018 to 80 percent rn 2020among the males The correspondrng figure among femalesshows a steady dechne from 24 percent rn 2019 to 20 percent in2020The followrng recommendatrons should therefore be adopted,> Increase access to health services through construchon andupgradrng of more health facrlrtres, equipping of healthcenters, and provrsion of medrcrnes, contrnuous recrultment ofhealth personnel and provrcron of a nahonal health msurancescheme23! Provrde sex educatron to adolescents r e. drscuss health rrsks ofun protected sex, teenage pregnancies, HIV and other SexuallyTransmitted Drseases.F Improve and contrnue to support the UPE and USEprogrammes to encourage 'Education for all'! Strffen and put more-strict penalties for traffrc offenders.4 5 6 Goal4 on Quality Education.As measured from proficrency levels rn readmg and nmathematics, the average proficrency rn lrteracy for P3 reducedfrom 50 percent n FY 201-8 /1-9 to 49 9 percent n FY 2019 /20,rvhile that of P6 rncreased from 53 percent rn FY 2018 /'19 to 53'lpercent in 2019/20.There rvas also an rncrease rn the complehon rate among Prrmarystudents (P 7) from 63 percent rn 2019 to 67 percent rn 2020 Therewas a dechne in completion rate among Lower Secondarystudents (S4) from 34 percent rn 2079 to 32 percent n 2020Accordrng to the National Service Delivery Survey (NSDS) 2021report, 45% of household respondents rated the quality ofteachrng at prlmary schools attended by household members asgood. A higher percentage of respondents rn urban areas (48percent) rated the qualrty of teachrng as good compared to thosern rural areas (45 percent) The Ugandan Government shouldcontnue to scale up fundrng to the educatron sector andstrengthen inspection, monitonng and reportrng of nterventrons2445.7Goal 5 on Gender Equality.Women representahon rn Parhament has been rncreasrng over theyears For example, rn 2016 General Electrons 157 seats were wonby women comparcd to '1.74 rn 2021 general electrons Relatedly,the number of women rn cabrnet rncreased from 28 in 2016 to 35in 2021 general electrons. equality At the local government level,the country rs yet to attain gender parrty rn pohtrcalrepresentatronTo increase women's rncomes, the Government has made effortto support women entrepreneurs by way of boostrng therr start-up caprtal and provrde on-job skrlhng through rnterventrons suchas Youth Lrvehhoods Program, Uganda WomenEntrepreneurship Program, among others However, manywomen rely on agrrculture or rnformal trade for therr hvehhood,both of rvhich have been adversely affected by the lockdowns, asa result o[ the Covrd-l9 pandemic.Furthermore, the proportion of grrls and women aged 15-49 yearswho have undergone female gemtal mutilahon/cuttrng (FGM)reduced from 1 4 percent rn 2011 to 0 3 percent on 2016 However,the practice has conhnued because the community still beheves rt tobe a necessary rrte of passage for young girls Now, FGM rs oftenperformed rn a rusfu in unsafe and unsarutary conditions, thusmcreasing the health usks Therefore, Governrnent should work254584 5.9wrth the local Authodties to shffen and rmplement strrct measuresagamst the practice.Goal 6 on Clean Water and SanitationAs at 2020 /202^1,, 79 percent households had access to improvedsources of drinking water, although this was below the NDP IIItarget of 83 percent for 2020/2021 Ninety-one (91) percent of thehouseholds rn urban areas had access to improved water sourcescompared to three quarters of the households rn rural ar eas (75%)There has been increased access to hand washrng rvrth soap, rnpart, marnly as a result of advocacy protechon campargns agarnstCovrd-19.The proporhon of populatron usrng a safely managed torlet andhand-washrng facrlity wrth soap and water rose to 20 7 percentand 7.6 percent respectrvely rn 2020 from 17 9 percent and 6.2percent respectrvelyGoal 7 on Affordable end clean energyStahstics indrcate that the percentage of households wrth accessto electricrty (grrd, solar home system and solar kit) was 56.7percent which was hrgher than the NDP III target of 30 percent by2021. Uganda's rnstalled generatron capacrty was ^1,252 4 }'lW,still below 1,884 MW NDP III target 2020 /20n. Whrle there rsrncreased generation of power, the challenge remains withtransmtssrory distribution and cost to further lncrease access andutilzatlon There was low access to modern and efficlent energy26sources and servlces such as solar home systems, hqueftedpetroleum gas, brogas and improved stoves for hghtm& heatin&and clean cookingAdditionally, the total number of electncrty consumers rncreasedby 3 7 percent, lrom "1,572,605 consumers m Calendar Year (CY)2019 to ^1,630,769 consumers rn CY2020 This was due to anrncrease rn the number of customers of UMEME Uganda Lrmrted,Uganda Electrrcrty Distribution Company Lrmrted (UEDCL),Pader Abrm Community Multipurpose Electric CooperatrveSocrety Lrmrted, Bundrbugyo Energl, Co-operatrve Socrety,Krlembe Investment Limited and Kyegegwa Rural ElectncrtyCooperatrve Society The Government u enhancing efforts toexpand the rural electrification programme and encourageelectriclty consumption wrth a target of bringrng down the cost ofelectrrcity to US 5 cents per umt once all ma;or generattorytransm$srory and drstrrbutron prolects are completed Inaddttton, the government has also leveraged partnershrps wrthcrvil socrety and private sector partners to attract investment inthe manufacture and use of improved stoves, such as the rocket-lorena stoves, for households and inshtuhons4 5 10 Goal 8 on decent $'ork and economic GrowthGross Domestrc Product for the F\2020/21 rndrcates that theeconomy grew by 3 4 percent rn 202-l from 3 percent rn 2020Agrrculture, forestry and fishmg sector actrvitles grew by 3 8214 511percent rn FY2020/21whrch rs one percentage point lower thanthe prevrous year's growth (  8 %) The rndustry sector actrvltiesgrew by 3 4 percent rn F\2020/21 whrch was a 01 percentagepornt hrgher than the prevrous year's growthIn terms of employment, the malority are employed rn theinformal sector, mainly m the agrrculture sector The overallunemployment rate was 8 8 percent m 2019/20 hrgher than the8 5 percent NDP III target by 7020/71 The unemployment ratervas higher n the r:ural (9 "l%) compared to urban areas (8.2'l.) m20^19 /20 Government should further strengthen povertyeradrcation programmes such as emyooga and the ParrshDevelopment Model especrally in rural areas to foster inclusivegrowth and reduce rncome rnequahhes.Goal9 on Building a Resilient Infrastructure, P(omote Inclusiveand Sustainable Industrialization and Foster Innovation.Data mdicates that the proportion of rural populatron livrngwrthrn 2 km of an all-weather road rose from 31 percent in 2017to 57 percent in 2018 and 53 percent by 2020 According to theNSDS 2021 Report, ma;orrty of households (5796) had commumtyroads as the nearest type of road There was a decline rn thepercentage of households that reported commumty roads as thenearest type of road from 62 percent in 2015 to 57 percentn202^lDrsaggregation by residence and sub-regron indrcates thatgenerally community roads were the nearest type of roads to2ahouseholds Bukedr (88%) and Teso sub regions (83%) had thehrghest proportron of households that reported to be nearest to acommunrty road whrle Tooro sub regron had the lowes t (42%) Tolncrease access to all-weather roads, Government rsrmplemenhng several prolects to rehabrlrtate, upgrade andmarntarn roads across the countryThe manufacturmg value added as a proporhon of GDP and percaprta was 15 3 and 142 respectively rn 2019 Thrs rose to 16 and146 respectively in 2020 Total officral internahonal support(official development ass$tance plus other officral flows) tornfrastructure also rose from 479,896,705 in2020 to 648,388,662 rn2021 The Internet penetration rate (mternet users per 100 peoplern Uganda stood at 25 percent rn 2019 whrch was strll below 30percent NDP III target 2020/Zl Ffty-two (52) percent of adults(9.7 mrllion) had mobrle phones and 10 percent (1 9 mrlhon) hadaccess to the rnternet4.5.12 Goal 10: Reduced Inequality:The recrurtment cost borne by employee as a proportion of yearlyincome earned rn Country of destination was constant at 16% rn2019 /2020 Total resource flows for development, by recrpientand donor countries and type of flow (e g , official developmentassrstance, forergn drrect tnvestment, and other flows) decreasedfrom 2,354,0'12,959 in 2020 to 1.,765,893,042 rn 2021 (MoFPED).Thrs rmphes that the decrease m officral assrstance, forergn drrect29lnvestment and others will cripple the government developmentProgramsThe mean per household monthly ncome rncreased from UGX324,288 n 20-16/-17 to UGX 339,263 n 20'19 /20 representrng anannualzed growth rate ot 14 percent The growth is driven byrural areas rvrth per household consumptron expenditure of UGX285,-119 n201.9 /20 fromUGX269,-197 rn 2016/17, translating rntoan annualized growth rate of 1 8 percent (UNHS, 2019/2020)The per caprta consumption expendrture stood at UGX 73,988 n20'19 / 20 hom UGX 73,"174 n 2076 / 77 This implies an annuahzedgrowth rate of 0 4 percent. The growth rate rs hrgher for ruralareas (0 9%) than for urban areas (1 8%) In nomrnal terms, meanconsumptlon expendlture per caprta rs estimated at UGX"135,223in 201.9 /20 from UGX121, 931 n 2016/"17 This presents a 10 9percent nominal increase in consumphon per caprta (UNHS,201.9 / 2020).The real mean consumptron expenditure per capita rn 20^19 /20 rs11 percent higher than the comparable figure estrmated from20^16/-17 - that rs, from UGX 75,330 n20^16 /^17 to UGX.76, 136in20^19 /20 T\rs rise rmphes a very modest annualized growth rateof a 0 3 percent Thus, between 20'1.6/1.7 and 20-19 /20 there hasbeen extremely hmrted growth rn hvrng standards. The observedlow growth is drrven largely by the urban areas from304.5.13UGX 719,730 to UGX'L'12,894 wrth an annuahzed growth of -1 9percent, the correspondrng estrmate for rural areas rs 0 9 percentIncome inequalrty as measured by the Grm coeffrcrent, Ugandahas marntained medrum level of inequalrty for some trme Forinstance, the national Ginr coefflcrent ranged from 0.41 in2005/6to 0.42 in 2016/^17 and now stands at 0.41 in 20-19 / 2 Spatnlmequalrtres remain a srgnifrcant development challenge inUganda whereby the urban populatron account for only 26 6percent n 20^19 /20 of the total populahon, but accounts for 38 9percent of the natronal total consumphon expendrture.Therefore, Government should ensure availabrlrty of adequatefunds to support development programs that are rnclusrve innature for Women, Youths, disabled and elderly in rural andurban areasGoal 11: Sustainable cities and Communities.This goal provides targets and guidance for urban planmng tosupport crtres with rts growing populations According toMrnrstry of Tourism and Wild hfe Authonty, the totalexpenditure (publc and private) per caprta spent on thepreservation, protection, and conservatron of all cultural andnatural heritage, by type of herrtage (cultural, natural, mxed andWorld Heritage Centre deslgnahon), level of government(natronal, regional and local/munrcrpal), type of expendrture(operatrng expenditure/investment) and type of pnvate fundmg314.5.744.5.15(donations rn krnd, private non-profit sector, and sponsorshrp)decreased by ^196 i e ln 2020 rt was 3,265 and decreased to 3,069rn 2021 Thrs rmphes that there rvas a reduction rn private fundingand government expendrture Therefore, the government shouldencourage private funding (donations m krnd, private non-profitsector, and sponsorship) to rmprove on the public/privateexpendrtures.Goal 12: Responsible Consumption and Production.The goal rs meant to ensure good use of resources rmprovlngenergy efficrencp sustarnable infrastructure and provrdrng accessto basrc servrces, green and decent;obs and ensuring a betterqualrty of life for allThe lmplementation of standard accountrng tools to momtor theeconomic and envrronmental aspects of tourrsm sustarnabilrtyincreased from 4 rn 2019 to 5 in 2020 This imphes that there wasan rncrease rn the Implementahon of standard accountrng tools tomomtor the economlc and environmental aspects of tourrsmsustainabrlrty in the countryGoal 13 on Climate actiorLThis goal calls for urgent action not only to combat climate changeand its impacts, but also to build resilience in respondrng tochmate-related hazards and natural drsasters Under thrs goal,324.5:t 6there's only 1 mdrcator wrth data and 2 wrthout There is norndicator whrch rs globally computed for thrs goalAccording to Office of the Prrme Miruster, the number of deaths,missrng persons and drrectlv aflected persons attrrbuted todrsasters per 100,000 populatron decreased from 148 persons rn2017 to 103 persons rn 2018 Thrs rmplies that drsasters reduced rnthe country. This was due to government rntervenhons hkerelocatrng people from dangerous spots on the mountans to saferplaces and plantrng trees around rlvers hke rrver Nyamwamba inKasese. Also, the government has rmplemented and formulated aNational Chmate Change Pohcy Thrs is a national sectoral pohcyof Uganda Its mam obiective is to ensure that all stakeholdersaddress chmate change rmpacts and therr causes throughappropnate measures, whrle promotrng sustainable developmentand a green economyGoal 14 on life below water.The Oceans, seas and other marrne resources are essentral tohuman well-berng and social and economrc developmentworldwide Therr conservatron and sustainable use are central toachrevrng the 2030 Agenda. Thrs goal has only 1 rndicatorapphcable to Uganda However, rt has no data pointsRelatedly, according to the state of envrronment report 2020, itwas estabLshed that, Uganda's water resources cover about 16percent of the country's total area The brggest pressure on the334.5-17water resource 1S from the growng populahon and poor wastemanagement practrces of industnes located near the watersystem Uganda rs on track to meetmg the Standard DevelopmentGoals for access to improved water within the country of 100percent by the year 2025Frsherres activlhes provrde an rmportant source of Lvehhoods tomany Ugandans and forergn exchange to the country. Between2018 and 2019 Uganda's frsheries export rncreased by 82.5 percent from US$ 78 15 mrlhon to 142 69 milhon Fish harvestrncreased from 249,000 metric tonnes rn 2008 to 416,000 metrrctonnes rn 2019 58 percent of Uganda's fish harvests come fromLake Victoria followed by 16 per cent from Lake Kyoga and 26percent from the remaining lakes and rrvers.Goal 15 life on land.Thrs goal has 11 rndrcators, 2 of whrch have data pointsPreserving drverse forms of hfe on land requues targeted effortsto protect, restore and promote the conservatron and sustainableuse of terrestrral and other ecosystems. Thrs goal has gotten only2 indrcators with data pomts,6 rndrcators wrthout any dataavailable and 3 indrcators computed globally.The forest area as a proportron of total land area stayed at 9%between 2018 and 2019 It then, however rncreased to 12 4percent rn 2019/20 as a result of growrng and protectrng of forestsby the National Forest Authorrty Furthermore, the proportron of344.5.18traded wildhfe that was poached or rlhcrtly trafficked rncreasedfrom 0.32 rn 2018 to 0 33 rn 2019 Thrs rmphes the life of wrldammals were fully protected by the government through ltsauspice Uganda Wrldhfe Authonty Thrs was possrble byrecruitmg more Rangers to protect the boundaries of all gameparks in the country.Goal 16 on peace, iustice, and strong institutions:Wrth thrs goal, there's need to promote peaceful and nclusivesocietres based on respect for human rights, the rule of law andhansparent, effectrve, and accountable instrtuhonsThe number of vrctrms of rntentronal homrcrde per 100,000populatron, by sex and per 100,000 populatron rncreased from4922 in 2019 to 5183 rn 2020 Thrs rs unlarvful and Governmentshould set new laws or strffen the exrstmg ones to reduce on thesecasesAccording to the Annual Criminal Report, the number of vrctimsof human traffrckrng per 100,000 populatlory by sex, age, andform of explortation increased from 455 rn 2019 to 666 m 2020 and1-149 n 2O21 .According to the Uganda Prrson services statrstlcal abstract, theun sentenced detainees as a proportron of overall prrsonpopulahon mcreased from 48.1096 in 2019 to 54 50% rn 2020 Thrsrmphes that many prrsoners are held m detention without trial rn35courts of laws The government should therefore ensure that alldetarnees are sentenced to ensure equal access to jushce for all.Accordrng to the Judrcrary, the proportron of the populahon rvhohave experrenced a drspute rn the past two years and whoaccessed a formal or informal drspute resolution mechanismrncreased from 0.5073 in 2020 to 0 5098 n 2021. rmplying that thepopulation has accessed formal or rn{ormal drspute resolutionmechanrsms.Proportrons of posrhons (by sex, age, persons wrth drsab rtres andpopulatron groups) in pubhc rnstrtutrons (nahonal and locallegrslatures, pubhc servrce, and ludrcrary) compared to natronaldrstnbutions, amongJudicrary offrcers decreased from 384 n2020to 375 rn 2021 Pubhc servrce officers decreased fuom 329,633 n2020 to 342,039 n 2021 The Ugandan parliament has 529 officerswrth 352 males and 177 females4.5.19 Goal 17 on partnerships to achieve the goal:Achievmg the ambitious targets of the 2030 Agenda requires arevrtalzed and enhanced global parbrershrp that brrngs togetherGovernments, crvrl socrety, the prrvate sector, the United Natronssystem, and other actors, mobrhzmg all avarlable resourcesAccordmg to Uganda Revenue Authorrty, the total govemmentrevenue as a proportion ofGDP, by source decreased from-17 99%in2020 to7299% rn 2021 Volume of remittances (rn Unrted States354.646^L4.6 24.6.3THE FIRST NATIONAL SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENTGOALS CONFERENCE 2022dollars) as a proporhon of total GDP decreased from 41 rn 2019to 2I n202^L (BOU, MoFPED).Honorables, Uganda like all other countrres acknowledges thatsolutrons towards burldmg back better from the Covid 19pandemic wrll not come from outside our communitiesSolutrons to burld the Uganda economy better wrll be mformedby local models and approaches that wrll accelerate the pace ofdevelopment, innovate new ways of working and unlocking theresihence of women and men across the country.Agamst this background, the Government of Uganda hasrnitnted a natronwrde forum that brrngs together all Stakeholderswith an interest rn the SDGs rmplementation process ThisPlatform has been - code named - Uganda Annual SustarnableDevelopment Goals Conference (Attached as Annex 5 is the firstSDG Conference Report). Thrs was the first of its krnd rn UgandaThis forum facrhtates sharrng of ideas and good practrces at thelocal and national level and catalyze actions to achieve the 2030Agenda and the SDGsThe Uganda first Annual Sustarnable Development GoalsConference was preceded by regronal forums attended by more174.6 4 The key rssues that emerged from the conference include,than 800 people, that comprrsed Local Government politicalIeaders, techrucal officers, prrvate sector leaders, cultural andtradrtronal leaders, rehgrous leaders, crvrl socretv orgamzatrons,youth and children The natronal conference was attended byover 400 delegates who mcluded the Vrce Presrdent, Speaker ofParliament, the Chref Justice, Pnme Miruster, GovemmentMrnrsters, Permanent Secretarres, Dlplomatrc communrty, centraland local government officrals, prrvate sector, civrl socrety,religrous and cultural leaders, youth and children.(a)Underscored the centrahty of frnancing agrrculture and thatsolving problems of hunger in Uganda wrll have a clearmultrpher effect on all the SDGs(b)The Conference underscored the central role of digrtaltechnologies rn young people's busrnesses(c) It was also noted that since there are only erght years left to theyear 2030 when the SDGs goals must have been reahze{ thereis a need to mobrlze citizens to rdentify what works at locallevel, mcrease collaborative work with citrzen formations andgroups and contnue to find ways of making sure that crtzensare at the center of the development processes(d)The Conference noted that whereas the Government andpartners have tried in placing resources and dedicating38rnterventrons to reducrng vulnerabrlrtres, a lot more needs tobe done.(e) The parhcrpants in the Conference also noted that smce theestabhshment of the SDG Secretariat at the Office ot the PnmeMrnister, there has been vrsrble tractron regardingcoordrnatrory implementatron, momtorrng and reporting ofSDGs(f) The Conference noted that whrle Uganda has made goodefforts rn coordmatrng SDGs, there rs need to integrate thiswith other regronal agendas such as the African Union 2063Agenda whose implementatron remarns srlent4.7 HIGH LEVEL POLITICAL FORUM IN NEWYORK }ULY 20224 7.1472Honorables, Uganda partrcrpated rn the Hrgh-Level PohticalForum on Sustarnahle Development Goals whrch was held rnNew York from 5th to 18th luly 2020. The obJective lvas to notonly share experiences from the SDG Conference with the rest ofthe member states but also to Iearn from them especrally on keymodels and Voluntary Natronal Revrews (VNRs).Uganda also orgamzed a srde event at the Uganda PermanentMissron to the Umted Natrons rvhrch attracted partrcipation ofdrfferent stakeholders and member states394.7 35.051The 2022 Hrgh Level Polrtrcal Forum 2022 assessed the globalsrtuahon regarding the SDGs and the rmpact of the COVID - 19pandemrc The HLPF supported d$cussrons and peer Iearning tordentfy pohcres, strategies and achons to overcome the pandemrcand rts impacts while trrggerrng the deep changes and transrhonwe need to accelerate the realization of the SDGs It burltmomentum and insp[ed internatronal sohdarrty and multilateralcooperahon Attached as Annex 6 is a report on outcomes of theHigh-Level Political Forum held |uly 2022).CHALLENGES AFFECTING THE IMPLEMENTATION OFSDGs IN UGANDAColleagues, the pertinent challenges affectrng thermplementatron of SDGs rn Uganda are.(i) Financing for SDGs, amidst other Competing Priorities,Achrevrng the SDGs requrres immense support from allstakeholders srnce they represent the globally agreed and mostpressing envrronmental, social, and economrc issues, resourcesallocated to SDG Coordinatron and popularrzatiorymomtonng and reporting.(i)Data Challenges; Standardrzed monrtonng of thermplementation of the SDGs is sometimes hampered by thefact that not all global mdicators are apphcable to Uganda orhave sufficient national level data Currently, we are able to405.2report on 119 SDG rndrcators wrth data pornts out oI 201apphcable to Uganda(rrr)Low Levels of Awareness of the Local Leaders to IntegrateSDGs with Local Development Initiatives, The ParishDevelopment Model we rolled out at the local governmentlevel does not integrate the SDGs ,(rv)Low Levels of Digitization; As a country moves from theCOVID-19 pandemrc, there is need to embrace digrtaltransformatron which presents signif icant opportunitres.Colleagues, rt goes wrthout sayrng, that achievmg the SDGsrequrres immense support from all stakeholders. More pohtrcaland highJevel techmcal support rs requrred rf the Government ofUganda is to achreve the pledge it made to leave no one behindand reach the furthest first6.0 COMMUNICATION STRATEGY FOR THE SDGS6.1,As a means of commumcating and popularrzrng the SDGs, theGovernment through, Mrnrstry of Informatiory Communlcationand Nahonal Guidance and Offrce of the Prime Mrnrster willdrsseminate the implementation of SDGs Progress to allstakeholders armed at ensuug that all stakeholders are rnformedabout the country's progress in SDGS attarnment. In the sprnt of"leaving no one behind", the proposed medra plan is intended tobe robust and all-rnclusrve41627.07."172Different medra Platform wrll be used to engage stakeholders andcitrzens. Gaming thrs feedback will requrre utilizing vanouschannels hke TV and Radro talk-shows wrth call-m sesstons andmteractlve onhne channels Websrtes and soctal medta platforms(Trvrtter, Facebool WhatsApp among others)CABINET APPROVED RECOMMENDATIONS TOACCELERATE THE ATTAINMENT OF SDG TARGETSWITHIN THE FRAMEWORK OF OUR NATIONALDEVELOPMENT PLAN AND- THE PARISHDEVELOPMENT MODELHonorable Members of Parhament, the Cabinet Meeting inOctobet 2022 under mrnute No 359 (CT 2022) approved thefollowrng recommendatrons to accelerate the attainments of theSDG Targets wrthrn our natronal development trameworksThe Offrce of the Prrme Mmister and Mrnrstry of Healtll led bythe Rt Hon Prrme Mrmster should convene a meeting with theMinister of Health and concerned stakeholders to devise meansto address the persistent outbreaks of malaria in the countryTo follow-up wrth Uganda's Ambassador to Azerbar;an, AmbMuhammad Tezrkuba Krsamrra on the Pledge made by theGovernment of Azerbaqan to give a Grant to the Government ofUganda to support Programs directly benefitrng Persons withDrsabrlitres.427374757.677Mrnistry of Health, to submrt a Paper to Cabinet explarnrng therncrease of malarra cases in the CountryMrnistry of Frnance Planning and Economrc Developmentshould, fast track the rmplementatron of the Integrated NationalFrnancrng Framework (INFF) as a means of mobrlizing resourcesglobally and nationally to support sustarnable developmentMoFPED needs to revsrt Uganda's Domestrc ResourceMobrhzatron Strategy and assocrated pohcres that take mtoconsrderatron these emergmg realitiesThe Mrmstry of Inlormation, Communrcatrons Technology andNational Guidance, to work wrth Office of the Prrme Min$ter topopularize the Sustarnable Development GoalsMrmstry of Agrrculture, Ammal Industry and Frsheries, torncrease investment rn agrrculture to foster food security andstabihzmg food supply charns through pohcy incentrves toencourage value addition, support the central role played by e-commerce, and expand the drgrtal rnformation rnfrastructure inthe country. This wilt ensure that data remarns supreme and anrmportant part of prrvate sector growthUganda Bureau of Statrstlcs, should contrnue to expand thenumber of SDG rndrcators that have data pornts in Uganda The43787.97 "t0development of statrstrcal plans by different enhtres should alsohe encouragedMrnistry of Pubhc Service and Uganda Bureau of Statrstrcs, to re-instate the positron of Statrsticrans in the structures for MDAs andHLGs for effective and efficient delivery on the qualrty datarequred at both national and local Government levels for SDGsand other Government programs Lke Parish DevelopmentModelMrnrstry of Local Government, to tram local leaders to rntegratethe SDGs rn the PDM rmplementatron and the all-localdevelopment plans - rncluding the new crhesMinistry of Science and Technology, to strengthen theengagement and mobrhzahon of the pubhc and privatestakeholders with drgrtal innovatrons and support them for scaleuPThe Offrce of the Prrme Mrmster (SDG Secretarrat), shouldconduct a comprehensive documentatlon to identfy the peopleleft behind, those at a risk of berng left behrnd, where they arefound and rn what areas of servrce dehvery they have been leftbehindThe SDG Secretarrat should take on an addrtronal role ofcoordinatrng the follow-up on the Afrrca Umon s Agenda 2063447.11712slnce it has not been well coordinated srnce its adoption This isbecause the 2030 Agenda and Afrrcan Umon Agenda 2063 areboth mutually rernforcrng rnternatronal and regionaldevelopment strategres that support the national prrorities ofUgandaThe Office of the Pnme Miruster should present the SDG progressreport and status of implementahon to Parhament as a means ofmobilizrng members of Parhament rn locahzatron of SDGsThe Government of Uganda coordinated by the Offrce of thePrtme Mmister and Mmstry of Forergn Affarrs, should presentUganda third Voluntary Nahonal Review (VNR) report to theHrgh-Level Pohtrcal Forum m New York rn 2024 and thrs requrresconcerted efforts by all three arms of Government8.0 CONCLUSION7.137148.1The successful rmplementatron of Agenda 2030 requres anintegrated approach, partnerships and particrpatron throughinclusrve politrcal processes and responsrve, effechve,accountable mstrtuhons It wrll requrre varrous stakeholders tordentrfy soluhons for planning, budgehng, implementing andmonrtonng progress towards achieving the SDGS, as well astrackmg where and how funds are spent and assess the impact ofthese inrtratrves on the lives of people - especially ke), nterestgroups We hope that this report will enhghten the thought45process of Honorable Members ot Parhament m thelr effortstowards a fuller realzatlon of the 2030 AgendaMINISTER FOR GENERAL DUTIES/FOCAL - POINT MINISTERFOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALSOFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTERPLOT 9-11 APOLLO KAGGWA ROADP O BOX 341KAMPALAV UGANDAJANUARY 202346