

Tuesday, 24 April 2018

Parliament met at 2.04 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. Chairpersons and members of committees, could you finalise the Bills that are with you and bring them back to Parliament? Some of them have delayed. I do not want to specify the Bills. The chairpersons know themselves. Some of those Bills are very urgent and some have taken long. We would like all of them to come to the House so that we finish them in this session of Parliament.

As you are aware, we will finish with the Budget on 31st May and immediately thereafter, there will be prorogation of this Parliament so that we can go for a short recess and come back with the next session of Parliament. I urge you chairpersons to make sure that the matters are finalised and we finish these Bills in this session of Parliament so that we get on with other business when the next session of Parliament opens in June.

Honourable members, there is a matter that I took out of the Order Paper today and I needed clarification from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and from our chair of the Committee on National Economy. It had to do with the loans that we passed here on 28 November 2017. This relates to the loan to support the multi-national Uganda-Kenya-Kapchorwa-Kitale-Eldoret Bypass Project. 

The amount that was approved by this House was the amount that was requested in terms of units of accounts, USD$28,328,000. The equivalent however has issues. It looks like - I do not know where this figure came from because the committee does not even make mention of why there was this change in the figure. It was supposed to be 38,400,000 but they came out with 38,349,000 without an explanation. In the report, the two figures are mixed. So I am wondering what procedure to use; whether we make a revision of the decision of Parliament or if there is an error that can be corrected as a typo arising from a figure that was not properly captured in the report of the committee. We need to have that because the procedure of rescinding our decision is quite onerous and we might not want to go there when something is straight forward. 

Therefore, immediately after this afternoon’s sitting, I call on the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Chairperson of the Committee on National Economy together with the clerk responsible for that committee to have a short meeting with me and we resolve this matter so that we can conclude it tomorrow afternoon.

2.10
MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba West, Gomba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to present a matter of national importance stemming from Gomba West. We have heavy vehicles ferrying sand from Mirambi in Kabulasoke sub county of Gomba West Constituency and others coming in from Kyotera in Masaka and these go through Kifampa Parish and onto our newly constructed tarmac road, the Mpigi-Kanoni-Maddu-Sembabule-Villa Maria tarmac road. That road has made it very easy for all of us to travel to the constituency; one can get there in a matter of two hours. The road is beginning to decline in standard, yet the road is just about to come to completion. The sand is allegedly reduced in quantity and shared with other trucks before these trucks get to Mpigi. It is said that some of it is stored in a place called Kalya, which is in Ngomanene Sub County in Gomba East Constituency.

Therefore, I would like to call upon UNRA to come in to assist us because we do not have weighbridges and a road toll so nobody is checking these vehicles. Furthermore, NEMA should come in to assist us because this is leading to a decline on our road and also to a loss of potential revenue from these transactions. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.12
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The honourable member has called upon UNRA - that is under Ministry of Works and Transport to come in and help on traffic control on this newly constructed road. I will work with her to make sure that the minister in charge comes in quickly to save us. This I undertake.

2.12
MR GORDON ARINDA (NRM, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance in regard to the insecurity that is in Bushenyi and the surrounding areas.

A number of gun attacks have been going on in Bushenyi for the last one month and our people are very scared. These attacks are sort of coordinated because they normally take place between 8.00p.m. and 10.00 p.m. in the night. 

To be very specific, some of the areas that have been attacked include Kanyamabona in Ishaka Division, this happened on 30 March 2018 in the home of Mwebaze Nicholas and the shop of JB Rwebembera. These two were attacked, the shop looted, money and merchandise taken. On 04 April, 2018 in Katojo in Central Division, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, a shop belonging to Guma and a shop belonging to Mahebwa and another one belonging to Teacher Adrine were attacked by gunmen. The gunmen also went with merchandise. Still, on 12th April –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you come to the urgent and current one which happened?

MR ARINDA: Thank you. The current and urgent one, Mr Speaker, is the one which happened on the 22nd – Sunday night – where a one Innocent Ngabirano was shot and injured in the arm and is now hospitalised at Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital. Money and merchandise were taken from his shop. The one which happened last night took place in Katerera in Rubirizi District, where a businessman from Bushenyi District was killed and he is from Kakira Parish, Bitooma Subcounty, Bushenyi District.

Mr Speaker, these attacks, robberies and killings seem to be very coordinated. Therefore, we would like to seek the intervention of the Ministry of Internal Affairs to investigate these attacks and robberies and see whether they are mere lumpens or people with a bigger agenda. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. There is a similar matter from Buhweju.

2.15
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Behweju): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The current wave of murders in Bushenyi and Buhweju is worrying. We have lost close to 10 people in a period of three weeks. A woman is preparing super in her kitchen and somebody just comes, kicks her and she is killed! Somebody is walking home in the evening and he is killed! We are being kept guessing whether this is as a result of a broken LC system, expensive justice or politics. 

Mr Speaker, through you, I would like to ask the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Security to tell us what is happening. Are we protected? Are we secure? This uncertainty cannot allow development to continue. It is exposing our people and we are losing our people almost on a daily basis. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The Member for Busia Municipality had a similar matter.

2.17
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Mr Speaker, today is a sad day for the people of Busia Municipality. Jacqueline Masibo was kidnapped on Monday last week. The kidnappers used Kenyan telephones to ask for a ransom. They gave them Kshs 10,000. At 11.00 a.m. this morning, they got the body at Malaba and it is a very disturbing situation. I, therefore, inform Government that the border of Busia is generally not fine security wise. There are many robberies and attacks from Kenya and we request the Inspector General of Police to deploy more policemen. 

Two months ago, people from Kenya, with a motorcycle, came and took a gun from a police station in Sofia. On Monday, they came and took the woman from Kayola in the middle of Busia Municipality. Up to now, we do not have enough patrol vehicles to patrol the border. At the same time, we have very many Uganda Revenue Authority vehicles chasing people instead of helping to chase criminals.

We call upon Government to put up affirmative action in regard to security for the border areas to help curb insecurity. At the same time, we have a big number of children disappearing at the border. When they are traced, they are found across in Kenya. I do not know whether this is revenge, because many times, I have complained that the Government of Kenya is very adamant on making sure it keeps its side of the border. Whenever we complain, our people are arrested. 

In the last three months, almost seven boda boda riders were killed in Busia, Kenya. As I speak now, almost 17 boda boda riders are in Kenyan cells. That is why I still believe there is Mama Kanyaga (undermining of Ugandans) in Kenya and it makes our people not to have good faith in supporting the East African cooperation because whenever things come to Uganda, they say: “Wait. Be patient. We shall sort that out”. When Kenyans misbehave, everybody just looks at them and say nothing at all.

Mr Speaker, we need immediate attention and help. Thank you.

2.20
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to express sympathies, on behalf of Government, to those who have been attacked and injured. Let me also add that all these cases that have been mentioned are being followed up by police. What I will require from the Minister of Internal Affairs is to brief this House on how far they have gone. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, as we have heard from the Members that have submitted, it seems these are well-coordinated moves by the killers and they use their telephones for calling one another and this is what the Government -(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the Government Chief Whip, who is my friend, for accepting my point of clarification.

Mr Speaker, we have many security agencies in this country. We have seen a number of them engaging in what amounts to kidnap when they arrest and re-arrest without identifying themselves. In the past, we have had a coordinator of intelligence services in this country and we seem not to have the same office today. 

The point of clarification I am seeking from the Government Chief Whip is, who coordinates these intelligence services by the several agencies that we see arresting and re-arresting, including at court premises in civilian clothes? Once we reach an environment for arresting people anyhow without following the proper procedure coordinated and orchestrated by Government agencies, it creates an environment for the ordinary thugs as well to hide under the same cover. Therefore, who coordinates the intelligence services in this country?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, it is true that we have different intelligent organisations. We have been having them and they have been coming together to face challenges of insecurity. We have seen them working against terrorism. We have seen them helping one another in handling Joseph Kony and the rest of the groups. It is true we do not have one. We have many and they come together like they do in any other country. There are such a number of groups or forces doing almost the same work towards security. Police works with the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF). The UPDF works with Internal Security Organisation (ISO); ISO works with External Security Organisation (ESO). They work together and they are coordinated under the national security committee, which sits every Thursday in the Ministry of Internal Affairs and is chaired by the Minister of Internal Affairs. 

Therefore, do not get worried, honourable, about many organisations. What is important is that we are safe in this country. Challenges will always come up – they are everywhere. Peace is illusive. Today you are peaceful but tomorrow something can happen. What we have to do as a country is to make sure that we are always prepared. I stand here with all the confidence that they have really worked hard to make sure that Uganda is a safe country, at least in the region and that is on the record. 

Like I explained, I know police are following up all these cases and the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Information, ICT and Communications will come back and tell us. The basic tools they use for coordinating are the telephones. You will realise that the problems is in registration of telephones; people buy sim card lines on street. 

Mr Speaker, we are re-arranging all this. However, at an opportune moment, I will request the Minister of Information, ICT and Communications to come and tell Parliament how far we have gone in securing the gargets that would help to trace and track people who coordinate to cause catastrophe in this country.

There are two ministers handling this matter and they will come here and tell us how far they have gone. We have the Minister of Internal Affairs - on the issue of kidnappers and holding people at ransom, and those who have been kidnapping themselves, we have netted some of these people and rescued some victim.  However, they have continued to think that they will use their telephones numbers to call and say you are kidnapped so that someone can bring money.

The Minister of Information, ICT and  Communications will have to tell us what we have as Government as far as procuring the gadgets to make sure that we trace down all these people who are causing us problems. That is what I have to say.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me make some recognition. In the public gallery this afternoon, we have students from Busedde College, Buyaga, Buteme Sub County, Jinja District. They are represented by hon. Nelson Lufafa and hon. Loy Katali. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

We also have pupils from Eaglets Primary School, Nakalanda Mukono District. They are represented by hon. Muyanja Johnson and hon. Kusasira Peace. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

In the gallery this afternoon, we also have a delegation of Uganda athletes and officials who participated in the 21st  Commonwealth Games, that took place in Australia from 14th-15th April, 2018 and medallists from the 2016-2017 Paralympics. (Applause) They have come to observe the proceedings of this House. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

Honourable members, shortly after these urgent matters, we will be adjusting the Order Paper to allow the honourable member for Ajuri County, move a motion for this particular purpose. It does seem like Uganda will have to close its gold mine because we are going to send people to harvest gold from all the international games all over the world. (Applause)  I think this time we did well and we continue to encourage our athletes to do their best in the circumstances and achieve what they have been able to achieve. The motion is coming. Let me not prejudice the content of that motion. We will adjust the Order Paper to allow this motion come first, so that they can go and we continue with other businesses.

2.28
MR WAIRA KYEWALABYE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the media last week, there were reports that police are planning to close 1,600 police posts. The reason was that criminals are attacking the police posts and that is why they are running away from the criminals. I am wondering why police would leave criminals within the community.

The police went ahead to say that they are intending to have a police patrol vehicle at each sub-county. That is a fleet of 1,500 vehicles. I am also wondering where they will get that money and how the fleets are going to be managed and maintained. They mentioned the names of the police posts they intend to close including my police post, which is located on the landing site –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have a police post?

MR KYEWALABYE: In my constituency, I have a police post, located at the landing site. You know how chaotic people who come from the landing sites are. Otherwise, if they close those police posts - Members are crying of the rise in criminality in the country.  I am concerned what we are up to. 

I know the Inspector General of Police (IGP) is very anxious to streamline Uganda Police Force. However, being over ambitious on security matters of the country can become very dangerous. Therefore, I would like to request the Minister of Internal Affairs to stop his intentions of closing these police posts and instead come up with a statement explaining how he intends to strengthen these police posts so that our people can be stable and live in a secure environment. Thank you.

2.30
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): I know we have a new IGP who is doing his work within his jurisdiction. I am not competent enough to gauge whether he is being over ambitious in doing his work or not like hon Majegere has said. Therefore, I would like to request that we give the IGP some time to re-organise the Uganda Police Force. As long as we can do rapid response to challenges – however, to stand here and begin directing the new IGP on how he is doing his work, I think it will not help us. I have taken note of -(Interruption)

MR KYEWALABYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The point of order I am going to raise is very humble. You have heard Members crying and when Members of Parliament cry, those cries are for the people they represent. I am crying on behalf of my people.

Mr Speaker, when this report came up, I received calls and I had not known that the IGP was intending to close police posts and people were complaining that they have been having criminals. We have heard that they are going to close -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the point of order?

MR KYEWALABYE: The point of order I am raising to my sister is, is she in order to play around with the security of the nation and watering down the voice of my voters? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: First of all, she is not your sister in this House. She is the honourable member for Kiboga District and the Government Chief Whip. A reference to her in that line would be in order. Secondly, I have not seen her playing around.

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. Just to assure hon. Majegere, the Uganda Police is concerned about its mandate, which is enshrined in the Constitution to keep the people of Uganda. Can we –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, we have spent the last 30 minutes raising matters of national importance to Government but all the ministers who are supposed to provide the answers are not here. The Government Chief Whip, for every issue that is raised, is asked to offer a lengthy explanation, which she concludes by saying that the relevant minister will come.

Mr Speaker, the procedural issue I am raising is whether the Government Chief Whip maybe should concentrate on taking notes and passing over information and whipping the ministers to come, instead of using this as an opportunity for her to give a “state-of-the-nation address” to Parliament. (Laughter) Are we, therefore, proceeding well to raise issues supposed to be answered by different sectors of Government but the Whip who does not have answers volunteers to attempt and fail on each occasion?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is becoming a problem because these urgent matters qualify under these particular rules because they are urgent and need urgent attention. If urgent attention is not given and instead a promise is made that another person will come later, what happens to the urgency of the matter? (Applause) 

I am greatly concerned about the procedure we have adopted now that we raise these matters; the Government Chief Whip makes an undertaking but a week later, it comes on the Order Paper as a ministerial statement. That is a very backdoor way of doing business in this House. (Applause)

Urgent matters are exceptions to the rule on notice on questions. You dispense with that notice because the matter is urgent. If it is not urgent, you go under another rule of this House; Question for Oral Answer, which takes its time. Otherwise, urgent matters operate as exceptions. They must be dealt with urgently, so we cannot wait for another day for this matter to be answered. Where are your ministers, Government Chief Whip? (Laughter) Where is your Minister of Internal Affairs? Your Minister of Health? The questions that are being asked always relate to those sectors. Where are the ministers?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Ssemujju who has raised this very important point of procedure. I sincerely thank you. In that regard and with due respect, when a Member raises a matter of urgent attention, instead of calling on the Government Chief Whip, call for example, the Minister of Works and Transport and the minister will stand up if he is around. If that minister is not around, then you guide on how to move. That is one issue – (Interjections) - I am kindly requesting –(Interruptions)

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, for the many years I have been around, I know some English. I thought that the Government Chief Whip would simply do one noble job of apologising to the House that she has not done her work. The Minister of State of Internal Affairs, hon. Obiga Kania, has been with us in the canteen this afternoon. The Government Chief Whip has not whipped him to be in this House. However, by innuendo, the Chief Whip is saying that the Speaker was wrong by not asking for responses from the relevant ministers directly, yet when these questions of national importance were raised, she volunteered to stand up and give answers. Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, maybe in the past but today, I have not called on the Government Chief Whip to respond to anything. I have said Government, which is the Front Bench. If you are the Government, then that is okay –(Laughter)– because all I said was “Government”, meaning somebody from the Government that can deal with this matter comprehensively, not somebody who is coming to postpone matters for the House. Therefore, if you are not competent, please remain seated. Let somebody competent get up to deal with the matters. (Laughter) Our Rule 113 is clear on the attendance of your people. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, we should not joke about your guidance. I believe that the ministers are in this House by law. Therefore, they must obey the rules. Allow me to read Rule 113: “For any Ministry, the Minister or at least the Minister of State shall attend sittings of the House; and where none of them is able to attend, a Minister shall request another Minister to represent that Ministry’s interests in the House and notify the Speaker accordingly.”

Mr Speaker, Members of Parliament on the Government side called Cabinet have been breaching this rule openly and with impunity.  The rules say that the Speaker must be informed. It is also high time for the Government Chief Whip to do us a favour; do what is assigned to you so that these people can be exposed. That is why we appoint a substantive minister and ministers of state. As I said, the rule I just read says that if the minister is busy, at least the minister of state must be here to answer some of these queries. 

Therefore, hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, we know that you are a very active Member of Parliament. We trust you and we know you love your work but do yours. Let others also do theirs. (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I guess the honourable member for Dokolo has already ruled on her procedural point. (Laughter)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I only hope that she learns to pronounce my name. My name is Nankabirwa.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What did she say?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: She said, “Nakibirwa.” (Laughter) Mr Speaker, indeed it is a challenge that we have Members who do not attend Parliament and so cause this House to waste time; it is regrettable. I try to do my work as Government Chief Whip and sometimes, I am delegated by the Leader of Government Business, who is the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, especially when the Deputy Leader of Government Business is not there.

When you see me seated here when the Prime Minister is not there, you know that I am in that capacity. He delegates me and it is his right to do so. I have stood here a number of times and given answers. Only where I feel I do not have the answer is when I make an undertaking to go and task the minister to come the following day and help us with the answers. Like I was answering the query raised by the hon. Waira Majegere that the IGP is new and that he is doing his administrative work but that we will make sure that this short period is taken care of such that people do not suffer.

However, like you have guided, Mr Speaker, I am very happy that I am now relieved of some of the work I have been doing. I thought that by coming here as Government Chief Whip and offer, I would be doing my work as the indeed the Government Chief Whip as designated. I will whip the ministers like I have been doing and you promised to name – Mr Speaker, you promised and we shall be waiting for your promise, which I know will be of my help as the Government Chief Whip. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this House needs ministers to transact its business. There are answers that we require and you have them. However, they are only relevant to the extent that you are in the House to answer some of these questions; it helps. Of course that is not to say there are Members of the front bench who are not very consistent in their attendances; they are there but there are also those who are very inconsistent by not being present.

Honourable members, we know the sectors that always show up in these urgent matters. It has to do with the works ministry, health ministry, Office of the Prime Minister; disaster related matters; internal affairs ministry; and occasionally defence ministry. These sectors will always be there.

Therefore, is it so difficult to learn the trend and deploy appropriately to deal with these issues so that we stop clogging our Order Paper with business that should have been handled today and postpone them to tomorrow? Because there will be urgent matters tomorrow again and the next day more but the ministers are not there to respond, the Order Paper will then have three pages of ministerial statements just because they were absent. It doesn’t help this House!

Therefore, I am hoping that there will be some improvement by tomorrow. However, if there is no improvement, this Parliament will not handle any Government business from tomorrow. If a matter has to do with Government and there are no ministers to respond to matters raised by Members, we will skip those issues and deal with only matters of private Members - (Applause) - so that Cabinet might find opportunity to have a day when they can be available to deal with their matters.

Therefore, with effect from tomorrow - in fact, I even would like to say that today we only deal with the motion and by the time we finish with this motion if the ministers are not around, I will adjourn the House. (Applause) Unless the Government Chief Whip is going to step outside and make some phone calls and I am very satisfied that some answers will be given today, I will not reconsider that position.

Can I have the hon. Luttamaguzi?

2.48
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise up on the matter of national importance. On 21 and 22 April 2018, the people of Nakaseke South in the sub counties of Ssemuto and Nakaseke experienced heavy hailstorm that destroyed gardens and homes. Very many people are homeless today without food; and the elderly are almost sleeping outside because they don’t have anywhere to sleep.

It is on the basis of this that I now seek Government’s quick intervention in terms of providing relief in the form of: iron sheets, food and anything that can be availed to help these people who now live without hope.

Mr Speaker, in conclusion, the people of Nakaseke have tried to seek for Government’s intervention on different matters but we have never been assisted. Our assistance remains on paper. I hope this time Government will be committed and provide the relief I have asked for. That is my prayer.

2.50
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Mary Karooro): Thank you, Mr Speaker –(Interjection)– yes, this is now Government because I am the Minister of State for General Duties in the Office of the Prime Minister and, therefore, I am very conversant with matters of relief and disaster preparedness. 

I would like to say on Nakaseke, we have got the report and I can assure you it is going to be worked on. However, I would like to make an appeal to Parliament that year in year out, we come and ask for the Contingency Fund because nobody can predict disaster yet sometimes it is this very Parliament that throws it out. Therefore, when we come with our budget proposals, please let us have money provided to the Contingency Fund so that these disasters can be taken care of. Thank you.

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, the Contingency Fund is statutory matter. Every year, you are authorised by the law to use a percentage of the money we have appropriated as contingency. Is the minister in charge of general duties in order to mislead Parliament that it needs to create another Contingency Fund other than the one that is provided for under the law?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, what becomes of our Contingency Fund?

2.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is true that it is a statutory issue and in this financial year we have provided Shs 77 billion in the budget, which is with us here. However, I would like to also point out that there is a time in the 2016/2017 financial year where we provided for Shs 140 billion but Parliament, in its wisdom, adjusted that figure to zero. We hope that the Shs 77 billion will remain.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the Contingency Fund an appropriation issue or is it upon appropriation that a percentage of it automatically goes to the Contingency Fund? Do we need to appropriate for this fund?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have learnt something today. We appropriated money and sent it to the Contingency Fund but now it looks the finance minister appropriated it himself and now he is telling us that Parliament again appropriated what we had appropriated.

Therefore, is it procedurally right for the whole finance minister, whom we have been trusting so much - (Interjection)- it is a procedural matter –(Interjection)– Mr Speaker, when are you taking him for the induction course?

MR BAHATI: No, point of order, Mr Speaker. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I understand the rules of procedure of Parliament.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, is it in order for the senior Member to confuse the House that Parliament appropriated but that the finance ministry went ahead to remove the Contingency Fund while he knows that in the 2016/2017 financial year, while he was in this House, this was provided for but Parliament, in its wisdom, adjusted it to zero? We have now provided for this figure and it is before us. Is he in order to talk about things that he does not understand?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the question I asked was: do we appropriate for the Contingency Fund or is it an automatic percentage of the appropriated budget?

MR BAHATI: According to the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, it is a statutory obligation but still the figures come to this House.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. That is why I am saying that we have a problem with the ministers in this Government. It is the Constitution which creates the Contingency Fund statutory provision and it talks about it being 3.5 per cent of the appropriated budget. The portion of the money, when we pass the budget, is automatically and directly shifted to that Contingency Fund account, which purposely, is to deal with emergencies. The minister now says it is in “our wisdom” yet we passed the budget as Parliament knowing that 3.5 per cent would be taken to the Contingency Fund account. 

Therefore, is the finance minister in order to make such a statement yet we directed him in writing by saying that it was Parliament  that reduced the money proposed to be provided for to the Contingency Fund, to zero yet the law talks about a percentage? Is he in order to abuse me that I am out of order while he is the one not in order? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I thought you originally rose on a point of procedure. (Laughter) (Hon. Cecilia Ogwal rose_) Do you rise on a point of clarification or procedure?
 
MS CECILIA OGWAL: Okay, point of procedure. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, proceed.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, by law we pass the budgets and by law we agree that the Government is allowed to use 3.5 per cent of the budget we have passed. In case they exceed the 3.5 per cent and they still need money for emergencies or unforeseen disasters, they can always come to the House for approval. 

The point I am raising is whether the minister is now turning Parliament into a finance ministry so that we have to go back to ensure that the minister has utilised the money in accordance with our budget provisions? Can the minister also tell us why he has always brought supplementary budget requests, discussed and passed for those emergencies? 

I would like the minister to clarify this matter to us because he has now put the onus on Parliament that the Government is failing because Parliament, in its wisdom, reduced the money and gave the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness a zero balance. That is unfair on the legislators; we are concerned because the people who are suffering are our voters.

MR SSEGGONA: My I provide information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Information on a procedural point? (Laughter)

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, I did not hear the word “procedure” but kindly indulge me. What we are discussing is a very important issue first of all, for the management of affairs in our country. However, it starts from the destroyed core and this is how it goes. You have a minister under the Prime Minister’s office who is a Minister for Disaster Preparedness. I think the way we arrange our ministries is also not proper. You have a minister who does not have a budget but the Prime Minister’s office comes with a budget to Parliament and we allocate the money and so we follow their budgets.

If the ministries or ministers are too many, then what we need to do is to slash them and let the Prime Minister do all this work; he brings his budgets for approval. The problem begins with the core, which is to do with the arrangement of the ministries. The Prime Minister has too many ministers some of whom cannot do anything because we cannot keep giving money anyhow.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I would like to appreciate the information he has given to the House. However, my concern is that the finance minister is failing in his duties and that is why he now wants to allege that it is Parliament, which is failing the ministry. I am saying that is not the case. Let the public know from today, if they did not, that we allocate money, which the same ministry sometimes removes from one ministry into another thereby allowing the other one to fail while one succeeds. In fact, if we were to be vicious and brutal in the accountability, we were going to ask you - about two weeks ago, we were scratching our heads to raise money for the nodding disease in the North and it was difficult for you to raise it. I would like to ask where you got the money, which you gave the President to distribute to the people of Rukungiri? Where did you get the Shs 5 billion from to give the President because the source is one; the president gets the money from you but you could not give us money for the nodding disease. 

Mr Speaker, we need to be straight with these ministers otherwise they are going to make us fail our people. The finance minister must explain where he got the Shs 5 billion to give the President when we do not have the money for the nodding disease.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, the resources that Government uses are appropriated by Parliament; State House is given resources every financial year to run its operations, which include donations by the President. That money is appropriated by this House and the money that was used is part of the money that was appropriated by this House. 

The second point is about the issue of the Contingency Fund. I beg that out of respect, I do not go into the details of the issues raised by hon. Cecilia Ogwal and to confirm to this House that we have established a Contingency Fund; we have proposed Shs 77 billion for the next financial year; we shall continue to build it until we have sufficient funds to cater for emergencies. Thank you.

MR NSAMBA: Mr Speaker, hon. Luttamaguzi rose and informed the House that there is a disaster but the minister is here telling us that they are going to deal with the matter in the next financial year -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, please. The hon. Mary Okurut responded to the issue of Nakaseke.

MR NSAMBA: And it was not satisfactory, Mr Speaker. That is why we ended up into a discussion on the budget for disaster management and emergencies. It was because the response by the minister for general duties was not satisfactory. We ended up wondering whether there is money in this country that can be used for emergencies.

Mr Speaker, it is good to tell us that money will be provided for in the next financial year but how about the matters that are coming up now?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That matter was responded to by the Minister for General Duties. She said that the office of the minister responsible for disaster is already aware of that matter and that they are handling it. That is what I heard. Maybe I did not hear what she said well. Therefore, the debate was a general follow up on the general issues of disaster in the country not this particular one.

3.06
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter of concern I have to raise is not only for Buganda but for the entire country and even outside; it is the omission of Buganda Region from the national map showing regional vaccination coverage in Uganda.

Mr Speaker, recently the Ministry of Health issued and circulated a map that excludes Buganda Region as being part of Uganda. The map clearly shows all the traditional regions of Uganda as West Nile, Acholi, Karamoja, Bunyoro, Lango, Teso, Elgon, Bukedi, Busoga, Tooro and Ankole and it omits Buganda and where we should have Buganda they only indicated “South Central” and “North Central”. 

Mr Speaker, when I consulted my senior, the hon. Medard SSeggona, he sent me to the entrance of Parliament where I got to realize that all regions that came together in 1962 to form the current Uganda are clearly indicated.

That omission has resulted into very grave ramifications and various sections of the society are now very anxious and extremely concerned about the intention and the reasons behind the deletion of the Buganda Region. Was it intentional to exclude Buganda from Uganda’s map as we always hear it?
 
Therefore, Government should urgently explain the anomaly before the people of Buganda Region consider themselves as being independent. Thank you. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister of health, why did you omit Buganda Region on your map?

3.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Rt Hon. Prime Minister –(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have not been here for a while then.

MS OPENDI: My apology, Mr Speaker. I was just speaking to the Prime Minister before I came here. However, I would like to say that I was equally surprised when I saw the complaint from the Buganda Kingdom. When I looked at the map, indeed all the other regions had been named - Ankole, Lango and Central but the name Buganda was missing. 

I have already apologised and I would like to apologise for that mishap by the technical team. We are going to correct that to reflect Buganda on the map as it is. We apologise for that; it was purely a mistake by the technical staff. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Now you see this one does not require another statement by the minister tomorrow. It is finished because we have the relevant minister present in the House.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, on behalf of my colleagues, we accept the apology and look forward to the expeditious correction of that anomaly.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Can we now go to the Order Paper as amended? I amended to accommodate - let us just receive the papers before we process the motion.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The procedural issue I am raising is that we are not seeing Bugisu but Elgon Region. We have never been Elgon Region; we have been Bugisu Region. Therefore, can the minister also tell us, why they omitted Bugisu Region on the map of Uganda? Was it procedurally right to remove Bugisu Region from the map of Uganda?

MS OPENDI: Mr Speaker, I have not looked at that but the one of Buganda was really pronounced because it was “central”. Elgon Region had always existed. We could not indicate Bugisu Region because the Sabiny would complain. Therefore, when we put “Elgon Region”, we covered the Sabiny and the Bagisu. 

Anyhow, Mr Speaker, allow me to look at it but my brother should accept that otherwise we shall have the Bagwere saying they want the Bugwere Region, the Japdhola asking for this and that; let us look at the broader picture, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

(I) ADDENDUM TO SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.2 FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2017/18 TO ACCOMMODATE USHS 12,944,591,899 UNDER VOTE 139 – KYAMBOGO UNIVERSITY, USHS 682,000,000 UNDER VOTE 156 – COTTON DEVELOPMENT ORGANISATION AND USHS 1.5 BILLION UNDER VOTE 109 – LAW DEVELOPMENT CENTRE APPROPRIATION IN AID [AIA] AND USHS 2 BILLION UNDER VOTE 002 – STATE HOUSE [GOU] SUPPLEMENTARY

3.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay an Addendum to Supplementary Schedule II for Financial Year 2017/2018 to accommodate Shs 12,944,591,899 under Vote 139 – Kyambogo University, Shs 682,000,000 under Vote 156 – Cotton Development Organisation, and Shs 1.5 billion under Vote 109 – Law Development Centre Appropriation in aid and Shs 2 billion under vote 002 – State House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the appropriate Committee on Budget.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I beg to withdrawal item 3 (II) on the Addendum to the Supplementary Schedule II for financial year 2017/18 to accommodate Shs 8,118,764,600 to organise Local Council elections and conduct the by-elections for Rukungiri District woman representative to Parliament for vote 102 – Electoral Commission because we have discovered, it is a statutory provision, which does not require appropriation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which one?

MR BAHATI: The addendum we had proposed under vote 102- Electoral Commission for the by-elections in Rukungiri District is under a statutory provision.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So it is not laid before Parliament? Okay.

MR BAHATI: No, it is not laid.

(III) FINAL GOVERNMENT ANNUAL PERFORMANCE REPORT FOR FY 2016/2017

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, honourable minister for general duties.

3.14
THE MINISTER OF GENERAL DUTIES (OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER) (Ms Mary Karoro): Mr Speaker, it is now my pleasure to lay at the Table, the Government Annual Performance Report for Financial Year 2016/2017.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to our committee responsible for that sector.

(IV) ADDITIONAL INFORMATION IN RELATION TO THE VALUE FOR MONEY AUDIT ON MANAGEMENT OF PETROLEUM DATA

3.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Simon D’Ujanga): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay at the Table Additional Information in Relation to the Value for Money Audit on the Management of Petroleum Data.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the committee on Natural Resources.

(V) ASSESSMENT REPORT: COMPLIANCE OF MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT WITH GENDER AND EQUITY REQUIREMENTS, FINANCIAL YEAR 2018/2019

3.16
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the report entitled, “Assessment Report: Compliance of Ministerial Policy Statement with Gender and Equity requirements, Financial Year 2018/2019.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the Committee on Budget and copies to be sent to all the sectoral committees.

(VI) EVALUATION REPORTS UNDER THE GOVERNMENT EVALUATION FACILITY (GEF)

3.17
THE MINISTER OF GENERAL DUTIES (OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER) (Ms Mary Karooro):  Mr Speaker, I beg to lay at the Table, the evaluation reports under the Government Evaluation Facility (GEF). These are:

Process evaluation of Government of Uganda’s Family Planning Programme
Process evaluation of Government of Uganda’s Universal Primary Education Programme
Process evaluation of Government of Uganda’s Youth Livelihood Programme 
Process evaluation of Government of Uganda’s Public Service Delivery and Local Government Programme
Rapid assessment of Public Sector Organisations in Uganda, April 2017 
Vegetable Oil Development Project Phase 2: Process Evaluation Report
Evaluation of Public Sector Organisations in Uganda, June 2017.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture all those documents. They stand referred to the appropriate committee to analyse and advise the House on how to proceed. Thank you.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT CONGRATULATING TEAM UGANDA FOR THEIR PERFORMANCE DURING THE 2018 COMMONWEALTH GAMES

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this motion will be seconded by hon. Anita Among. All the other Members listed below will be speaking to the debate not further secondment. It will be seconded by one Member.

3.18
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Mr Speaker, I rise under Rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament congratulating team Uganda for their performance during the 2018 Commonwealth Games.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by Member for Bukedea, Member for Gulu Municipality, Member for Kaberamaido and Member for Kazo. Would you like to read the motion?

MR OBUA: The motion reads:

“WHEREAS the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy No. XVII enshrined in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda 1995 (as amended) mandates the state to promote recreation and sports for the citizens of Uganda;

AWARE THAT in fulfilment of the above objective and principle, Uganda participated in the 2018 Commonwealth Games held at Gold Coast, Australia between 4-15 April 2018;

FURTHER AWARE THAT Uganda fielded participants in the Commonwealth sporting disciplines of Athletics, Boxing, Netball, Swimming, Badminton, Rugby, Table Tennis, Weight Lifting, Cycling, Shooting and Squash;

RECOGNISING THE FACT THAT Team Uganda through the sterling performance of the following individuals won medals in different categories. They include: Mr Joshua Cheptegei - two Gold Medals in the men's 5,000m and 10,000m finals; Ms Stella Chesang - Gold Medal in the women's 10,000m finals; Mr Solomon Munyo - Silver Medal in the men's Marathon; Ms Mercyline Chelangat - Bronze Medal in the women's 10,000m final and Mr Juma Miiro - Bronze Medal in Boxing leading to a total tally of three Gold Medals, one Silver Medal and two Bronze Medals making it one of Uganda's best tournament ever in history;

CONGNISANT OF THE FACT THAT through these performances, Uganda's Medal ranking in the Commonwealth Games improved from 18th position in 2014 to l5th position in 2018 out of the 72 Commonwealth territories or participating countries;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that:
1.  	Parliament of Uganda collectively congratulates Team Uganda generally and individual medallists for the remarkable performance and achievement for Uganda.
2. 	Parliament of Uganda urges Government to fast-track the completion of the Teryet High Altitude Training Centre and other sport facilities in the country generally.
3. 	Parliament of Uganda urges Government through the line ministry to fast-track the tabling of the Bill meant to repeal the 1964 National Council of Sports Act.” (Applause)

Mr Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I have already sought secondment and it has been seconded. Would you like to speak to your motion?

MR OBUA: Mr Speaker, with your permission under our Rules of Procedure and for the record of Parliament, I would like to lay at the Table the list containing the names of participants and officials who represented this country in this great event such that in future, whoever is perusing through our records can be able to see which men and women represented Uganda in this historic event. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Our Committee on Education and Sports might want to look at it later and come back to the House.
 
MR OBUA: Mr Speaker, in Luke 17:11-19, there is a great story where Jesus healed 10 men with the dreaded skin disease. The Bible says, out of the 10, one recognised what Jesus had done and came back to thank Him. The spirit of that Biblical quotation forms the basis of this motion. The basis of this motion is for this Parliament to recognise the fact that between 14th and 15th, a team of young men and women represented this country at the Commonwealth games in Australia and they performed well. Today, they are here; some of them for the first time and it is important for us to say, “Thank you”. Saying “Thank you” is encouraging and motivating. 

In the culture, custom and social behaviour of the military, when officers and men are promoted and are going for a fitting ceremony, the newly promoted are escorted by those who hold the same rank. This is the same when it comes to consecration of bishops. We thought it would be befitting that a motion to congratulate our team that participated in the Commonwealth games be also moved by a political holder of the Commonwealth medal, that is, Mr Speaker, hon. Hamson Obua. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, allow me to take this opportunity to thank the following categories of people:

The Government of the Republic of Uganda needs to be appreciated by this Parliament, especially under the leadership of His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, who hosted team Uganda before they left for the Commonwealth games. He gave them the motivation, zeal, momentum and the stamina to die a little while participating in these games. He needs to be congratulated because he is the chief vision bearer. He met them again when they returned on Sunday. In that particular meeting, he made a commitment that all his pledges, including arrears for those who have performed at the continental level and international level, must be handled as soon as possible.

Secondly, I salute the mother Ministry of Education and Sports. I thank the minister herself and the Minister of State for Sports who is here, for co-ordinating all the team members for Team Uganda. 

I salute the National Council of Sports, the Uganda Olympics Committee. I salute the respective federations under the 11 disciplines that participated. 

I, in a special way, salute the Ugandan High Commissioner in Australia who was physically present from day one to the last day.

I salute team managers and officials. The people of Uganda who were glued on television, watching and celebrating these respective victories. I celebrate with you. (Applause)

I also want to salute the hospitable people of Australia. We say Uganda is gifted by nature but the people of Australia are extremely hospitable. This must go on record. 

Mr Speaker, let me address my mind to the three prayers in this particular motion because the Commonwealth games is the second most prestigious games in the whole world, after the Olympics.

Prayer number one speaks for itself. I do not want to dwell much on it. It is about this Parliament congratulating the team. 

Whereas as a country, we have home work; where we must invest more and pass the litmus test is on prayer number two and three.

Prayer number two is urging Government to fast-track the completion of the Teryet Training Centre and other sports facilities in the country generally. On that note, let me start with Mandela National Stadium then I will come to Teryet because Mandela is our national stadium.

That structure we see has a master plan. It is incomplete, honourable members. What is available at Mandela National Stadium, Namboole are two football pitches, one inside and one outside and that dilapidated hotel. In the master plan of Mandela National Stadium, that stadium was supposed to host indoor stadia for multiple sports such as netball, basketball, volleyball, boxing, badminton, an aquatic centre, to mention but a few.

Let me use this opportunity to call upon the line ministry because this construction was like a donation from the Chinese Government. Why don’t we, as a Government, if the Chinese have put a full stop on their donation, complete the remaining structure such that when these sportsmen and women gather from the east, north, south, central and west, as they are doing their final training, the facilities are available for them to be able to train, move out of the country and compete in these international and continental events.

More on Mandela National Stadium, is the question of the land. It is reported that the entire land size on Mandela National Stadium is 120 acres. However, the current stadium, including the fence, is sitting on approximately 40 acres. It is further alleged that part of that land has been encroached on. I think I should raise this as a wakeup call to the Parliamentary Committee on Education and Sports to do some investigations such that we save this national stadium for Uganda especially on the issue of completion and that of encroachment.

Let me move on to the Teryet High Altitude Training Centre. It has taken us as a country, 12 years from 2006 to complete this high altitude training centre. I would like to submit that even a child born within these twelve years would be more or less able to get another medal for Uganda by now. 

Why don’t we walk the talk? Where is the challenge? That region called Sebei is blessed. I would like to believe and move that in response to this particular subject matter the minister should emphatically brief Parliament on when we intend to complete the Teryet High Altitude Training Centre. 

What we may or may not know is that majority of these athletes are training on the Kenyan sites and judging by the results that Uganda obtained in this year’s Commonwealth games – because for us we are moving towards number one, Kenya is moving in the reverse direction. In Africa as a whole, Uganda is number four, after South Africa, Nigeria and Kenya. Internationally Kenya is number 14, and we are number 15. Therefore, the Kenyan Government is not happy that Ugandans are training in Kenya and end up grabbing gold, silver and bronze that should have been grabbed by Kenya. Therefore, as a country, we must as a matter of urgency, complete the Teryet High Altitude Centre to give opportunity to our sportsmen and women to train.

Finally under two, let me bring the fate of Akii-Bua Memorial Stadium located in Lira. The history of sports in Uganda is incomplete without the name of John Akii-Bua because it is on record that he is the first Olympic gold medalist. When he won gold in Olympics, the Government then constructed a stadium in Lira. The land on which the stadium was constructed originally belonged to Lira Regional Referral Hospital. As I speak, Lira Regional Referral Hospital has taken over their land. However, Lira District Local Government identified another piece of land. That particular piece of land has been earmarked for the construction of the new and refurbished Akii-Bua Memorial Stadium.

I would like to submit that there was a budget line that led to the clearance of the site but now the site is a bush. As Hamson Obua who represents Alebtong and Abako subcounty, where the late John Akii-Bua comes from, I would like to get an answer. How are we going to proceed with the construction of Akii-Bua Memorial Stadium located in Lira? Honourable minister, these are very important issues. I was hearing about Dorcus Inzikuru Stadium in Arua but other Members will handle that.

Finally on prayer No.3, where Parliament is urging Government through the line ministry to fast-track the tabling of the Bill meant to repeal the 1964 National Council of Sports Act, without a blink of an eye, let me state it categorically clearly that as a country we are more or less managing sports using the 20th century law in the 21st century. From 1964 to 2018 – anybody would say that, that law is archaic, obsolete, old-fashioned and must be repealed as soon as possible. 

The primary role of this Parliament, under Article 79, is to make laws and the majority of these laws emanate from the Executive arm of Government. I would like to put the Executive arm of Government on notice that if by the elapse of one month the Bill meant to repeal the 1964 archaic and obsolete law is not tabled in Parliament, I will be left with no option but to move a motion seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Member’s Bill. 

In that law, Mr Speaker, there are issues that we need to handle. That law, in my opinion, will put a final cap on the issue of funding. When you look at the Sports Act of Kenya, even under corporate social responsibility, the Government has made it under the law that every company takes a sporting discipline: “Nile Breweries, can you sponsor football; Coca-Cola, go for netball; MTN, go for boxing.” - and that is incorporated in the law. 

On the issue of rewarding sportsmen and women who excel at international and continental levels, the President has said it is just goodwill but we need to incorporate that in the law. What if tomorrow President Museveni is no longer President of Uganda, shall we have such goodwill from the next President? The time is now. When we repeal this archaic law, we must be able to incorporate all these –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, the mover of this motion started by telling us history of a president who offered Akii-Bua Stadium. As he concludes, he is telling this Parliament that if Mr Museveni goes – and certainly he will – there will be no goodwill in this country. The mover of this motion is a young person with a very goodwill and I think that is why he is moving this motion. 

This Parliament is listening to a motion – which I guess he has presented in goodwill – to recognise sports. He is castigating this Government for failing to repeal a law of 1964 but at the same time praising it for having goodwill. Is he in order to suggest that in this country, there is only one man who has goodwill?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I listened carefully to the Member for Ajuri. He is saying we can no longer operate on the goodwill of individuals or office bearers. We need to operate on laws. That was his point. He is in order. (Laughter)

MR OBUA: Mr Speaker, you have summarised it all because I was saying once this law is put in place, we shall not continue on the goodwill of an individual. This law will put a final cap on the question of funding. Today, Mr Museveni is the President of Uganda. Out of goodwill, he has said Shs 5 million for a gold medallist, Shs 3 million for a silver medallist and Shs 1 million for a bronze medallist every month. What if tomorrow he is not President of Uganda? Once we have the law, it will be able to tie the hands of that particular office holder. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, let me conclude by saying that I had the opportunity to be at Gold Coast, Australia. I witnessed how our young men and women competed. I would like to say that the future of sports in Uganda is bright. (Applause) The future of sports in Uganda is exceedingly bright. When you look at the sports facilities in countries such as Australia, you cannot compare them with what we have. However, our young men and women were able to compete favourably and were be able to get for us what they got. 

Therefore, investing in sports, in my opinion, is not a choice in this millennium but it must be an imperative obligation on the side of Government and all of us stakeholders such that we groom, mentor and nurture the young talents from across the country to ensure that our sportsmen and women continue excelling in all these sporting disciplines, globally, continentally, regionally and nationally.

Mr Speaker, I beg to thank you very much for giving us space. Through this motion many young Ugandans out there are motivated. If we can do the three things we are praying for, I believe we shall have passed the litmus test of making sports a better place for Ugandans who are blessed in those sporting disciplines. I would like to thank honourable members for their support and pray that in debating this motion, we call a spade a spade and that is what I have done. (Applause)

Where somebody has done good, thank him or her. Where there is a challenge, raise it. That is an ideal I stand for and that is an ideal I will live for. A spade is always called a spade. What is yellow is yellow. What is blue is blue. What is green is green. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. Thank you.

3.43
MS ANITA AMONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Mr Speaker, I rise to second the motion for a resolution of Parliament congratulating Team Uganda for their performance during the 2018 Commonwealth Games in Australia.

Mr Speaker, I happened to have been at the Gold Coast to watch the games. There were 72 participating countries. Out of the 72 countries, Uganda happened to be No.15 internationally. (Applause)

At continental level, Uganda was the fourth country, coming after South Africa, Nigeria and Kenya. Without doubt in my mind, as the mover of the motion has already said, we have a bright future in these games. This is the best performing Commonwealth Games since 1970. We must congratulate our athletes for what they did.

It is also worth noting that out of the six medals we got, three were gold, one was silver and two were bronze. Our participating athletes did very well and participated up to the last minute. They finished their disciplines in the positions of number four, five and six, meaning they missed narrowly to get other medals, which was very good for the country.

As a woman, it is worth noting that out of the six medals we got, two were won by women – (Applause). I join this House to celebrate and congratulate our ladies on behalf of all the Ugandan women. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, it should be noted that it was not only in athletics. The ladies did very well in netball. They were participating with the other European countries but our ladies were superb; they did very well.

Looking at the performance of these young people, it brings a lot to us in this House. Athletics bring a lot of unity in the country. Athletics brings togetherness of the people of Uganda and that is one reason we should invest in sports. The success of this team was attributed to good preparation; the early release of money for the team. The minister must know that whenever there is an activity in sports, it should not be done in an ad hoc manner. There was very good preparation. We reached Australia but when we saw our athletes smart, we could not imagine they were from Uganda. Good preparation was done this time around.

Mr Speaker, whenever the ministry makes good preparations for the team, we should always expect good results. As the seconder of the motion, my prayer is that the government should support the sports fraternity in rewarding the exceptional performance, within the medal bracket as promised by His Excellency. The President promised that the gold medallist would be given Shs 5 million per month, as salary for life. The silver medallist would be given Shs 3 million per month, as salary and the bronze medallist would be getting Shs 1 million.

For us to show appreciation, as Parliament of Uganda, to this team, we should appropriate funds for payment of these medallists. 
		
Further, in order to ensure that we acquire what we want to get from sports, government should increase funding in the sports ministry. Once funding is increased, our ladies and gentlemen will always be catered for. Government should also develop interest in sports, especially scouting athletes from all over the country. We may think the best athletes come from Kapchorwa but Karamoja may have them too. Therefore, we should scout many of them. Once we do that, the whole country will be represented.

Mr Speaker, as the Member of Parliament for Bukedea, I personally congratulate the team and thank them, for whatever they have done. I beg to submit.
	
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I will propose the question for your debate. That is what the rules say. Otherwise, before the question is proposed, please remain seated. Honourable members, I notice in the gallery previous winners and holders of these titles, I see the famous Inzi (Dorcus Inzikuru) –(Applause)– and others I have noticed. This motion recognises all of you, for your participation in the past, present and future. 

I would like to also report to this House that there is a man I train with. He is called Titus Tugume (UPDF). He won two belts in kickboxing from Texas at beginning of this month. By saying I train with him does not mean I intend to scare anyone (Laughter)– but I train with him, except I will not be able to go to Texas to compete. I was disqualified on account of my age. However, we are looking to review those rules to allow people contest at any age – (Laughter). Next time, you might be wondering who will be sitting here, especially if I have also won belts and I have to be recognised. We also have hon. Acon here –(Applause). He is picking medals every month. We recognise him for it.

Honourable members, this motion is to celebrate all our young people who have brought pride to this country, especially now that we have the current team which came back from Gold Coast. I am also told that when they say Gold Coast, they think it is the coast where you just go and get gold; and so, they went to get gold. Congratulations, for getting those gold medals.

Honourable members, the motion I propose for your debate is for resolution of Parliament to congratulate Team Uganda, for their performance during the 2018 Commonwealth Games in Gold Coast, Australia. That is the motion I propose for your debate and debate starts now, each member taking three minutes. We will limit the debate to 30 minutes because we have other businesses to handle. Can I start with Members who wanted to second the motion? 

3.53
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): Mr Speaker, first of all, I would like to take this opportunity to thank Team Uganda for what they have done for this country. Because of time, I would like to address myself to a few issues.
 
Honourable members, if you look at Vision 2040, government made a commitment to involve the following aspects:

Public-private partnerships. 
Construction of sports facilities across the country. 
Development of sports academies. 
Physical education and sports.

If you ask yourself whether we are moving towards the attainment of Vision 2040, the answer, in my considered opinion, is fifty-fifty. If you look at the involvement of the public-private partnership, the mover of this motion attempted to talk about the multinational companies we have in this country. Honourable minister, I thank you. We were together in Australia and you must have noticed the involvement of other public partners in investing in sports in Australia and other countries. The question comes back home: What do these multinational companies help us with to support and promote sports development in our country?

We thank development partners, for instance, the Chinese Government which gave us a facility. What is the involvement of other partners other than painting the facility? That is what I would like to ask the government, specifically the minister. Look at the involvement of other partners when it comes to the marathon; marathons happen once a year. Look at the investment in the KCCA festival. Why are we failing to do that in sports? I need answers to these questions.

My brother, hon. Julius Acon is here. I would also like to address myself to my late papa, Patrick Etolu. He won a gold medal in high jump. Why are we not tapping such talent from my area? Talking about Teso, if you go to Soroti, we have one of the biggest sports arenas in this country but what is happening there? You mean we cannot get a gold medal from the hills of Kigezi or from the mountains of Rwenzori? Why should it only be in Sebei that gold medals must come from? Why are we not tapping into the hills which we have in various parts of this country? Why are we not getting gold medals from Mbale?

Mr Speaker, I saw a young lady called Joyce Lalam in Australia participating in javelin – (Member timed out.)

3.57
MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion on our Team Uganda. On my side, I have the best smile in my life. I would like to comment on one of the most historic performances of Team Uganda. I competed for Uganda for 25 years although I retired, but I am not tired. I remember the first medal I won in 1994 was a surprise to the country. I was never welcomed but still, I never gave up.

Today, I would like to encourage our Team Uganda. I would like to thank you for the wonderful performance. You made a historic performance for our country. I would like to thank the Chef de Mission and Team Uganda who went to Gold Coast. I happened to watch this event. For the past 25 years, I had never watched because I was competing. I wanted to dive at the finishing line when I saw Joshua Cheptegei taking the lead but I did not regret. 

I have competed in three Commonwealth Games. Unfortunately, I did not make it due to some problems in our country. I was a finalist and was number seven in all three of them. I competed in seven world Championships. I made it to the semi-finals and finals. In three Olympic Games, I made it to the semi-finals but our time was very difficult. My colleagues, I would like to tell the Uganda Government and the ministry to pay each and every one before they die. We should not wait for somebody to die, then you say, “Thank you”. (Applause)

The State Minister of Sports, hon. Charles Bakkabulindi is here. We should learn how to thank people. I would like to thank the government for the allowances which were given to Team Uganda. During my time, we would get $100 for four years because the government was not aware. However, I was told that this time, each participating athlete got Shs 7 million, which I would like to thank government for. There are a few issues which I wanted to raise. If the country could give these athletes a free – (Member timed out.)

4.01
MS EVERLYN CHEMUTAI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukwo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to take this opportunity to thank Team Uganda for the good work that you have done for the country. I would like to, first of all, register my disappointment. We have the best talent down there in the villages. Last month, I did a sample of identification of talent and I found gold medals lying there. No one has ever identified them. Nobody has ever supported them to come to the limelight. Remember the ones that we have now are from Uganda Police. If they were not in Uganda Police, who was going to recognise them? 

The other thing I am also requesting for is that we see support is given from government institutions. When we are doing recruitments, I think we shall have to request the government to give priority to our children who have talent. Last year, recruitment by UPDF was conducted and in Sebei sub-region, nothing was done. They said that there was Ebola. Up to date, we do not have UPDF officers coming from Sebei sub-region. The government should explain why recruitment was not done in Sebei sub-region.

I would like to echo the issue of our children going to Kenya to practise. To be honest, those people are now already threatening us. They say they do not want our children to go to Kenya. Remember what happened last year in Kololo when Cheptegei was running? Some people saw him with a bad eye. Remember the gentleman failed to run yet he was the first. Those are the very things why we do not want to put our children at risk by taking them again to Kenya for practice and we lose them. The government should do something. Honourable minister, you should tell us what is going to be done about the Teryet High Altitude centre so that our children practise in Uganda.

I am requesting that we improve the budget of sports and take it to the district level. Let us empower the district sports officers so that they help us identify these children before they come up to the national level. I am also requesting the government to rename these roads. We have roads with names whose meaning we do not know. Why don’t we have roads named after our own gallant sons and daughters? (Applause) Why don’t we have a road named after Cheptegei, Inzikuru and our honourable colleague here? Why do you have roads like Dewinton Road and Speke Road? Who are those people and what have they done for this nation? We have people like Kiprotich and Kipsiro. That is my request, Mr Speaker. Thank you very much.

4.04
MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA (DP, Makindye West Division, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg since I am the shadow sports minister -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are wasting the time.

MR SSEWANYANA: I am begging for five minutes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are wasting the time.

MR SSEWANYANA: Thank you. I would like to first thank the Tenth Parliament for that great emphasis you have put in the deliberations for the benefit and good of sports in this country.

It is the first time that Uganda is achieving most - when you were in this House, Uganda qualified for AFCON 2017 and while in this House, Uganda became a netball champion worldwide. When you are sitting in this House, Uganda is achieving the most in the Commonwealth Games.

Therefore, we cannot underestimate your efforts as the Tenth Parliament. I thank you as the shadow sports minister. (Applause) 

I would like to thank the government this time for fulfilling their pledge of assisting this team with Shs 2 billion as facilitation in preparation for these games.

Nevertheless, much as that was good, the way of disbursement of these funds hindered the performance of this team in achieving more medals for this country. For example, I got to interview some players and participants when at Gold Coast where I attended on the goodwill of the Speaker and this Parliament. 

Some sportsmen told me that they only received the Shs 7 million a day before they could depart for Australia. This money was meant to help them prepare very well for these games. I don’t think that they could prepare well a day before departure. Therefore this was wrong organisation and I beg that going forward, this should never be repeated for the good of our country.

Uganda has a potential of performing better as a country. However, you could find that some of the sports disciplines, in the 11 disciplines that we participated in, never had coaches accompanying their players, to provide good guidance to these sportsmen.

We might thank the athletes but they had so many technical officials behind them and that is why they performed well. The boxers had a coach and some technical people around them. However, the participants in the other disciplines did not have coaches. They were alone there and so they could even get guidance from our opponents.

Therefore, in preparation for the future, we need to correct such things because much as Uganda is celebrating for the six medals, Kenya is dissatisfied with the 17 medals they got. Uganda is not to that level of thinking –(Member timed out.)

4.07
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to say a big “Thank you” to our brothers and sisters who have given the country free publicity.

Mr Speaker, I would like this House to be informed that one of our daughters in the names of Regina Aya won the first gold medal in 1969. Unfortunately, no one now remembers this name. These are the things that we are talking about. If you are talking about payment - 

This woman died a very painful death like a “nobody”. Her family is suffering and no one remembers her yet she brought so much pride to this country. Even as we are doing this, it must never be selective. It must go for everyone uniformly.

As a country, we must target what our niche is when it comes to sports. Is it long distance? I was very surprised to see that the bazungu (whites) –(Interjection)– okay the Europeans, are challenging us when it comes to javelin. We are the hunters; Africans are known for hunting. It is about skilling just like hon. Ssewanyana talked about it. In Discus, we have all the energy; we can all get medals in some of these areas.

Talking about managers, these Europeans, each of the athletes has not less than one manager or technical adviser supporting them. If we put more money in sports, this is where we can get free publicity instead of going to big televisions to advertise a country. These sons and daughters, in a way, advertised us.

Even the one who did not perform well, just a mention of Uganda was good enough. Therefore as a country we need to specialise. We may not perform well in all the disciplines but what is our niche. What is it that we can do better? 

Also, let us remember - perhaps we could start a wall of fame for all these gallant sons and daughters who have done Uganda proud and brought medals. We start with the ones who have been forgotten; the likes of Aya, Akii Bua and Inzikuru who may soon be forgotten. Let us initiate that wall of fame and have all these people inscribed somewhere and we will remember them forever so that even our children continue to remember them. I thank you.

4.10
MR ONESIMUS TWINAMASIKO (Independent, Bugangaizi East County Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion for a resolution of Parliament to congratulate Team Uganda for their performance during the 2018 Commonwealth Games.

I would like to thank the Government of Uganda that has made efforts in supporting athletics in this country. Our Government has always availed resources to facilitate our team in and outside the country.

Government of Uganda has also made efforts to give our medallists monthly payments. We must thank Government for that, Mr Speaker. It is a good motivation to our sons and daughters to enable them excel always in these games.

Mr Speaker, I would like to specifically thank the Uganda Police Force, Uganda Prisons Service and Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) for always recognising our athletes who are serving there whenever they excel. Few years back, we saw Mr Kiprotich being promoted in the Uganda Prisons Service and of recent we saw the Uganda Police Force promoting Mr Cheptegei to Inspector of Police and Ms Stella Chesang and others.

Therefore, we must thank the Uganda Police Force, Uganda Prisons Service and Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF). I saw the UPDF welcoming Titus Tugume as a hero when he was returning to our country. It is always a good motivation and we thank them for that.

Mr Speaker, I pray that even other athletes who always fail to win the medals should also be appreciated in one way or the other. Cheptegei and Chesang had always tried to win medals in the previous tournaments. However, they have won in this year after trying and failing.

I pray that we always recognise these other participants who fail to scoop some medals because it is also a motivating factor that next time they can always win big. I beg to submit. Thank you.

4.13
THE MINISTER IN CHARGE OF GENERAL DUTIES (OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER) (Ms Mary Karooro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also stand here to support this motion. There is a story about the eagle: when the she-eagle is going to lay eggs, it looks for the highest cliff of the deepest ocean and it lays its eggs on top of that cliff. When the eggs hatch and the eaglets come out and grow wings, the she-eagle gets them out of the nest, throws them into the air and tells them to fly or else they die. 

I would like to congratulate Team Uganda; you have flown high, flew the Uganda flag and did not let our country die. Thank you for bringing honour to Uganda. Of course Government has been thanked for the initiative and some people said Shs 5 or 3 million is too little; however, our people say that somebody coming out of the ground should not despise any amount of sunshine. This is the beginning and I am sure better things are coming. 

Mr Speaker, the benefits of sports are well known. I love football; in fact, when the Uganda Cranes are playing, do not sit next to me because I am the type of person who kicks my neighbour when the ball is getting hot. I love sports because it is a unifying factor; unity in diversity. It has no colour or political party. We are one and it is the identity of our nationality; a source of income for the athletes as well as their leisure time. 

As Members of Parliament - even ex-officios come from somewhere - we need to spot talent in its infancy. When we see some of these people excelling at the Olympics - at four years the talent of a child can be identified. We need to spot talent, nurture it and groom it so that they can excel at the sport in future. Thank you and congratulations once again. May God bless you abundantly! (Applause)

4.16
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not have enough words to thank Team Uganda but I also wish to congratulate the people of Sebei region where medals have consistently come from; the people from Bukwo, Kapchorwa and other parts of that region. 

I also wish to thank the President and his wife for especially hosting Team Uganda for a very expensive dinner and I am sure they enjoyed. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to briefly talk about two things; first, what has been happening in the Commonwealth is that there are about 32 disciplines in which countries compete. Uganda participated in only 11 of them, which is about 35 per cent of the disciplines that were available for us. This is evident enough that many Ugandans are still denied chance to participate and explore their talents. 

I have seen Ugandans in Kampala and elsewhere engaging in sports like volleyball and table tennis, usually with good talents. I wish the Ministry of Education and Sports were here to tell us why out of the 32 disciplines, Uganda could only afford 11.

Secondly, someone has talked about having a law to do away with goodwill. I wish to add my voice to this that what we need to have is a clear achievers’ policy. We must get away from having the goodwill of the President that when he wakes up and feels he needs to have dinner with some people, he has one and when he feels like not having it, it does not take place. 

At the dinner, he could be prompted to make pledges like, “I will give you a house, I will give you seven million shillings...” and so on. We cannot depend on only the person of the President when some of these pledges have not been fulfilled for years. 

A Ugandan athlete called Davis Kamoga was promised a house in 1996 and 1997; in 1996 he participated in Olympics in the United States of America and in 1997 he was a winner in Athens, Greece.  On both occasions, the same President pledged houses and up to now – it is over 20 years. Even the goodwill could just be cosmetic speeches at dinners, which never yield anything. 

Therefore, as I thank the President and his wife for always hosting very good dinners - (Member timed out.)

4.20
MR GORDON BAFAKI (NRM, Kazo County, Kiruhura): Mr Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate our young people - Team Uganda - that participated in the Commonwealth games. Particularly, I would like to thank all the players who participated and I congratulate you. 

I would like to thank your families; I understand, you must have supportive families and I would like to thank you before this House. I would like to thank your managers and coaches without whom you would not have done this good job.

Mr Speaker, I am very happy this time that unlike other games in which we have participated, the number of officials this time was smaller compared to the participants. It has been the norm to find a plane full of officials escorting one player –(Laughter)– I am so happy today that at least we have so many players being escorted by a few officials. Officials, I would like to thank you for understanding it this time. (Laughter)

I would like to add a simple prayer, which will be prayer No. 4, to the motion: “The Ministry of Education and Sports should take immediate effort to reclaim the sports fields that have been encroached on.” We used to see so many pitches in Kampala but we no longer see any. We do not know who has sold pitches and now all our schools do not have. We shall not develop these young people’s talents unless we have sports activities taking place at our schools. 

I would like to urge the Minister for Tourism who is here that the Minister of Education and Sports is now part of tourism. Cheptegei is now a tourist asset.  

May I use this opportunity to name the She Cranes - the “Queens” – (Applause) May this Parliament always call them the “Queens of Uganda” otherwise the “She” seems to incorporate a lot of things. I thank the She Cranes for the work you are doing. Therefore, the Uganda that we have now is composed of about 80 per cent of the youth –(Member timed out.)

4.23
MR CHRISTOPHER KIPTERIT (Independent, Upe County, Amudat): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate Team Uganda upon their success in Gold Coast, Australia. 

I would like to thank them because they have put Uganda on the map of the world. When I was in Europe some years back, whenever they asked where I come from and I said I am from Uganda, they would talk about Idi Amini. However, I think now with the likes of Cheptegei and the team, we have now wrapped that bad image of Idi Amini. 

Mr Speaker, sports is very important - I was also an athlete. I used to train in Kenya because there were no sports facilities in Uganda and up to now, most Pokots because we are Kalenjin - the Sabiny and the Pokot are Kalenjin. That is why most of them train in Kenya because of the good facilities. 

In the Lancaster Cross Country of last year, there were three Pokots who were representing Kenya and three of them won medals yet they were from Uganda. However, because they trained in Kenya, the medals went to Kenya. Therefore, I encourage the Government to complete the Teryet High Altitude facility so that it can attract those talents from all over Uganda to go train and improve.

Mr Speaker, athletics promotes tourism, just like the honourable member said. Kenya is known because of athletics. Most of the people from the West go to Kenya because they also want to train in those camps like Kaptagat camp in Eldoret. Most of these international athletes train there and then advertise Kenya in those foreign countries.

Therefore, it is very important for us to improve these sports facilities so that we can put Uganda on the map of the world. Besides that, I got a scholarship to go and study free in Netherlands for my university because of athletics. Therefore – (Member timed out.)

4.26
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to echo the same sentiments by congratulating our young men and women on having done us proud as Ugandans. I would like to especially thank the women who have brought us medals because we always look at men - but well done women!

Mr Speaker, I have some prayers; first, collective effort is not easily recognised. For example, when the She-Cranes won the African Netball Championships, it is we, in Parliament, who commended their effort but it was not done out there. If it were the Uganda Cranes that won the African cup or tournament, you would have seen people drinking themselves to hell. However, when it comes to women - we have to really give them great support and congratulate them.

I am sure they would have done better in Gold Coast if they had also been given that incentive. They cannot be recognised as a team - honourable members, you remember it was us here who recognised them and contributed something little. If it had been a country that recognised them at that level of the African tournament, I am sure these girls would have gone to Gold Coast with that enthusiasm.

Therefore, my prayer is that if any team wins anything in Africa or outside Africa, we should give them greater recognition and even if it is something like Shs 3 or 5 million from the state, I am sure they would be more encouraged.

Secondly, my son in law, hon. Ogwang, talked about recognising different talents from different places of Uganda but I would like to request the Government and the Minister of Education and Sports that we need to budget and plan for different stadia in different regions. For example, we have a stadium in Mbale but it is nothing. How do we improve even in sprinting these short races? We now have Kapchorwa giving us a name but what about those who take short races? Where do they train from? Is it only in Namboole –(Member timed out.)

4.31 
MS REHEMA WETONGOLA (NRM, Kamuli Municipality, Kamuli): Mr Speaker, I would like to add my voice to my colleagues’ by congratulating Team Uganda. I have only three issues.

The first one is about the road network of the eastern region. As we congratulate our men and women for winning and bringing Uganda on board, I would like to request the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Minister for Works and Transport and honourable members to put emphasis on improving the road network of that area.

Mr Speaker, two weeks back, our colleague hon. Chekamondo lost a husband and we went for the burial. We would like to thank the Government for constructing and tarmacking up to Kapchorwa. However, after Kapchorwa, the road is too bad. If we improve on the road network, we will be doing something good for our boys and girls.

The second issue is about trade and tourism. I went to Kapchorwa and saw so many foreigners going there for tourism. Can we improve those areas so that we can get more revenue? I know that if we improve the tourism side, we shall get a lot of revenue through these women and men.

The other issue, Mr Speaker, is about trade and linking Uganda to Kenya. We already know that Kenyans are performing well in athletics. If we improve on the road network through Kapchorwa, Kween and Bukwo, trade will improve and people will start trading from Kenya to Uganda.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I would like to thank Ugandans for the individual spirit because the Government does not allocate money for training. We would like to thank the individuals who decided to train by themselves. We are now praising Uganda but it was through individual effort – (Member timed out.) 

4.35
MR JOSEPH KASOZI (NRM, Bukoto County Mid-West, Lwengo): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I also would like to support the motion and congratulate our gallant children from Uganda who did us proud. I would like to applaud the level of organisation that was exhibited by our team and the organisers. I think, for the first time, we raised a large team close to 70 athletes and that is why we were able to harvest a good number of medals; six of them. 

I have observed that these other teams that receive hundreds of medals always field large teams in different disciplines. I think we should also urge our National Council of Sports and the ministry to encourage even other disciplines to participate so that we can enlarge the number of participants we take. This will increase our chances of winning more medals. We pray that in the next Commonwealth Games, we do that.

Mr Speaker, I would like to applaud the different sports bodies under the different disciplines that were able to raise these teams. We all know that buy and large, most of these bodies struggle on their own with little or no support from the ministry. They did their best and looked for sponsors. Some of those athletes up there sponsor themselves. They would move to relatives and companies looking for sponsors. 

Therefore, we would really like to appreciate that initiative and also to call upon the ministry - I do not know whether the Minister of Education and Sports is comfortable with the budget he gets because we never see him complaining and he has been in that ministry for years. Honourable minister, we are ready to support you if you really show cause that you need money to raise sports –(Member timed out.)

4.37
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to support the motion moved by hon. Denis Obua to congratulate our athletes who have just returned from Australia. Today, we stand here with pride and joy to congratulate this team. However, there is a lot that goes on behind the scenes with these athletes.

From reliable information, the honours that we are appreciating here are out of individual sacrifice. These athletes were supported by volunteer trainers and coaches. These athletes were being fed by their own families when they returned from the training fields. Therefore, when this minister comes here chest-thumbing, he doesn’t deserve the honours and that is what hon. Denis Obua said; that we should call a spade a spade. 

This Government is reaping from where it never sowed. These are nationalists and patriots whom we must recognise in their own honour. 

Mr Speaker, Dorcus Inzikuru is up there plus other athletes who won gold medals before. However, the pledges that have been made by this Government whenever they return have never been fulfilled. Where is the stadium that you promised, in Dorcus Inzikuru’s honour? Can you show it to us? Where is the vehicle that you promised to buy for her? Mr Speaker, I have heard the honourable minister sneering and I do not know whether that is parliamentary. These are facts which you should take note of and fulfil. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to report here that this minister has been very rude to former athletes. They have been going to his office and he chases them away. They go to the National Council of Sports to follow up on these pledges and he chases them away. On Sunday, when the President hosted athletes for the State dinner, some of the athletes were denied opportunity to go and see the President; after denying them opportunity to accompany the team to Australia, yet they sacrificed to train them and they were instead watching on television here in Uganda. I was with Dorcus Inzikuru while the gold medals were being won and she told us that some of the athletes have gone through her hands, as a volunteer trainer. 

Therefore, this Government needs to pull its acts to order. Where you have made pledges, please compute these pledges and fulfil them –(Interruption) 

MR SSEWANYANA: Thank you. A case in point is Davis Kamoga who, on Saturday, ran to the minister’s chambers to find a way of meeting the President over unfulfilled pledges. Today, he is not here because of an eye defect he got last night. Mr Kamoga called me to pass on this information to the minister.

4.41
MR SAM CHEPTORIS MANGUSHO (NRM, Kapchorwa Municipality, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank you for the opportunity to also support the motion moved by hon. Denis Obua to thank Team Uganda, having returned successfully from Australia. I would like to use this opportunity to also thank this Parliament for having been very supportive to the sports in this country and more so according to this time which is very inspirational.

We must appreciate these sportsmen; that while these people were participating in Australia and other games before, you will find that people like Mo Farah are representing countries like Britain yet he comes from Somalia.

Therefore, we must appreciate them for being very patriotic; that is another important thing. These people have not remained behind to pay allegiance to different states but have remained with their own country Uganda and we would like to appreciate them for that. 

Secondly, sports is now a very good asset as far as tourism is concerned. Like my colleagues have said before, Sebei and Karamoja areas have some of the national parks that bring in a lot of tourists to that region. However, because of these sportsmen, the numbers of tourists coming is even growing because the whole country and region is now known internationally. This is something worthy investing in.

I, somehow differ a bit from hon. Bernard Atiku. It is not true that Government is completely doing nothing. If we say that Government has completely done nothing, I do not know who sponsored the flight of these athletes. I know that we may not have helped to feed them when they train but who flew them to Australia? We must appreciate what Government has done in order for it to do more.

The other challenge is that sometimes even the ministry and more so the minister - I will use this opportunity to inform him that even the little resources that have been sent to support the fast-tracking of the high altitude training centre in Kapchorwa is actually not being used because some of these contractors take advantage of our poor road networks. They do not want to spend their money to construct our facility there and they give excuses of the rains. It is true that the rains are there but these rains last for two or three months. What about the other eight months –(Member timed out.)

4.45
MR COSMAS ELOTU (NRM, Dakabela County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to join the House and congratulate our dear athletes for doing so well in the just concluded Commonwealth Games and making Uganda proud.

At the time when these events were taking place in Australia, I had a guest in my house and each morning, we would wake up to breakfast and try to catch up with the activities of the day. All that we would see was the Ugandan flag going up; not only once, not twice but three times. My guest was so mesmerised, not only by the colour and beauty of our flag, but also by the fact that these young people were able to represent this country at that very high level. 

Therefore, I would like to take this opportunity to strongly congratulate this team for “bringing a big hole” in the context that it was not only one goal but many of them. Thank you very much for making Uganda proud.  

Mr Speaker, I do not want to dilute this debate from the context of what the mover of this motion brought. However, I would like to emphasise the issue of facilities for our sportsmen and women, which was brought up by the mover. The honourable minister should take up the issue of Namboole and bring it to a logical conclusion. It is not only about Namboole; there are many other stadia around the country that have been taken by very hungry private people in this country. If you want to do good for these sports people, let us re-establish these facilities and bring Namboole back to life in all its development plans. 

If there is an issue on funding, if the donors have failed to come back to the table to work with us, we have our gallant soldiers who have done a very great job and they can help us with the construction. We cannot excel in all the many disciplines that we saw in Australia if we do not have a fully functional stadium and Namboole can represent us in that context. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.47
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I appreciate the movers of this motion, which motion has attracted 100 per cent support from both sides. I stand to confirm that even on the Opposition side, we unanimously support the efforts that have been put in to enable Uganda regain her image in the recent Commonwealth Games in Australia. 

I appreciate the vigour and enthusiasm with which the youthful legislators are taking up the issue of sports. To me, that is hope. What I would like them to do is to translate that vigour into action and actually lobby for sports; lobby for the Government to start training our people at a young age. 

I had the opportunity of visiting Cuba and we even visited their training schools where young children are trained from a very young age in different kinds of sports skills. This is what I would like the Government to take up. 

As Uganda, every time we do well, we praise those who have got gold medals and we make promises. Those who get envelopes on arrival back are lucky. However, those that receive mere promises do not get anything. 

I think it would have been very good if the movers of this motion had gone back to find out what the Government promised to those who had done well before and whether those promises were fulfilled. If they did not, they would have embarrassed the entire Parliament because whatever we agree on the Floor of Parliament is to ensure that the country appreciates what we are doing.

Mr Speaker, you may recall that you presided over a debate here where we reflected on our history and we discovered that in 1956, a football team from Uganda went and played barefooted in Britain and won. In fact, we were all so shocked because I remember you asking, “Did they play in winter or in the summer?” Whether winter or summer, the important thing is that those people –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, time is up. Okay, conclude.

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I would like to say that we should reflect on the promises we have given. Let us create a database for all our heroes and make sure that we reward them because when they win like this, the whole nation celebrates. It is not an individual victory. Therefore, I would like this Government to take the matter of sports seriously and invest in sports as a country.

I am trying to remind you about the promises you made to Denis Obua who is from Lango, Owiny Manasi from Lango and other footballers like Okot p’Bitek. I would like all those people to be honoured by this country for the role they played in the field of sports. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakabulindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to thank my colleague who has moved a very important motion as well as the seconder and all the honourable colleagues that have contributed on this important motion.

In the same tone, allow me to once again thank Team Uganda. Apart from their performance, in sports discipline is paramount and they exhibited discipline in Gold Coast. 

Allow me to thank His Excellency the President and the First Lady for the strides they made in the motivation of sports in this country. I would like to tell Members that Team Uganda left in a good mood - (Interjection) - I will take the information later not now. 

A lot has been said and I commend my colleagues. Some however said that they wished the players had been given the millions beforehand for preparations. There is a difference between money for preparation and what an athlete is supposed to be part of and the two should not be misunderstood. Some are saying that sports has been left behind. 

However, Mr Speaker, Government is looking at sports in totality. If I had time to explain what was done in the African Cup of Nations (AFCON), African Nations Championship (CHAN) and the Commonwealth Games, people would have come to appreciate that indeed Government is moving. The motivation of Shs 5 million, Shs 3 million and Shs 1 million, plus what is taking place now, has motivated the team. 

It is unfortunate that hon. Atiku is not around. He said, “You pick on people who are already shining”. I do not know what sports he played when he was still young but you have to show the world that you are there and then they pick on you. That is a must, for those of you who played sports – [Member: “Clarification”] - Mr Speaker, I will allow the clarification at the end, let me first build my point. 

Mr Speaker, there was also an allegation by the same that on Sunday, we were given lunch at State House and that Kamoga was brought to my office the previous day, Saturday, and that he was denied a chance to see the President. 

Mr Speaker, it is good for people to carry out research. First and foremost, on Saturday your minister in charge of sports is not stationed in the corridors. The doors were closed of course and I am not supposed to do the donkey’s work. I have got a commissioner and other technical people. The list was properly compiled and we were with Mr Kamoga during the lunch at State House. He took photos with the President and he was promised something.

I would like this to be clear. I have heard several people saying, “Promises, promises”. Who made those promises? Ever since I became a minister, the promises that I am aware of have been fulfilled. For instance, we started with Inzikuru. We built a house for her and she is there listening. She was given money. We came to Kipsiro and we built a house for him and he was given a vehicle – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up. Honourable minister, you should have come with your own statement. 

MR BAKABULINDI: Mr Speaker, I have to clarify some issues because there was an issue raised here and it is important for the Members. They said, out of the 32 disciplines – incidentally we have got 53 disciplines – why is it that in the Commonwealth games, others did not appear? 

Mr Speaker, some disciplines appear in Olympics Games and do not appear in Commonwealth Games. That must be known. Some countries participate in the Olympics Games but cannot participate in the Commonwealth Games because they are not Commonwealth countries. We need to understand all these things.

I agree with the mover on fast-tracking the Bill, which is already with the First Parliamentary Counsel. I agree with the mover and the contributors about Teryet. In fact, Teryet is moving. We had problems with the roads because of the rains but after next week, I am going there and I want to go with the Committee on Education and Sports and the area MPs so that we are all there together. As we talk, electricity has moved, water has moved and the primary school has been relocated to another angle. We are moving, of course with the monies, which you give us.

Mr Speaker, it is true, as my colleagues are saying, that we have a big chunk of land on Mandela National Stadium. We want to see if we can also put an international swimming pool on that piece of land. We have got people who have been encroaching on the land and we are trying to come up with mechanisms on how to remove them. 

I have heard of the prayers raised by the mover of the motion. They are all important prayers and together, we can promote sports in this country.

I would like to congratulate my colleagues; the MPs who escorted us to Gold Coast. Thank you very much. I would like to congratulate Parliament. Mr Speaker, you have done a great job in as far as sports is concerned because I can see money coming in. The more money you bring, the more sports is going to shine. 

I cannot leave without giving special congratulations to the netball team. As we talk, European countries are applying to play friendly matches with our national team; the She-Cranes because they have shown that we are there and we can make it. I can promise you that if I am still there, things are going to move. (Laughter) Thank you very much.

4.59
THE MINISTER FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you very much for this opportunity. I also thank Members for thanking our sportsmen and women who have put Uganda on the map. 

You frequently mentioned the issue of tourism and sports. Let me say the following. Games and sports are one of the most unifying forces of any country or society because a player or sportsman is identified and praised not by the colour of his skin, ethnicity or religion but because of his performance. That makes sports and tourism come together because tourism is also a cross-cutting force across all sectors. 

In fact I can add, Mr Speaker, that the most unifying force or one of the forces for promoting democratic values is sports. Sports promote the spirit of give and take, winning and losing and accepting any outcome. I wish we could emulate the same in politics. Sometimes – I do not want to mention names – if you dare stand against him and win, you are in trouble. In sports, they win, take and move forward. That is one of the most democratic values we would have. Tourism is the same.

Sport is the greatest marketing mechanism for tourism. For instance, the winning by our sportsmen and women has put Uganda on the world map. Anyone who did not know Uganda now knows it: the Pearl of Africa, a country gifted by nature whose people are talented. That is what our country is all about. It is a country gifted by nature and the Pearl of Africa, as named by Churchill.

May I mention that on 3rd June, the whole world will be trekking to Namugongo to celebrate Martyrs’ Day? We can also pay tribute to those martyrs who died for their faith. 

I can tell you that they have contributed to tourism immensely and they are heroes in our hearts. That is why these sportsmen and women have really put Uganda on the map. I would like you to know that you are heroes in this country. As the minister in charge of tourism, I would like you to know that you have promoted a sector, which is struggling because most people understand tourism as a leisurely activity, not very serious –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member for Ajuri, for bringing this motion and honourable members for a very good debate. I also thank the honourable ministers for the responses you have made and for the undertakings. I still think that the minister in charge of this sector should come with a statement, if he deems it fit, so that we have a second go at this debate on another aspect of how this sector can be supported better.

Honourable members, I do not know whether you feel the way I do when, in a foreign country, that flag is raised and the anthem is played with the athletes holding their breasts. I do not know whether you have the same feeling I get when I see those things. How I wish, for every game, the anthem is sung all the time and it can happen. It can happen if we put our minds together, put the necessary resources where they are needed and build more capacity and send more people. The national anthem of this country will be sung in every capital where these games are held and our flag will always be high. (Applause)

Honourable members, do you see it the way I see it? What do we do about it? Honourable minister, let us think about this together and see how we can find a comprehensive solution of raising potential athletes from all corners of this country and build them up into a team that is formidable and will make this country what it truly is - a great country.

Honourable members, I would like to thank the athletes who participated and thank the people who supported them. Even those who have not won, you have just postponed your victory. Come next game, we want you there and we shall support you. I would like to thank you and congratulate you for your participation. For all those who have done it before, they have beaten the tracks for us who are coming later. Let us celebrate those who came before, those who did it yesterday and those who will continue to do it today and tomorrow. Let us do this for God and our country. (Applause)

Honourable members, I will now put the question to the motion that Parliament congratulates Team Uganda for its performance during the 2018 Commonwealth Games in Gold Coast, Australia. I put the question to this motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Congratulations again and we look forward to more of these debates. Next item. 

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON THE NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE PERFORMANCE OF THE ECONOMY DURING THE FY 2016/2017

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we debate the state of the economy today? This debate is quite involving. Can we have this debate and the state of indebtedness tomorrow as the only items to deal with? 

Honourable members, go and prepare for this motion and for the one on Local Government Public Accounts Committee so that we can conclude those debates as they inform part of the proceedings of the Budget. Is there any other matter that we can handle now? Item nine. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON ENTITIES WITH UNQUALIFIED OPINION FOR FY 2014/2015

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was this report presented? Next item. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE LEARNER’S PROJECT UNDER THE NATIONAL IDENTIFICATION AND REGISTRATION AUTHORITY (NIRA)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the chairperson of the committee here? 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, considering the fact that we started on a very low note; being depressed about the poor presence of Cabinet ministers and now getting concerned about the absence of the committee chairpersons – possibly they were not aware that their reports would come on the Order Paper - I am asking whether it would not be procedurally right to adjourn so that we can prepare for better debate tomorrow? I seek for your guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, regarding the debates on the state of the economy and state of indebtedness, the committee has matters they are dealing with tomorrow and therefore, the chairpersons will not be available. Can we have this debate on Thursday when the leaders of the committee are present? Therefore, we will deal with the issue of public accounts and other pending matters tomorrow. 

Honourable members, I earlier made communication here that I need to meet the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Chairperson of the Committee on National Economy and the clerk to that committee so that we can organise what we are going to do tomorrow. In light of this, this House is adjourned to tomorrow, 2 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 5.10 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 25 April 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) 