
Tuesday, 10 April 2012

Parliament met at 2.49 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, Leader of Government Business, Members of the Cabinet; I welcome you to this sitting and from the recess. I know it was very short, but I do hope that you had time to touch base with the electorate. 

I also wish to announce the unfortunate death of the composer of one of the national symbols recognised under Article 8 of our Constitution, Professor George Kakoma. He will be given an official burial, but I will be inviting the Leader of Government Business to inform us better about the preparations.

I also take this opportunity to thank you very much for the work done to host the Inter-Parliamentary Union meeting. It was the biggest meeting in this century and I really want to thank you for your cooperation. The delegates were happy; the Secretary General was happy; the President was happy. I would just like to read the message from the Secretary General, which I want to put on record. It is written to me:

“Madam Speaker, I would like to express my warmest thanks to you again on behalf of all the participants for the outstanding manner in which the Inter-Parliamentary Union was received in Kampala, and in which the 126th IPU Assembly was organised. Both the excellent conditions of work for all our meetings and the warm and gracious hospitality of our Ugandan hosts have ensured that the 126th Assembly will long be remembered by all. 

The Assembly was indeed a great political success for your country as testified by the rich harvest of important decisions, reports and recommendations emanating from the debate. We could not have hoped for a better theme than, ‘Parliaments and people: Bridging the gap’. The debate on this subject was both spirited and enlightening.

I would also like to thank you for your efforts in ensuring that a resolute Presidential statement was issued at the end of the Assembly.

The Assembly was also a success in terms of the bonds that were built between the delegates through their informal contacts. The Members of the Executive Committee were very appreciative of the dinner you so kindly hosted to them on Thursday, 29 March 2012 and all the delegates hugely enjoyed the dinner you hosted at the beautiful Speke Resort after the inaugural ceremony on Saturday, 31 March 2012.

The cultural evening was truly a night to remember. The participants immensely enjoyed the spectacular show of singing and dancing, and the evening was a perfect opportunity for them to let their hair down.

In fact, we had never had so many opportunities to practice our dancing in the course of an assembly and I have to say that our Ugandan hosts win hands down in that department.

All this wonderful Ugandan hospitality combined with the tireless efforts of all those members of the secretariats of Parliaments, who spared no effort to ensure the smooth-running of the Assembly, contributed in no small way to the success of the event. Please convey our warmest thanks to all those who have worked so hard to prepare for the session and ensure that it went so well.

It was a huge pleasure for my colleagues and myself to work alongside them. The Kampala assembly would not have been such an outstanding success without your own personal contribution as President of the Assembly and for the supremely competent, resolute and smooth manner in which you presided over the debate. 

The fact that you were able to devote so much time to the Assembly despite so many outside pressures was particularly appreciated. I also know that my colleague, Philip felt very privileged to work with you during Assembly.

On a more personal note, I would like to say that it was a huge pleasure for me to work with you during this Assembly. Thank you so much for the patience, generosity and good humour that you have shown me this past week and indeed in the month leading up to the event, and above all, thank you for making the Assembly such a resounding success. 

I hope you will be able to take some rest after these hectic days, and with warmest wishes, I remain yours sincerely,
Andreas Johnson.”

Of course I have not done what he wanted, but honourable members, alongside the Assembly, I also took time to forge Parliamentary friendship associations with the following Parliaments:

Afghanistan, Bahrain, the United Arab Emirates, Kuwait, Sudan,South Sudan, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Ethiopia, Brazil, Chile, Timorese, India, Pakistan, Morocco, Egypt, Cuba,
United Kingdom, Italy, Zambia, Saudi Arabia, Australia, Hungary,
Ukraine, Mongolia, Oman, Maldives, Benin, Iran, Venezuela, Myanmar, Japan,  Columbia, China, Germany, Philippines, Lesotho, Namibia and South Africa; so all these are going to form friendship associations with our Parliament for cooperation and interaction. 

The majority of them were good, but I will mention to the House that many of the members of the EU wanted to meet and talk about homosexuality and I told them off. So, I want you to know the pressures under which I was operating throughout that week.

Let me invite the Rt Hon. Moses Ali to inform us about Professor Kakoma’s funeral arrangements.

2.57
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I also want to thank you for the highest achievement I believe in your life. That was the climax and we are proud. Personally, I was proud of your performance and thank God you did not fall sick during those days. I believe all those people went back with new information about Uganda. Our Speaker has exhibited how Ugandans can be humorous.

On a sad note, I am reading a statement on the funeral arrangement of the Late Professor George Kakoma. On Saturday, 7 April 2012, Government of Uganda learnt with shock about the death of Professor George Kakoma. As you may be aware, the Late Professor Kakoma will forever be an unequalled icon, whose priceless contribution as the composer of Uganda’s National Anthem is eternally engraved into our history as an independent state. 

For his immense contribution to our national pride and identity, the fallen professor ranks very high among personalities who have brought honour and prestige to our motherland. Accordingly, the Government has unanimously resolved to honour Professor George Kakoma with an official burial. 

Pursuant to this, Government has set up a cabinet sub-committee comprising of political heads of the Ministry of Information and National Guidance, Gender and Social Development, the Presidency and the Public Service to oversee the programme and funeral arrangements for the Late Professor Kakoma.

Government has already taken care of all the funeral expenses of the late professor. From the time of his demise, Government has been in touch with members of his family to work out the requirements for the funeral and all the necessary resources that have been availed today. 

As part of the programme, the body of the late professor will lie in state here at Parliament for public viewing and signing of the condolence book on Thursday, 12 April 2012 starting at 10.00 a.m.  There will be a funeral service on Friday, 13 April 2012 at Namirembe Cathedral starting at 10.00 a.m. 

The burial will be on Saturday, 15 April 2012 at his ancestral home in Wakiso District. Burial ceremonies will start with a service at his home at Nambombwe at 10.00 a.m. Thereafter the casket will proceed to the family burial site 3 kms from the late professor’s home starting at 3.00 p.m. At the burial, Professor Kakoma will also be honoured with a symbolic gun salute deserving of such a distinguished son of Uganda.

On behalf of Uganda Government, I want to relay our heartfelt condolences to the family, relatives, friends and in-laws and the country at large about the untimely passing of Professor George Kakoma. He will always be remembered in post-independence Uganda as an outstanding citizen and scholar who gave the nation its priceless identity by composing our national anthem. As Government we look forward to fully honouring him though in absentia. 

In October 2012, we mark 50 years of Uganda as an independent state. May the good Lord grant Professor George Kakoma a peaceful rest. For God and my country.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this means that whatever we have should be done today and tomorrow because on Thursday it will not be possible to have a sitting. I believe the body will be brought in the morning. 

3.03
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): I rise on an issue of public importance, but before that, let me put one thing on record. One is to congratulate you upon organising such a successful conference that benefited all Ugandans. I also want to congratulate you as an individual for having attained the rank of President. Ugandans are happy about that.

MR SSEBAGALA: Madam Speaker, you have given us very good communication from the secretariat of the IPU and I thought that having organised such a successful function, you would have accorded us some 40 or 30 minutes to really talk about the success we had as Members of Parliament and the organisers. 

I will request that you allow us to share our moments of truth as Parliament before we go to other issues. Let us share our moments of truth in as far as the organisation was concerned. I want to thank you for organising such an event, but request you to allow Members to share their feelings with you.

THE SPEAKER: I do not want to be selfish, so I will allow Members to speak about this. Prepare yourselves to move a substantive motion tomorrow.

MR MUWUMA: I want to request that that motion be presented by Government then it is discussed by the entire House.

MR SSEBAGALA: Madam Speaker, this is our Parliamentary arrangement. Indeed, if Government had that plan, it would have been communicated to us through the Leader of Government Business. So, if they have decided to keep quiet, let us own it as Members of Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the backbenchers will move a motion tomorrow.

MR MUWUMA: One week and a half ago, we registered a very fatal accident in Busoga region, whereby a truck that was carrying traders from Buwenge to Isilu - and it had over 46 passengers - swerved and killed at least 23 people, and the causalities were taken to Jinja Referral Hospital. When the casualties were taken to Jinja Referral Hospital, there was no single glove available, no pain killers and no First Aid kits.

There was a state of emergency in Jinja Referral Hospital whereby those who had their people hurt in that accident were advising medical workers to use polythene papers as gloves to help them save lives. Those who could afford were being asked to go and buy gloves from private pharmacies and clinics.

Jinja Referral handles around 24 districts within that region. If at all a regional referral hospital could be denied facilities to that level, I do not know what Government is planning for the people in that region.

As a leader, I visited the hospital that weekend, but the situation was very horrible. The patients were hostile and the attendants were even turning to us saying you are the people. What are you saying? Even those who are on ARVs were complaining that Septrin was nowhere to be seen in the whole hospital. I want to appeal to Government to save lives and come to the rescue of the people of the region. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.09
MR JAMES MBAHIMBA (NRM, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. I represent Kasese and we have had a disaster, and there is another disaster that is on the way coming.

The Kilembe Mines have flooded underground and people were trapped up to 7th of this month. The body of one person is yet to be retrieved. I have worked with the fire brigade and we have failed.

I wish to point out the following on this issue. Mining closed in 1979, but Kilembe Mines continued maintaining the underground tunnels by pumping water because the tunnels are drilled up to the water levels or what we call the water table. They continue pumping out the water, although this water is acidic.

Since last year, Kilembe Mines has been in no position to pump the water anymore. I have presented this to the Minister of Privatisation because alongside, there are about 48 companies that have expressed interest in reviving Kilembe Mines over a period of three to four years ago. I have also presented this to the Minister of Energy and also to the President. The President has even written basing on the circumstances that Kilembe needs to be given due attention because of its potential disaster.

When the waters ooze out, they cause a serious disaster to the population because of the acidity and now it has started oozing out. Secondly, if we are to revive Kilembe Mines when the tunnels are already blocked and broken down, we will have to drill again and this is very costly.

Related to this is the fact that copper is in grades and when this copper overstays, there is a process called oxidation that works on the copper and reduces its grade. Currently, the reknowned tonnage of copper in Kilembe is about six million metric tonnes and today a kilo of copper is at $12. At $4, the six million metric tonnes of copper in Kilembe makes it viable, but the problem is the process of oxidation now.

Today, the current grade is at 1.7 percent and when it goes below one percent, it loses on the world market. We, therefore, have to move and I wish to interest the minister in charge of privatisation to handle this and look at it at a technical level. I am here to give the technical advice on how to mine, give out and concession Kilembe.

If we delay, something is going to happen like what has happened, where all of a sudden, Kenya has discovered oil and we have been lingering with oil here. This is going to happen to Kilembe. I will say it in future that when Congo stabilises, our copper may not have market. It is better to give out the copper today or we better close the mine in a more environmentally required manner so that we avert the possible disaster potentials that are likely to happen.

Disaster number one is that when the mines flood, they will spread into the waters of River Nyamwamba and this river is used domestically. It will have an impact on the fish in Lakes George and Edward directly and also affect our people. It is, therefore, my request that the issue of Kilembe Mines be treated with care and taken on seriously to avert the likely negative effects. 

However, it is still my request that the Minister in charge of Disaster Preparedness should assist us. I have been communicating with the local government and they have surrendered saying they cannot move anymore.

There is a stream down there and they want the body out. The jumpers have reached there and they have failed. I had told them that we need a pump that will pump vertically, but Police could not agree with me and they have bounced back. The only pump in Uganda that can be found as for now is at Bujagali. I have communicated to the Minister of Energy to assist us and get that pump, but we are have not succeeded. So, maybe, in two or three days, the mining camp will be flooded and people will be affected.

It is my request that the minister intervenes, and I want to bring it to the attention of the nation that there is potential disaster looming in Kilembe and we need to save the mines. Otherwise, we are going to lose all the six million metric tonnes of copper very soon because of oxidation. If the mines flood, we are going to lose a lot of money as we try to re-open a new mine underground yet we could have used the ones we have been maintaining for the last 20 years.

Madam Speaker, that is what I wanted to bring as a matter of national importance. Thank you so much.

3.15
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the state of our embassies abroad, but before I do that, allow me, not withstanding the motion that is coming tomorrow, to take this opportunity to congratulate you and honourable members and Uganda at large for successfully hosting the IPU.

Allow me also to take the opportunity to congratulate Africa on getting a second woman head of state, circumstances notwithstanding. (Laughter)

I rise to express concern about the state of our embassies and high commissions abroad with specific reference to the High Commission in South Africa. The state of these embassies makes one question what they exist to do. When you visit the High Commission in South Africa, the flag outside the Embassy is so pale and it reflects a state of deep sleep.

When you enter the reception, the shelf has items of 1900. There are packets of tea, which are supposed to be manufactured from Uganda but they are half torn. There is a Nubian and Kitooro basket, an influence I suppose by hon. Rugumayo, but then you wonder, where are the other beautiful items that Uganda can offer? Where are the beautiful mats from Masaka? Even the Nubian baskets we have are very colourful. Where are the beautiful baskets from Ankole and all the other cultural items and other items of trade that we can offer?

Certainly, nobody visiting this embassy would imagine that Uganda has the beautiful and executive Igara tea bags, for example, the Mukwano tea bags and other products. Certainly, no one visiting this embassy will ever dream that Uganda has mountain gorillas and other tourist attractions. No wonder people visit Rwanda so as to view mountain gorillas in Uganda.

When you visit other embassies, you find a screen showing items that a nation is able to offer. But the state of our embassies leaves a lot to be desired and it raises questions as to what they exist to do. What is our trade strategy in these embassies, which are supposed to be the face of Uganda? What do the embassies exist to do? The High Commissioner in South Africa has been there for six years; is it any wonder that we are in a state of complacency? Other nations change their ambassadors after every two years. This is in a bid to create fresh ideas and diversity in these embassies and high commissions. 

Moreover, the state of the High Commissioner’s residence in South Africa is pathetic, to say the least. This is a huge and prestigious building in a prime area in Hatfield sitting on a one acre piece of land. However, all the rooms are currently leaking; the High Commissioner has a towel in his bedroom – he was kind enough to take us to his bedroom –(Interjection)- Yes, you can go and verify this. He has a towel in the bedroom laid on kavera to trap drops of water from the ceiling. This is true. Every room in this house is leaking and the walls are peeling off, with clear cracks on them. Valuation was done and repairs need $400,000. This is just Shs 1 billion and it is for property worth more than $15,000. 

The Minister of Foreign Affairs should explain to this nation why this building and others are in such a state. Let us repair it, sell and buy a smaller property if we cannot maintain the big one. But we should learn to value our image abroad; we should be able to project a positive image of Uganda abroad, Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am equally concerned about the state of many of our missions. I have had a meeting with the Committee on Foreign Affairs who have compiled a report. We are going to meet the Head of State about the state of all our missions. Thank you.

3.21
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Michael Bayigga): Madam Speaker, hon. Muwuma raised a matter of national importance and I believe that it deserves a response – a response from the substantive Minister of Health. But when I looked at the front bench, the substantive Minister of Health has been perennially absent from this Parliament. Now that the Shadow Minister of Health is around –(Laughter)– I believe I can make an augmentation of the statement so that I fill in for the substantive Minister of Health, so that when she remembers to come back to take political responsibility and to provide answers to these nagging problems, we shall have gone a long way, as Parliament.

Madam Speaker, in our response to the Minister’s policy statement, we felt that it was important for us to make a forensic audit on all the actors within the health sector in order to trace what exactly the bottlenecks to the health service delivery are in Uganda. Despite the colossal sums of money that go to the Ministry, we continue to find such nagging problems as absence of gloves, needles and syringes, cotton wool, basic drugs – despite the change of policy. 

I think something has gone wrong. We have gone through the first half of our expenditure and we would have expected any responsible ministry to come to the House and appeal to us to do our oversight function to ensure that Government expenditures that have gone to programmes and projects are well followed up. This has not been done. 

Members of Parliament should be in position to get information about the expenditures of all the projects that have been done by Government to enable them to sensibly follow up what it has done and failed to do. It is only after having an accident and people die that you will see Members of Parliament doing quasi-oversight function; this happens only when some people have already died.

The Opposition, led by the Leader of the Opposition and myself, have been cris-crossing this country visiting different hospitals. The last hospital I visited was Waluwanda in Buvuma and we saw all these things happen, and we highlighted them. We enable Government to understand what we do through the media, but we also make reports. However, our reports have never attracted any response. Why should Government always wait for people to raise these matters, when people have lost their lives; to come and water them down, making promises that never come to pass?

This Parliament can act by even recommending to this Government to sack some of these ministers who do not take up the responsibility to explain to the public what they are failing to do. (Interjection) I am not moving a motion now because the motion that I will move will be more advanced than what you think; you will not see the Frontbench anymore. (Laughter) 

This Government should look at all the hospitals; there are no success stories whatsoever in the past one year. These are basic things that hon. Muwuma has just communicated, but when it even comes to issues of supply – distribution of HIV and other drugs – basic treatment like the anti-TB drugs – when TB is the major culprit of all diseases that kill people with HIV. We have not received any statement to that effect.

Madam Speaker, I would ask that the Leader of Government Business – who happens to be an Army General – should make a statement to the effect that the matter as addressed by hon. Muwuma is addressed. But as Shadow Minister of Health, I call for a national forensic audit to be done because this Government has no success stories in all hospitals, including the one I visited with you in Kamuli. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Now, Leader of Government Business, there is a looming ecological and environmental disaster arising from Kilembe Mines flooding and there is a dead body there, according to hon. Mbahimba. We want to know what you are going to do; the policy issues are for privatisation, but what are you going to do about the disaster? 

You can also respond to the issue of the referral hospitals; they are on the highways and accidents occur all the time. We have talked about this matter over and over again. Disaster minister, please tell us what to do with the body in Kilembe Mines. 

3.27
THE MINISTER OF DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Dr Stephen Mallinga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are aware that there is flooding at Kilembe Mines, and we have instructed one of the people in the ministry to visit this week. We got that information this morning. So, somebody will be going there to assess the situation. 

As far as flooding inside the mine is concerned, I am still carrying out consultations as to whether it will be I who should be responsible. However, if the water comes out, then it will be our responsibility to take action. We are anticipating and we shall be prepared for the acidic water which will come out, go down the hill and might run over people’s homes and cause damage. Government will take every effort to make sure that water is pumped out before it runs down the hill and causes damage. Thank you very much. 

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, honourable minister. Madam Speaker, thank you very much. The point of clarification I would like to raise is about the looming disaster at the High Commission of Uganda in South Africa. The house - (Interjections) - This is an issue of disaster. I would like to raise this, Madam Speaker. First, let me make my point. 

We are told that there is a house which is about to collapse. Haven’t you seen the effects of collapsing houses here in Kampala? Do you want that house to collapse on the High Commissioner in South Africa before we can say it is a disaster? What are the temporary measures being taken, as the honourable Speaker goes to meet His Excellency the President on the long term preparation or the general issues about embassies? What are we doing to save the lives of the people who are occupying that building? Is that not an issue of disaster, Madam Speaker?  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: It is a disaster but let us deal with the Kasese issue first. I think you had finished. Prime Minister, can you talk about the policy on the Kilembe Mines? 

3.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (ENERGY) (Mr Simon D’ujanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would just like to add to what my senior colleague has said. Indeed, we received this message this morning and it so happened, as the area MP said, that this water needs a special pump to pump it. It is a head of 100 metres and such pumps are not very common. Before I came to Parliament, I had sent one of my engineers to Bujagali to see if we can ferry one of such pumps to Kilembe. I have not received any update yet but we are concerned, as the disaster preparedness minister said, that this water should not come out. We are doing everything possible to get the pump to pump the water out. (Applause)

3.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since Kilembe Mines was closed, a company owned by Government, in the names of Kilembe Mines Limited, has been maintaining it. It has a board of management that has been maintaining Kilembe Mines in readiness for its divesture. The divesture process of Kilembe Mines is underway. A divesture plan has been drawn, and as I speak the transaction advisor is being sourced to carry out the transaction as under the law; Government cannot just allocate that company to anybody to exploit the minerals. 

There are many parties who have shown interest to run and mine the copper, but I must say that what has slowed down the divesture process is a court case by a company, which had been given some rights to run Kilembe Mines and it ran into problems with Government. They could not cope but then they took out a court case and the court process has taken a bit long and yet that company has slapped an injunction on the divesture process.

The Attorney-General’s Office together with the Privatisation Unit of the Ministry of Finance is handling the court process to ensure that it is disposed of so that the divesture action plan as planned by Government can take place. Government and the members will be informed of the progress. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.34
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, unfortunately, I do not see the representative of health but I will take responsibility to make sure that the Ministry of Health reports extensively on the status of health in the country -(Dr Bitekyerezo rose_)- No, there is nothing I have said. (Laughter) I have said nothing, so clarification for what now? I have said nothing. 

Madam Speaker, I want to repeat that I am taking it upon myself to ensure that the Ministry of Health reports on the status of health in the country. That is all I have said - (Interjection) – They will report on the status of hospitals in the country, including referrals.

Meanwhile, I will call on the Minister of Foreign Affairs to talk about the problems in our embassies. I am sure he is on the way coming, and he heard it - [Honourable Members: “He is here.”] - Yes, but as he was coming, somebody was talking about it and this is to remind him. So, when I finish he should come here. (Laughter) When I finish, he should come and tell us what is happening in our embassies. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, I was in this House when Parliament took a position that the Minister of Health should give a comprehensive statement about the status of hospitals in this country. To date, no statement has been given and yet as Members of Parliament we have been pressed wherever we come from. In Jinja, for example, we have had no TB drugs for a long time and the situation has not been explained. So, when the hon. Prime Minister comes on the Floor of Parliament and says, casually, that he is going to talk to the Minister of Health to give a statement, it sends a very bad picture to the victims out there. 

I seek guidance, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, on whether it is not important that a timeframe is set for us to know when the Minister of Health is going to address us on the status of the hospitals in this country. He was on the Floor of Parliament and he promised - I was in this House – but to date nothing has come up. This, actually, will be interpreted by the population out there that we do not take issues to do with their health very important. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Actually, Prime Minister, I do not know whether that is not contempt of Parliament because it must be more than two months since we discussed that matter.

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I do not whether it is really contempt of Parliament or not because we are yet to define what contempt of Parliament is. (Laughter) We are yet to define. 

Allow me to say, I would like to ask the Ministry of Health to come and report -(Interjections)- I do not know when, although in today’s papers -[Mr Katuntu: “The rules do not allow”] - action has been taken, but Ministry of Health will come here. Take it from me.

Secondly, I think Ministry of Foreign Affairs is coming to tell us about the embassies. Madam Speaker, with your permission, I want to ask - (Dr Bayigga rose_) Sit down first. (Laughter) Let me finish. I want to ask the Minister of State for Energy - (Interruption)

DR BAYIGGA: Madam Speaker, I am unrepentant in moving a point of order to a General. Members have raised significant concerns about the Leader of Government Business being non-committal in setting a time when all of them would come to listen to the minister. Is it in order for the Rt hon. Leader of Government Business to continue being non-committal despite the fact that Parliament would want and would deserve to know the timelines when the Minister for Health would come and give a statement to that effect?

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, I do not agree with you that there has not been contempt of Parliament. If the minister was here two months ago and she said she is coming to explain the state of health in this country and has not done so after two months, that is very clear contempt. You do not even have to ask. So, can you please set a timeline when we can get this statement? The country wants to know.

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I really would not say when the Minister of Health should be available. I do not even know why they are not here. (Laughter) I am at the risk of giving Thursday as a date for the Minister of Health to come here -

THE SPEAKER: Thursday is out of question; we are going to have Prof. Kakoma’s body here and we cannot have proceedings on that day.

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: So, Tuesday next week.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, Tuesday.

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Meanwhile, I was going to say, Madam Speaker, I would like the Minister of State for Energy to go back to the office and follow up that pump in Bujagali until he makes sure that it is on its way to Kasese and then he comes back here to report.

THE SPEAKER: He should report to the General. (Laughter)

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Yes, from Bujagali to Kasese. This is common sense. You must start from where the pump is to where it is going. So, the pump is in Bujagali, it must go to Kasese. I want the Minister of Energy to go to the office and follow up the pump. When it starts taking off for Kasese, then he comes back to report. Meanwhile, with your permission, the Minister of Foreign Affairs can come.

THE SPEAKER: The General has directed the Minister of State for Energy to ensure the movement of the pump from Bujagali to Kasese and to report at the earliest opportunity.

There were the perennial issues of the state of the missions of this country. Let us hear from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and move back to the Order Paper.

3.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR REGIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Asuman Kiyingi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the members for raising pertinent questions regarding the state of our missions. I too have travelled around and seen a number of these missions and there are serious problems there. But as you rightly guided, Madam Speaker, this House will receive a report on this matter, I think from the Budget Committee, and I request that I make a comprehensive comment on the matter after that report is tabled. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can I hear from the chair of the Budget Committee. He is telling us where the -

3.45
THE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Mr Tim Lwanga): Madam Speaker, we happened to be in South Africa and we went and visited the embassy. We went to the residence and the building is falling apart. It does not make sense that we are going to wait for a report when a building is falling apart. What we need is to treat this as an emergency, get a team down there if need be, get the US$ 400,000 if you want that, and repair the unit. The building is worth US$ 15 million. Remember what happened in Brussels? We lost a building and at the end of the day, we paid a fine of about €5 million just to remove the debris. What is the problem with foreign affairs?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have been to many of these missions; if we are going to just fix piecemeal, I do not know where we shall stop. Why don’t we have a comprehensive debate on this matter, mission by mission? New York is in trouble, Washington is in trouble, Brussels is in trouble and India is in trouble - I do not know who is not in trouble. I had to battle with the Minister of Finance to get a lift in New York. Our residence in New York is empty -

MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank hon. Kamateeka for bringing up the issue of our mission in South Africa. I would like to ask all Members of Parliament whenever they travel to come and inform this House about the state of our missions abroad.

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs has got three ministers but you can even see that the ministers do not know what is happening in our missions. The state of our missions abroad is the same in Washington, Burundi, Rome, India, Copenhagen, Brussels - The situation is the same, Madam Speaker and honourable members. 

We have just talked about the missions and the state of buildings but when we talk about people manning those missions, their state is very bad. We are washing our dirty linen before the world. We have just hosted a very successful IPU meeting but when these people abroad look at our missions, it is so shameful to this country. 

Hon. Kamuntu was here saying that Uganda was chosen as a first tourist destination for 2012 but when you see what is in our missions abroad – I went through that for the last 25 years - the situation is very bad and the government is looking on. What surprises me is that there is a lot of money being stolen left and right in this country while our missions have gone to the dogs. When I see ministers here on the front bench looking very smart, when they visit our missions I do not know why you people cannot discuss this issue in Cabinet. They are laughing at us. The situation is so bad that even the people in those missions cannot manage to run those missions at all. They are failures. They cannot even write statements. 

This is the state of affairs in our missions. I am asking honourable members that whenever you travel – As the Committee on Foreign Affairs, we are not even able to visit these missions because there is no money. I am happy the Speaker was in Washington and she came and met us and gave a report. It is very bad! If we do not wake up and take immediate measures, we are embarrassing ourselves in all these capitals around the world.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether you want the report of the Committee on Foreign Affairs because I think it is ready. If we are to say that next week we debate the report of the committee so that we can touch all the missions, wouldn’t that be better? Where is the chairperson? I have a copy of the report, so I will put it on the Order Paper for Tuesday. Let us go back to the Order Paper. 

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING BILL, 2009

3.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIVATISATION (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, honourable members, I wish to present to Parliament and lay on the Table a Bill called, “The Anti-Money Laundering Bill, 2009.” It is Bill No.13. This Bill is to combat money laundering and criminalise any acts of money laundering. This Bill is supported by a certificate of financial implications issued under section 10 of the Budget Act. I beg to present. 

THE SPEAKER: This Bill is a reprint. It is one of the Bills we saved. Which committee did it go to last time? Was it finance? It is sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for expeditious handling. The business people are very interested in this Bill, please handle it expeditiously. 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

3.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIVATISATION (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, in accordance with section 4 of the Budget Act, His Excellency the President is required to lay before Parliament not later than the first day of April 2012, the three macro-economic plan programmes for economic and social development and the indicative revenue and expenditure framework. Given that on the date when this matter was supposed to be tabled before Parliament, Parliament was on recess, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister wrote to you requesting for an extension of this deadline so that this indicative revenue and expenditure framework can be tabled before Parliament. I, therefore, take this opportunity to table before Parliament the National Budget Framework Paper for the Financial Year 2012/2013 for consideration by this honourable House. I beg to move. 

Madam Speaker, together with this paper, I wish to table preliminary budget estimates for self-accounting departments, commissions and organisations under the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda by statute for the fiscal year 2012/2013. This is in accordance with section 5 of the Budget Act. The self-accounting departments are:
•	The courts of judicature, vote 101.
•	The Electoral Commission, vote 102.
•	The Inspectorate of Government, vote 103.
•	Parliamentary Commission, vote 104.
•	Uganda Law Reform Commission, vote 105.
•	Uganda Human Rights Commission, vote 106.
•	The National Planning Authority, vote 108.
•	The Office of the Auditor General, vote 131.

I beg to lay the estimates for those institutions as read out. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I would like clarification on whether your National Budget Framework is only for 2012/2013; doesn’t it go to 2017?

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, the National Budget Framework Paper is for the years 2012/2013 to the years 2016/2017. I beg to lay. 

MRS AKOL ROSE OKULLU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Minister for laying the National Budget Framework Paper on the Table. The Budget Act is very clear on timelines. Today is 10th and the Budget Framework Paper should have been laid on 1st. As Parliament, we have lost time by 10 days. 

The Budget Act clearly stipulates that by 15th May, we should have prepared our recommendations through the Committee on Budget and handed over to you for onward transmission to His Excellency the President who is also supposed to read the budget not later than 15th of June. Today is 10th, the budget paper has been laid on the Table but we do not have copies of this National Budget Framework Paper in our pigeonholes despite the 10 days grace period that Government has been given. We need to proceed with the National Budget Framework Paper in our committees to analyse and prepare that report, then we hand it over to you and by 15 of May, you hand it over to H.E the President.

I am seeking guidance from you, Madam Speaker; how do we proceed from today? The budget framework paper has been laid but we do not have copies. How do we proceed?

THE SPEAKER: Are you suggesting that the minister laid the document without bringing my 350 copies? 

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, I want to appreciate the concerns of the honourable members. In my forwarding a letter to your office, we said that an electronic copy has been forwarded to the Office of the Clerk to Parliament on Clerk@parliament.go.ug for distribution to honourable Members of Parliament while we process the hard copy. So this paper is available on Clerk@parliament.go.ug. 

MRS AKOL OKULLU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister very well knows the procedure of Parliament regarding the budget. As much as a copy has been sent to clerk@parliament.go.ug, finance has to provide each Member of Parliament with a copy in order for us to adequately look at the National Budget Framework Paper and come up with a report. If there is one copy with the Clerk to Parliament, how do the committees sit and analyse for their sectors? Let him clarify on how he would like us to proceed with one copy given to the Clerk.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of having copies of the budget framework paper is very serious. It is true that a soft copy could be with the Clerk or on the website of Parliament, but a document as bulky as this, are you going to send it to our e-mails? Look at the committee rooms where our committees, including that of budget, sit; do we have internet connectivity for members to open this document? Have you digitalised the rooms so that we can use internet connection?

The point is very clear; go back to your office – Maybe the order will come from the General, but let him go back and bring hard copies today. Thank you.

MR LWANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, this document is in sectors. While the minister is preparing to bring hard copies if we really need them, he can take the soft copy and get sectors printed for the various committees. That way, each sector gets copies just for the 30 members of the committee – it is cheaper and faster. We cannot waste time waiting for the printed copies to come. Let the minister fight his war and bring the hard copies if he wants, but let us use that soft copy, get the sectors and distribute them to the various committees and we get going. 

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is a budget line for publishing those documents. Where is the money set aside for that? You tell us that you submitted electronic copies, but these are figures which must be internalised by the committees before they are forwarded to you for endorsement and submission to the President. The President then reads it to the whole country, so that the country can know the amount budgeted for in 2012/13.

You cannot tell Members of Parliament - some do not even know how to use electronic gadgets – (Interjections) – Yes, that is the truth. Committees have to sit and internalise those figures sector by sector. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are you having trouble producing the 360 copies which are customary and which you know about? 

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, I appreciate the concerns of the members that we need hard copies of this document. However, as a policy of Government, we have been going electronic – e-government, e-Parliament, e-education and e-health. So, to ease the work of Parliament, we thought that before the hard copy is ready, we could place this soft copy on the website of Parliament so that the members can have access to it while we process the hard copy. We shall be ready to provide it in time. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue we are handling is very important because it is within the budget framework paper that the ideas of the people we represent are captured. I can sense some ulterior motive by the honourable minister to deny honourable members the information. This information has been generated from the ground. They gave him the figures long time ago and without any justified cause, he is saying it is on the website. What is your problem so that you cannot print and give these copies to us? 

As we go to consult with our constituents, we carry these documents. We ask them, “Is this what you gave during the budget conferences?” Do not fool us here. Hon. Minister, if you want respect from us – we are people’s representatives and we know the reality in this country is that e-governance and e-education is not everywhere in this country. Even as we talk here, many of our committees are not using electronic – (Interruption)

MS NDOBOLI: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. In addition to what our colleague is saying, I would like the Minister to know that many of us do not even have computers in our offices. (Applause)

MR ISABIRYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Government is not beginning today. This is not the first time we are handling the process of budgeting. We are all aware that budgeting is a process. Hon. Akol stood on a point of guidance. She put across a concern and she quoted the Budget Act and said that we are already late; today is 10th. I wonder; the minister is presenting one copy here to 375 Members of Parliament. This is a sign of unseriousness. This is where the problem begins. The Ministry of Finance is facilitated and this activity is fully facilitated; I wonder how the minister could come here and present one copy? I want – (Interruption)

MR KYEWALABYE: I thank you very much, my colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I have only got one small piece of information to give. Before I came for plenary, I checked on the Parliament website but I did not see that document. Even on my Parliament email, I did not see the document that the minister is referring to. That is the information I want to give.

MS KABAKUMBA: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I do appreciate that the minister wants all of us to be functionally literate as far as using electronic methods are concerned. I also appreciate that he may have been trying to beat the deadline. However, is it too much to ask the minister to tell us – He said that he was going to send the hard copies but he should not shift the cost of printing from the Ministry of Finance to Parliament and honourable members. (Applause) 

The clarification I seek is: when are these copies coming? I take what he talked about as an advance copy, much as it is not yet anywhere, according to the honourable’s information. Hon. Minister, tell us when you are giving us these hard copies because we want to internalise the figures. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, apart from the cost, I have not yet been able to give all my members offices and computers. So, I do not know where you want them to print these documents from. (Applause) I will not allow you to transfer the cost of printing these things to Parliament. When are you bringing them?

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, I want to again restate that this electronic copy has been forwarded to the address, which I read to this House. I also want to restate that by Thursday – today is Tuesday - we shall have forwarded hard copies to members. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: It seems that despite you writing to me to extend the time, you are not ready. You have had all these days when we were on recess to do this. Now you want Thursday. Okay, Thursday morning. 

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE PUBLIC ORDER MANAGEMENT BILL, 2011

MR BAKA: Madam Speaker, the report of the committee on the Public Order Management Bill is ready but information that we had this item on the Order Paper reached us very late, at about 1.30. So, I beg your indulgence to have this item on the Order Paper tomorrow and we will be able to present it.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, item No. 5 is deferred to tomorrow

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO HONOUR THE MAKING OF A CAR, KIIRA-EV, BY MAKERERE UNIVERSITY

4.13
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY (Mr Robert Ssekitoleko): Madam Speaker, I beg your indulgence that this motion is shifted to tomorrow since the seconder is not around. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, but we can pass it without debate. Just present and we can pass without debate.

MR SSEKITOLEKO: Much obliged. The motion reads:

“WHEREAS in 2008 the students of Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) invited 27 universities worldwide to participate in the building of a hybrid car that uses both electricity and fuel; 
AND WHEREAS a group of students from Makerere College of Engineering, Design, Art and Technology participated in the global student-led consortium;
 AWARE that consequently the group designed an energy-efficient hybrid fuel-electricity prototype vehicle, Vision 200;
NOTING that the prototype vehicle was exhibited at the Vehicle Design Summit hosted at the world design capital in Torino, Italy in 2009; the success of this initiative provided the impetus and belief among the college staff, students and youth in Uganda that they had the inherent potential to innovate; 
FURTHER noting that when the students returned they had the inherent capacity to innovate but lacked funding to realise and develop their innovation;
OBSERVING that the President of the Republic of Uganda, His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, under the Presidential Initiative at the university, aided the project with Shs 25 billion to fund its operations and other technological research;
FURTHER observing that the students commenced preparations for the project, identifying engineers, drawing architectural designs as well as carrying out simulations on the vehicle design, having received the disbursement of funds by Government in July 2010. In February 2011, the manufacture of Kiira EV began and was assembled by a team of eight led by Paul Isaac Musasizi, who also doubled as the vehicle project technical director; 
COGNISANT of the fact that other than some components of KIIRA EV, like the steering wheel and other minor accessories that were imported from manufacturers outside Uganda, most parts of the car including the core body and combustion system were designed and built locally with the assistance of local craftsmen in places such as Katwe, an innovation suburb in Kampala; 
AND COGNISANT of the fact that Kiira EV was launched on 24 November 2011 by His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda;
AWARE that  Kiira EV is a two-seater car with a projected speed of 200 kilometres per hour but which can only practically be safely driven at 100 kilometres per hour because of its light weight and needs to be recharged after running 80 kilometres;  
REALISING that the college wishes to establish a vehicle design centre and has already completed designs for a 28-seater bus and a sports utility vehicle for which construction is due to start early next year;
NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament that:
1. 	It recognises the outstanding work of the college in the innovation and development of the Kiira EV; 
2.	 It commends the College of Engineering, Design, Art and Technology of Makerere University for this great achievement and calls on other institutions of higher learning in the country to emulate and generate other scientific and technological innovations;
3. 	Government allocates more funds to the College of Engineering, Design, Art and Technology, Makerere University, to enable the college develop a vehicle design centre.” 
Madam Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Fungaroo and others, you have two minutes and we will close with the minister. 

4.21
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion on the following grounds. One, science and technology are very important for human survival, comfort and progress in many fields. The University of Makerere in its entirety, and particularly the college of science and technology, and the people who worked hard to bring this innovation of the car, Kiira EV, should be congratulated. I thank them for the efforts. 

As Ugandans, we must realise that we have the potential but we are not committing ourselves to develop our own capacities. There are Ugandan scientists within the country and Ugandan scientists who are spread all over the world but we are not making use of them. This is the time for us to gather our brains - our scientists - together and help them to take our country forward in various fields of science and technological development. We should start with these ones at Makerere University and give them the moral, economic and political support to give the base here. 

Secondly, we should go for a homeward transfer of science and technology by bringing home our scientists from America, China, Britain and other developed countries of the world. You may not be aware that some of the things you buy expensively from abroad, such as vehicles or even weapons, are manufactured by Ugandan scientists who are working in those laboratories. This is the time to bring them home. We are sure of getting money, now that we have oil. What are you afraid of? We should lay the foundation to develop our country in the right direction in science. 

Madam Speaker, I would also like to introduce to you a point to worry about. There will be people who will come here to discourage you from developing your own science and technology and from developing your own scientists. Watch out for those saboteurs. The people of North Korea today have gone to the extent of launching a rocket to go to space, which is a good thing and which other countries have done before. Uganda is going to follow the example of Korea. 

If I will be in charge of this country as President, I will say – (Laughter) - Madam Speaker, this is very serious. The people of Korea should be given the opportunity to test their science and technological capabilities. The United States of America and the people of Japan should not interfere with science. If they can do that to North Korea, what will they do to Uganda? You will hear them with their malice coming to Makerere saying, “Do not do this; this is dangerous to security and this is going to affect terrorism.” The same Americans who say they come here to help you will come to discourage you.

The same manufacturer of Japanese cars, watch out for them; if Uganda will be manufacturing vehicles here, what will I do? Why would I waste time going to buy a Toyota car from Japan when I can get one from Makerere here? So, the point on this matter is sabotage from the manufacturers of vehicles – (Member timed out_)

4.24
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to support the motion which has been moved, to recognise the issue of a car having been manufactured by Makerere University. Having vouched support for that, I however hasten to add that I am a little scared about the amount of money that has been involved in the whole venture. If Shs 25 billion is really what went into that venture, then as chairman Public Accounts Committee I am not so sure whether that will really be the worth of this vehicle, if the public is up in arms over the Shs 103 million given to the MPs to facilitate their movement and yet I have been told this is going to be taxed. 

It is my belief that in coming up with this innovation, Makerere University, like in any other country, should have worked in partnership with other developed institutions. When you take a vehicle like a Tata or Mercedes Benz, no single place or single dot in terms of factories supplies all components. What they actually do is to subcontract, as it were, the different components. One party makes the body, another deals with the engine, another one considers itself an expert in the manufacture of radiators and the rest, so that at the end of the day, there is only the assembly plant where the whole vehicle is assembled. I think it will be of interest to us to know as to whether the faculty of engineering of Makerere University ever did go into that. If they did, then we will urge them to continue pursuing that line because that is the line that the developed countries have taken. 

Makerere University is not the first in this venture. Those of you who have been in Kampala will remember there was once a place called Musa Body University in Katwe. This “university” was started by a man from Luweero; actually, when you travel about 45 or 46 miles away from here, you will come to the place where this gentleman was born and he did make a lot of wonders. Those days, there would be instances when spare parts for vehicles were not easily available and you would go to Katwe with your sample. The man would tell you, “Can you come after a day or two.” You would go back there and you would find your crankshaft ready or your piston ring already made. So, that is the way. 

This must be available and this technology should not only be limited to Makerere. There are very many enterprising men and women in our informal sector, the jua kalis, who are there. Actually if they could fusion their ideas together, I am cocksure Uganda would be able to come up with a more efficient vehicle than the Kiira EV, which has put us on track but we need to improve on its quality. I thank you. 

4.29
MS LYNDAH TIMBIGAMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion and to appreciate what Makerere University has achieved so far. I congratulate Makerere for having attained this. 
The country should look at electronising the scientific section by putting electric wires. If Kiira EV has to run for 80kms and be recharged, then we should look at having electric wires connected on roads such that – (Interjection) - Yes, I have seen this working. I have seen electric buses running in China - a bus having a wire connected above it. If the country can look at developing this - it could be a long term plan - such that if Kiira makes a bus, it does not have to stop at a station to recharge again.

I once saw on TV such scientific developments. I think it was in Katwe where they had also tried to develop an aeroplane. As a country, we should all look forward to developing these talents and not just stop at talking. We should plan at giving them a good budget that should motivate them. Thank you.
 
4.30
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion. However, there are certain issues that we need to note. Makerere University gets Shs 1.4 billion for a full academic year for research; half of that goes to the school of graduate studies. So the balance is what is used for research. In today’s generation, how far can that money take you into research? It is time we planned, if we are to have meaningful research. 
If it had not been for the generosity of the President when he visited Makerere and promised Shs 25 billion for five years, this project would not have been what we see today. As government, we should plan for research. We are in a global world where every country is advancing in research. 

A total of US$ 35,000 was used in this project. Now that we have seen the Kiira EV, what happens next? We have seen a number of other projects that have stopped at inception. We saw the people who developed the plane, and we saw those who developed the armoured tank, and many other projects. We should be involved in research and we should fund these institutions if we want meaningful research. 

The other matter is that Kiira EV uses power and it moves for 80kms before the batteries run out. So it should not be handled as a single project. We should handle it together with energy. (Member timed out_)  

4.33
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM AND WILDLIFE (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I strongly support the motion commending Makerere for making a Ugandan car. The vision of this country is to transform peasant economies to become more modern and prosperous. One of the most binding constraints in our effort to achieve this vision has been lack of application of science and technology. That is the fundamental reason why we should really support Makerere. We should support them not only because of the vehicle but also for the expansion of science application to a wider area of our economic transformation. 

Makerere should be commended because when you look at our exports, most of them are either raw materials or semi-processed materials. However, if you look at our imports, most of them are really science technology content. You can even begin from here; this microphone I am speaking through is nothing but technology content. The content in this one is great. If you were to look at hon. Nambooze’s Rosary and watch, and if you were to look at even the Speaker’s Mace, all these are simply full of scientific technology content. Right here, Uganda sits on the Equator, with energy coming from the sun. Can you imagine how much more this country would benefit if Makerere could explore the use of sun energy for supplying this major constraint in our transformation? 

We should give every support to Makerere University and indeed the scientific community in our land, knowing that the transformation of this community and this country is going to be engineered through science and technology. I could even go further. If you look at the source of our transformation, it is going to come from manufacturing, it is going to come from the engineering industry, it is going to come from oil and gas - (Interjection) - it is going to come from tourism as well. (Laughter) 
We really support Makerere University and we support you, Madam Speaker, for the excellent job you did during the IPU. Thank you very much.   

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think this is a friendly motion. So, I put the question that this House do adopt a motion for a resolution of Parliament to honour the making of the Kiira EV car by Makerere University. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the movers for item No.7 and No.8; can we go to item No.9

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON BUDGET ON THE SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.1 FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2011/2012

4.37
THEVICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Achia Remigio): Madam Speaker, this is a report of the Committee on Budget on the supplementary schedule No.1 for the financial year 2011/12. 

On 16 February 2012, Government presented a supplementary budget schedule No.1 to Parliament amounting to Shs 215.6 billion. Out of this Shs 161.72 billion, about 75 percent, is for recurrent expenditure; Shs 25.88 billion, that is 12 percent, is for development expenditure; and Shs 28 billion, 13 percent, for statutory recurrent expenditure. The breakdown is given in table 1 on page 4 of the report. The schedule was referred to the Budget Committee and it is the committee’s pleasure to present to this House the committee’s report. 

Madam Speaker, attached to the committee report is a minority report by hon. Geoffrey Ekanya, the shadow Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. This report is based on rule 178 of our Rules of Procedure and will be presented by hon. Ekanya. 

Methodology

The Budget Committee scrutinised the schedule together with other relevant documents. This enabled them raise issues that were later discussed with the Minister of Finance.

The committee requested the chairpersons of all sessional committees to scrutinise their respective sectors to establish the justification for the proposed supplementary expenditure alongside the original financing outlay and work plans. This was done and their views have been incorporated in this report.

Framework for the Scrutiny of the Supplementary Expenditure
Madam Speaker, the committee developed a framework for scrutinising the supplementary expenditure and there were four issues identified as follows:

1. 	Whether the supplementary expenditure was in conformity with the law, that is: 

•	If the supplementary expenditure is within the statutory limit of three percent of the budget; and 
•	Whether the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development  indicated the impact of the supplementary expenditure on the original financing arrangement and outlays and sector work plans as required by section 16 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act.

2. 	Whether there are sources of funding for the supplementary expenditures.

3. 	Whether the supplementary expenditure was occasioned by unforeseeable emergencies that the relevant sectors could not capture in the normal budgeting process, that is, whether the expenditures were of unpredictable nature.

4. 	Whether all the deserving emergencies prevailing in the country at the time were covered under the supplementary expenditure.

Madam Speaker, I now proceed to present the findings of the committee with respect to the four issues below:

Overview of the Supplementary

In schedule No. 1, Government has requested to increase its expenditure by 2.09 percent through a supplementary budget, hence shifting its real demand upwards. Given that there is no new or flexible tax instrument available to increase Government revenues mid-way through the financial year, Government deficit (without grants) will obviously move upwards. This was originally projected at 7.7 percent of GDP, which will of course rise. An increased deficit will reduce total savings and that means less capital accumulation and less growth in the long-run.

The total supplementary request under Schedule No. 1 represents 2.09 percent of the total approved budget of Shs 10,323.75 billion for the financial year 2011/12.  Government is within its limit. As laid down in table 1 below, the recurrent, development and statutory expenditures are given there. We would like to observe from this table that 20 billion is a reallocation and so the supplementary requirement of additional resources is only Shs 195, 604,052,000. There is also 2.71 billion for USE to run local schools as a result of the counting of students in secondary schools.   

Table 2 shows the supplementary expenditure for the financial year 2011/12 including schedule No. 1 by the major cost centres. It can be observed that Shs 212.9 billion, representing 98.7 percent of the total supplementary request, is for the Central Government departments, leaving Shs 2.7 billion, which is the USE grant for local governments, that is, about 1.3 percent.

Legal Aspects

The committee also considered the legal aspects surrounding the expenditure. Under Article 156 (2) (a) and (b) of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, and under Section 16 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act 2003, Government is allowed to lay before Parliament a supplementary budget if the amount of funds appropriated in the budget is found to be insufficient or for a need that arises for expenditure for a purpose for which no funds were appropriated by Parliament. So, Government can go ahead and spend a certain amount of money but they are required, within the law, to present to Parliament that expenditure within four months, and that is the purpose of this schedule. 

Schedule 2 (1) of the Budget Act, 2011 stipulates that the total supplementary expenditure that requires additional resources over and above what is appropriated by Parliament shall not exceed three percent of the total approved budget for the financial year without prior approval of Parliament. Accordingly, the supplementary request before Parliament is covered by the respective legal provisions and Government is within the law.

Sources of Financing the Supplementary Expenditure 

The committee was interested to find out the source of financing for the supplementary request. According to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the sources of the financing are the following: 
a) 	Shs 184.8 billion is to be financed by additional Uganda Revenue Authority revenue collections. 
b) 	Shs 22.71 billion is also a re-allocation.
c) 	Shs 10.74 billion is from non-tax revenue.

The committee notes that during the first half of the financial year 2011/2012, URA experienced a revenue shortfall of Shs 80.8 billion against their target. It was the committee’s concern that this wears out the possibility of a surplus collection to finance the supplementary budget.   

The committee further noted that in the recent past, Government has been making large drawdowns to finance its expenditures, which could have reduced the reserves for the country to withstand unexpected external shocks to the economy. We are not new to this. The committee implores Government to desist from the practice of drawing down from Bank of Uganda.

Whether the Supplementary Expenditure was occasioned by Unforeseeable Emergencies

The committee notes that most of the items under the supplementary schedule are of a predictable nature and could have been provided for within the normal budgeting process - issues like water bills, electricity, and allowances, etc. The Budget Committee has over the years made this observation but there are no signs that our recommendations are being taken into consideration.

Whether all the Deserving Emergencies were covered under the Supplementary Expenditure
The committee noted that not all deserving emergencies were covered under the supplementary expenditure. Notable among these is the nodding disease, which has continued to claim lives of children in Northern Uganda.

The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development informed the Committee that Shs 6.95 billion was required for the disease and of this,  Shs 3.85 billion is required for the first phase. The minister further informed the committee that Shs 1.1 billion has already been secured under internal reallocation within the Ministry of Health. Another Shs 750 million has been secured through re-alignment of the medicines budget under National Medical Stores. This leaves a balance of Shs 2.0 billion for the first phase of handling the disease. The Minister of Finance pledged to incorporate this balance under Supplementary Schedule No. 2.

The issue of the nodding disease was thoroughly dealt with on the Floor of this House on Tuesday, 28 February 2012 and a motion was passed by this House in this respect. I, therefore, wish to proceed with specific vote scrutiny.

Vote 002 - State House recurrent budget

A total of Shs 81.86 billion is required to cater for the shortfalls in the operational budget of State House. State House was appropriated Shs 57.76 billion, hence the supplementary budget represents an increment of 141.62 percent from the original provision.

The committee observed that most of the items under the supplementary schedule are of a predictable nature and could have been provided for within the normal budgeting process. This includes utilities, travel and staff training among others.

The committee was informed by the Minister in charge of the Presidency that the planned budget for State House was Shs 190 billion, but Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development only provided Shs 56 billion, which was totally inadequate.

The ministry also further noted that the current increase in recurrent expenditure was as a result of an increase in the number of guests and travel by the President. This is due to the President’s involvement in regional and international issues such as the Somali issue.

The committee recommends that Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development comprehensively considers the State House budget during the budgeting process to avoid endless requests for supplementaries. This will in turn encourage and strengthen proper monitoring of the State House budget. I think this is a very important recommendation, honourable members.

State House Development Budget  

A total of Shs 10.148 billion is required to cater for the shortfalls in the Development Budget for FY 2011/2012 for State House. Two projects are expected to benefit from the supplementary request namely; Support to State House and the Poverty Alleviation Project. 

The committee was informed that some of the funds under the development budget are required for maintenance works at State House. As above, the committee recommends that in future such expenditure be provided under the normal budgeting process. 

Vote 159 - Internal Security Organisation 

Shs 16.7 billion is being requested for and is classified in nature. The committee notes that the request is an increment of 182.8 percent of the original provision. The committee was informed that these funds are meant to fight terrorism and due to the classified nature of the request, further details cannot be divulged.

Vote 006 - Ministry of Foreign Affairs

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs is requesting for Shs 11.84 billion to cater for:
•	Outstanding contribution to international bodies such as Commonwealth Secretariat, African Union, UN and ICGLR (International Conference of the Great Lakes Region).
•	Hosting of International Conference of the Great Lakes region summit. 
•	Payment of salary arrears for five former ministers posted to head missions abroad of Shs 195 million.

The committee notes that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has been underfunded for a long time and the supplementary expenditure was timely. It was, however, observed that there is a need to streamline payments to ambassadors as pay rates currently defer between ambassadors. This is to be handled by the Committee on Foreign Affairs, which has an oversight role over the sector.

Vote 007 – Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs

This is for the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs funding for arbitration between Government of Uganda and Heritage Oil and Gas Limited. The ministry is requesting for Shs 6.78 billion to cater for expenditures pertaining to the Heritage Oil Arbitration case in London. 

During the budgeting process, Shs 11.942 billion was appropriated and the minister confirmed that it has not been utilised. The Chairperson of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee interacted with the Budget Committee and a report of that committee was presented to this House and adopted. 

So, I think the contents of that report are incorporated as part of this request. Now that this has been done, the amount requested is Shs 6.79 billion under Ministry of Justice. So, we accept and approve the amount requested here under the Supplementary Schedule as per the report of the committee. 

Compensation for lost property in Northern Uganda 

In addition, the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs  is also requesting for Shs 20 billion for compensation of persons who lost property during the Northern Uganda conflict. The Budget Committee noted observations of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee as follows. Again we agree with the committee and their report contained all the key issues here. I think I will leave it for Members to read as we adopted those recommendations. 

The Committee on Budget recommends that the Shs 20 billion requested for under the Supplementary Schedule be provided as a re-allocation from PRDP, Office of the Prime Minister to Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs for compensation. This is the re-allocation I was talking about.

Vote 015 - Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives 

Shs 4.8 billion is requested for as supplementary expenditure to meet the outstanding Government obligations and contributions to COMESA. The committee observes that a lot of benefits accrue from Uganda’s membership to COMESA. The committee recommends that all outstanding dues to COMESA be provided for.

Vote 136 - Makerere University 

Government is requesting for Shs 16.7 billion to pay Makerere University in respect of outstanding staff pension with National Insurance Corporation (NIC). In the ministerial policy statement for FY 2011/2012, the total sum of unfunded priorities related to the staff provident fund account previously held by NIC stood at Shs 12.76 billion while other related arrears amounted to Shs 5.12 billion, hence a total sum of Shs 17.88 billion.

The committee requested the minister to provide the Memorandum of Understanding between Makerere University and the Government of Uganda and it was provided for. I beg to lay it on Table. The Republic of Uganda Memorandum of Understanding dated 22 September 2011. 

The committee recommends that the Shs 16.7 billion requested for be approved and that the money that shall be paid by National Insurance Corporation (NIC) to Makerere University be returned to the Consolidated Fund as per the memorandum.

Vote 137 - Mbarara University 

Mbarara University has a wage allocation of Shs 3.785 billion for the FY 2011/2012 and an application of Shs 89.6 million to cater for an expatriate staff salary has been made. 

The committee was informed by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that there are five Cuban Doctors whose pay has been increased from $700 to $ 1500 each month. The committee notes that no increment was made to Ugandan staff and there continues to be braindrain in the sector. The committee recommends that staff salaries be rationalised and expatriates should not be handled in isolation of other staff. 

Votes 503–778 - Various Local Governments’  Recurrent Expenditure

Government is requesting for a technical re-allocation amounting to Shs 2.71 billion to cater for shortfalls in USE capitation grant based on headcount results. The committee recommends that Government accesses and verifies the results of the headcount, given the recent allegations of “ghost” schools, teachers and students. 

Vote 019 - Ministry of Water and Environment  Development Expenditure

The Ministry of Water and Environment is requesting for Shs 5.0 billion to construct the Kanyampanga Gravity Water Flow Scheme in Kanungu District. This was declared as an underfunded priority amounting to Shs 7.3 billion in the ministerial statement and it is in line with the Water and Sanitation Investment Plan as well as the National Development Plan (NDP).

The committee notes that there are many areas in dire need of water that should have been considered; Karamoja is one such area that needs urgent attention. The letter is attached to this report.

Vote 144: Uganda Police Force – Development Budget

Uganda Police Force is requesting for Shs 10.74 billion to cater for additional funding to meet the institutional contractual obligations. 

The committee notes that there are several ongoing development projects in the Police and recommends that their request be granted.

In conclusion, while the supplementary expenditure request is within the law, supplementary budgets affect the outputs and outcomes originally intended for the budget. Supplementary expenditures undermine the entire budget process when targeted outputs are not realised. In future, the committee recommends that Parliament should be provided with a cost-benefit analysis of supplementary expenditures before they are passed. 

I beg to move that the Supplementary Schedule No.1 for the financial year 2011/2012 be approved as follows: 

(a)	Recurrent Supplementary Expenditure – with amendments for Heritage arbitration costs, it comes to Shs 161,716,000,000 and not Shs 154 billion that appears in the report. If you add Shs 6.78 billion which was withheld by the committee pending the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to that, we shall come to that figure.
(b)	Development Supplementary Budget is Shs 25,888,000,000.
(c)	Statutory revision is Shs 28 billion.

The grand total is Shs 215,604,000,000.

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit this report. But before I leave, I beg to lay on Table the minutes of the committee’s discussions. 

THE SPEAKER: Where is hon. Ekanya? Let us receive the minority report.

5.00
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Ms Kevinah Taaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a minority report on the Supplementary Budget request for State House for the financial year 2011/2012 -(Interjections)- they are attached. 

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Madam Speaker, we were not able to – despite the fact that hon. Ekanya sent us his report – we were not able to get him to sign it. But I think hon. Taaka can go ahead and present it.

MS TAAKA: Honourable members, the minority report is attached to the main report -(Interjections)- it is appended and you will find among the last pages -(Interruption)

MS KABAKUMBA: Madam Speaker, I have seen the minority report, but it is not signed. Are we setting a precedent that whoever wishes to give a report, just prints and presents it without signing? The usual practice has been that the minority report is signed by those who have written and owned it.

THE SPEAKER: Committee chairperson, how do you account for the absence of the signature of the Member who wrote the minority report? Actually, his name is not there other than you mentioning him. 

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Madam Speaker, it was not incumbent on the chair to look for signatures for the minority report Members. So, in the circumstance that they failed to mobilise themselves to sign, I cannot account for that; it is up to the minority report Members to do that. 

MR TIMOTHY LWANGA: Madam Speaker, I would like to give information to this House. I brought this to the attention of hon. Ekanya, not once, not twice but thrice and he said after reading it, he would then sign. I was surprised that when the final report came out, his signature is not there.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, hon. Ekanya works on my behalf as the Leader of the Opposition. I am ready to sign the report on his behalf because under the law –(Interruption)

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, hon. Mafabi. I am seeking clarification because I see on the title page of the minority report, “Hon. Geoffrey Ekanya, Shadow Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development.” Is that minority report of hon. Ekanya as a member of the Budget Committee or that of the Opposition?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I sent hon. Ekanya as my minister as well as a member on this committee and he does this work on behalf of the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament. In that regard, I take full responsibility of this minority report. 

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members. I do not think that we should import new procedures, where Members can just write a report and attach it without acknowledging the source. Hon. Ekanya is a member of this committee; he wanted this minority report. He should have said, “This is Geoffrey Ekanya and this is my report.” But this report has no source. I do not think it is setting a good precedent. This is not a good precedent and I will not allow it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, if this report of hon. Ekanya is attached to the main report –(Interjections)– all of us have received it as an attachment and it cannot be attached there without the chair’s knowledge. So – 

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members. I do not think that I will allow anonymous documents to be attached. (Applause) The reason why the rules require you to attach your report is to be able to present it here and speak for it. It is not a general document for everybody; it is for that person who was in the committee and disagreed, put their name and the reasons for not agreeing with the main report -(Interjections)- no, no, let us stick to the Rules of Procedure; if you write a report, you must sign it. Otherwise, I can also start writing reports and sending them to committees. Anyone who writes a minority report must sign it and come here to speak for it. (Applause)

MRS BAKIREKE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am seeking your guidance in view of the fact that in the main report submitted by the committee chairperson, on page two, paragraph three, it reads: “Rt Hon. Speaker, attached to the committee report is a minority report by hon. Geoffrey Ekanya, Shadow Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. This report is based on Rule 178 of our Rules of Procedure and will be presented by hon. Ekanya.” 

The guidance I am now seeking is whether we can continue regarding this document as anonymous and having no source when it is being recognised in the main report. What would happen to the main report now that parts of the contents of the major report are being discarded by this Parliament? That is the guidance I am seeking, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: No. I draw your attention to the rule relating to the reports. How do reports come to this House? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I had not seen page 2, which clearly shows that members of the committee on page – one of the pages after page 13 - signed acknowledging the minority report – [Honourable Members: “No.”]- because it is signed. When they were signing the report and they are saying -(Interjections)- listen. It is very clear. You have made your error. It says, “Madam Speaker, attached to the committee report is a minority report,” on page 2; and this page 2 is signed by all members of the committee on page 14. And when they signed, that clearly showed that they acknowledged the minority report.

THE SPEAKER: No. Honourable members, I do appreciate that there is something attached here, but it is not a minority report within our rules. Let us not try to cure defects. He did not sign it. No, we cannot cure defects on the Floor. If you have a minority report, you must sign it so that we know the owner of the report. (Applause)  

MR OTADA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I want to thank the hon. Kabakumba for raising that point. I am looking at Rule 177 that talks about committee reports and that a report of a committee shall be signed by at least a third of all Members. Then I am looking at the rule that governs a minority report - 178, and I realise that this rule is silent with regard to signing. So, I do not know, Madam Speaker; I am at a loss and I would like to seek your guidance in that regard.

THE SPEAKER: No. Honourable members. If you read rule 178, it says, “Any member or members dissenting from the opinion of the majority of the committee may state in writing the reasons for his or her or their dissent and the statement of reasons shall be appended to the report. So, it is envisaged that those who dissent must identify themselves. (Applause) No, we are not going to cure defects on the Floor of this House. Honourable members, it will mean that I will also start writing reports and sending them to your committees without a name and without a source. That is what it means. No, the minority report does not meet the requirements of rule 178. Let us proceed. Let us not introduce manipulation. If you say you are dissenting, you must stand firm with your name.

DR BAYIGGA: Madam Speaker, I am a member of the Budget Committee, but as you see, this report recognising the presence of a minority report on the one hand -(Interjections)- I  beg your indulgence, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, when you write a minority report, you must meet all the minimum conditions. Write your report and sign it. Otherwise, anybody can send a document here and say, “This is my minority report.” Then I must investigate who sat in what meeting which was where. No; I am sorry, you may have valid reasons, but it does not meet the conditions.

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE SPEAKER: We are taking the tally. Let us defer debate on this one. Let us go to the item on social services.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES ON THE AFFAIRS OF THE COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO THE MISMANAGEMENT OF FUNDS UNDER UNIVERSAL PRIMARY EDUCATION AND UNIVERSAL SECONDARY EDUCATION
 
5.15
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Dr Samuel Lyomoki): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is the report of the Committee on Social Services on the affairs of the commission of inquiry into the mismanagement of funds under the Universal Primary Education and Universal Secondary Education -(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: How big is your report?

DR LYOMOKI: It is 20 pages.

THE SPEAKER: Read as the copies come. I think by the time we finish they will be here. 

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, I beg to present to you the report of the Committee on Social Services on the affairs of the commission of inquiry into the mismanagement of funds under UPE and USE. You may recall that on 14 February 2012, the Minister of Education and Sports did present to this House a statement on the Commission of Inquiry and arising out of that statement, this House did resolve as follows:

1. 	That Government winds up the activities of the Commission of Inquiry and withholds further extension of its mandate.
2. 	That Government stays additional funds to the Commission.
3. 	That the Auditor-General conducts a special audit on the activities of the Commission —

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I understand the report is being manufactured -(Laughter)- so, let us defer it to 2 O’clock tomorrow so that they can be distributed. 

So, honourable members, with that, we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned to 2 O’clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 5.18 p.m. and adjourned until, Wednesday, 11 April 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)
