Thursday, 7 April 2016

Parliament met at 2.43 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I would like to inform Members of the Appointments Committee that they will meet on Monday, 11 April 2016 to vet seven nominees for Justices of the High Court. We were not able to do that earlier because we failed to raise quorum. Therefore, I would like to appeal to Members of the committee to be there so that we do not exceed the constitutional deadline for vetting these judges. Thank you very much.

LAYING OF PAPERS

2.44
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Cecilia Ogwal): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In accordance with Section 6E (2) and (4) of the Administration of Parliament (Amendment) Act, 2006 and rule 136 of the Rules of Procedure, I beg to lay the following alternative policy statements for the financial year 2016/2017 from:
i) 	Shadow Minister for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries;
ii) 	Shadow Minister for Energy and Mineral Development;
iii) 	Shadow Minister for Lands and Physical Planning;
iv) 	Shadow Minister for Water and Environment;
v) 	Shadow Minister for Local Government;
vi) 	Shadow Minister for Relief, Rehabilitation and Disaster Management;
vii) 	Shadow Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs;
viii) 	Shadow Minister for National Guidance and Information;
ix) 	Shadow Minister for Tourism, Antiquities and Wildlife;
x) 	Shadow Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development; 
xi) 	Shadow Minister for Trade, Industry and Cooperatives;
xii) 	Shadow Minister for Youth;
xiii) 	Shadow Minister for Works and Infrastructure;
xiv) 	Shadow Minister for Health;
xv) 	Shadow Minister for Public Service;
xvi) 	Shadow Minister for Internal Affairs and Human Rights;
xvii) 	Shadow Minister for Communication, ICT and Technology;
xix) 	Shadow Minister for Kampala Capital City;
xx) 	Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs, Regional Affairs;
xxi) 	Shadow Minister for Housing and Urban Development.

Madam Speaker, the remaining alternative policy statements are just being polished up. You realise we are working under pressure because the policy statements we got from the Government arrived late. The reasons are known, but we have done our best. We shall make sure that those which are remaining will be available on Tuesday. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable Leader of the Opposition. All those policy statements should be sent to the relevant committees so that they can make use of them as they prepare their final reports for this House.

Honourable members, according to our Rules of Procedure, on Thursdays, Members have priority for some of their issues. I have only received one item. Can I ask hon. Osegge to raise her issue?

2.52
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I stand to raise a matter of national importance regarding the East African Civil Aviation Academy, also known as the flying school, in Soroti District. The House will note that this is not the first time we are raising issues concerning this institution in this Parliament. A petition was brought before this House but also so many reports have been brought to this House but the situation is just getting worse. 

As we speak, this school has a total of eight fulltime instructors. They have actually just returned from the US from refresher training. This training was meant to help keep the students at the same level with international standards. However, as of today, 7 April 2016, all instructors have withdrawn from the training. In other words, they are on strike because their salaries have not been paid for the last three months neither have their allowances been paid for the last six months. 

In our view, this has created a huge delay in the completion of course studies and wasted resources of both the taxpayers and privately sponsored students, many of whom are international students. These students are threatening to leave the academy, which would create another huge gap in revenue generation.

Training equipment and operational licences of this institution: The institution has a fleet of nine aircrafts. They have six Cessna 172 Garmin 1000 purchased and delivered in 2011 under the directive of His Excellency the President of Uganda; one Cessna 172 (analogue) purchased in 1971 and currently in very poor training condition. In other words, the students cannot use it for training. There is also one Cessna 310 purchased in 1971, also in a similarly poor condition and the students cannot use it for training. There is also one twin-engine Baron, purchased in 2013 and delivered in December 2015 to Entebbe with no known date of delivery to the institution. In other words, this aircraft is parked at Entebbe International Airport and Government is incurring costs in parking fees.

The East African Civil Aviation Academy has continued to lag behind in renewing critical licences. That defeats the purpose of keeping on schedule with training even if all other resources were made available. It, therefore, stretches the graduation time for students and demotivates them and their trainers. It also promotes blurred ambitions within the students who seek to work within and outside their region. The conclusion is that it is a waste of time and resources. 

Madam Speaker, we have to note that the licences of these aircrafts expire before timely renewal is put into consideration. As we speak, on top of the poor mechanical condition due to no service, the aircrafts are also not licensed and so they cannot fly.

Madam Speaker, it is important to note that out of the nine aircrafts, one Cessna 172 Garmin 1000, registration 5XSRI, is in operation. The rest have all not been maintained up to scale and some of them are even missing spare parts. This has caused a huge delay and big gap in the training of these students, both the incoming and outgoing student pilots. Uganda has not produced globally competitive pilots for the last five years and will probably not do so in the next five years regardless of the resource input.

Madam Speaker, we think that timely payment for the instructors, who as we speak have not received payment, is important. The aircrafts we are talking about also need fuel to fly. It is also known that there is lack of timely provision of fuel purchases and most times when it is there, it is not enough. Once purchased, the expiry dates which are spelt out by the regional guidelines and all standards set by International Civil Aviation Authority (ICAO) are close. This puts the students at risk flying with fuel, which is about to expire.

The current student status is such that out of approximately 300 students who were admitted since 2001, only 27 have been passed out to date as certified pilots. The others are languishing in school. Instead of completing within a period of two and a half years, they have been there for the last six years and so they have three and a half years of redundancy. However, they are being maintained and fed by the Government and using utilities which we pay for. 

In September 2010, there were 28 student pilots admitted for a two-and-a-half-year course, which is a duration of about 28 months. As of today, none of those students in that group has been able to get a certified licence or has graduated. Therefore, there is an additional close to four years of uncertainty of the future of these students. There is no known date of expected completion as we speak now. On top of that, 13 of the 28 students have dropped out having spent the expected time at the school but not seeing a future in completing their courses. 

What is the future of these young men and women? They have wasted their years in that school. They have paid money with the hope of becoming pilots but now they have to find a different future. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, what are your requests to the Government? What do you want the Government to do? 

MS OSEGGE: Madam Speaker, our prayers are: 
1. 	That this Parliament should make a definite decision on the revival of this institution, which is the only one of its kind in Uganda and in the East and Central African region;

2. 	That this Parliament should require the line minister to reassess the capacity of management and leadership at this institution; and

3. 	That an expeditious process should be put in place to allow the overdue student pilots to complete their courses and have them passed out, probably by September 2016. After sharing with the students, they say they are left with about five months but that is if sufficient provision of resources is given for them to complete their courses.

Madam Speaker, this state of affairs has caused this country to indeed lag behind. I pray that this House requires the line minister and indeed Government to improve the budget that is given to this institution and to make sure that once the money is budgeted for, it is given to them to enable them to do what they ought to do; and two, to also help these students to, as quickly as possible, complete their courses and achieve their dreams. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I do not see the Minister for Works and Transport here. It is true that we discussed that matter probably two and a half years ago. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what do you have to say about the East African Civil Aviation Academy? What can we do? Can we ask the minister to come and tell us his plan? Prime Minister, do you want to advise us? 


3.03
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I will convey to the minister what is taking place. Since this matter is being recorded on the Hansard, we ask him to collect the information from there and prepare a response as soon as you may wish to direct.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I really hope that the Government can do something because this is one of the few assets we received during the breakup of the East African Community. If it is going to die, it will be unfortunate. 

3.04
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Member who has brought this matter here. Indeed, I was also about to bring up this matter but as you know these days – (Laughter). 

Madam Speaker, this is a very serious matter. Even where our Ugandan children are learning to fly these planes, for example in the UPDF, they fly them without insurance yet this is an international standard of civil aviation authorities. We are spending money and yet we do not have planes. Maybe our students should be training from Kenya which has planes. Imagine a situation where UPDF flight students fly without insurance. What if that plane crushes? 

I think the Rt Hon. Second Deputy Prime Minister, as a former general, knows what it means –(Interjections)– Oh! Is he still a general? (Laughter) I thought he retired. Okay, Gen. Moses Ali knows what it means, so this matter should be taken seriously. We have the brains in this country and we should be having the best pilots. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.05
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Second Deputy Prime Minister for making an undertaking that the line minister will make a statement as soon as possible. However, I would be more comfortable if a specific timeframe is given because these are very pertinent issues. 

It sounds very strange to me that all of a sudden, allowances have vanished for the last six months and salaries have also disappeared for the last three months. What would you expect the instructors to do? Therefore, I would like to propose that a specific timeframe – a short one - be given to the line minister to come up with a statement and avert the continued strike that is already on-going. He could come with it sometime next week, according to your guidance, Madam Speaker. 

3.05
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Madam Speaker, as the minister arranges to bring a statement here, I would like to suggest that he comes up with an explanation and tells this country if indeed we still need this school. He should also tell this country if they are considering closing it or turning it into a driving school or a school for agriculture, among others.

I am saying this because it is so frustrating for a country to train pilots when it does not even own an airline. What are they for? Why do we give young people hope to go and train in skills for which they will never find jobs? Do we train people to be jobless? Why are we training them anyway? Why don’t we close this school once and for all? We could maybe train bus drivers because that is what we have in the country at the moment.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are working on policy statements and after today, the House will go on recess until we are ready to report. So, I will require that as soon as we resume plenary sittings, the minister comes with a statement on the East African Civil Aviation Academy.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is just something that I think we should keep in mind even as we await the minister’s report. It is sad that as we speak, the students who are there have been told not to continue with studies because the Uganda Air Force is still studying the situation. This is because the sponsor of the Uganda Air Force students, which is the Ministry of Defence, is threatening to pull their sponsorship. Therefore, the other civilian students are being rendered redundant because the Uganda Air Force must take priority.

I think Government has to make a schedule. Government must know that all these students are important. On 23 August 2015, the President went to the school to meet the students. He spoke to the students and he came to a certain conclusion. After the President’s visit, the minister, hon. John Byabagambi, and the permanent secretary, a one Mr Alex Okello, also visited the school and said Shs 5 billion would be allocated to facilitate the school. They also said that two additional aircraft were supposed to be purchased but to date, they have not seen them. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we ask the hon. Osegge to hand over those documents to the Clerk. The Clerk also should get the Hansard and give it to the minister so that he can answer comprehensively.

MOTION THAT THE HOUSE RESOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY TO CONSIDER THE ADDENDUM ON SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULES 1, 2, 3 OF THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015

3.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, ECONOMIC PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, as you may recall, yesterday we deferred this matter pending some documentation. We were still compiling the documentation but we are now ready for item No. 5. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek some clarification. In the Daily Monitor newspaper today, I read a story saying that the Ministry of Justice and the Ministry of Finance are going to pay Shs 14 billion to a group of persons who are not even in Uganda. I would like to know whether this is true or it is just a rumour.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know how the minister can answer that. I do not know whether he has read the Daily Monitor.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I think this august House is a serious one and has procedures. If you have an issue or if you want to refer to a newspaper, you come with it. However, matters of public finance management are not handled through the newspapers. They are handled through the right procedure. We therefore do not know about that.

MOTION THAT THE HOUSE RESOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY TO CONSIDER THE SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO. 1 FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2015/2016

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please move motion before the chairperson of the committee reports.

3.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I move a motion that the House resolves itself into a committee of supply to consider Supplementary Schedule No. 1 for the financial year 2015/2016. 

THE SPEAKER: Can we have the report? Are there some seconders? Okay, it has been seconded. (Laughter) Hon. Baba Diri has seconded, among others.

3.13
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Madam Speaker, I beg to present the report of the Budget Committee on supplementary schedule No.1 for financial year 2015/16.

Introduction
Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No.1 2015/16 was laid on the Table on 23 March 2016, in accordance with the provisions of Article 156 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Section 25 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. On 1 April 2016, the committee received an addendum for supplementary expenditure to Schedule No.1 of financial year 2015/16. 

Section 25 states that the total supplementary expenditure that requires additional resources over and above what is approved by Parliament shall not exceed three per cent of the total approved budget of that financial year without approval of Parliament. The Speaker, therefore, referred the schedule and addendum to the Budget Committee for consideration and report to the House thereon. The committee accordingly considered the supplementary schedule and now begs to report to the House its findings and recommendations.

Methodology

The committee held meetings with the following ministries, departments and agencies:
    1. Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; 
    2. Ministry in Charge of the Presidency;
    3. Ministry of Defence;
    4. Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports;
    5. Ministry of Health;
    6. Ministry of Foreign Affairs;
    7. Ministry of Internal Affairs;
    8. Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries;
    9. Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives;
    10. Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs;
    11. Internal Security Organisation (ISO); and
    12. The Uganda Police Force.

The committee also analysed the schedule submitted to the House in relation to the budget that was approved this financial year 2015/2016.

Madam Speaker, the summary of supplementary expenditure in schedule No. 1 is as presented in table No. 1. The total recurrent expenditure that was appropriated was Shs 6 trillion. I think to preserve time, let me go straight to what is being requested for as supplementary expenditure. Otherwise, the second column on the table presents the approved budgets for the financial year 2015/2016. 

The third column shows the supplementary schedule 1A with a total of Shs 624,399,454,000 required for appropriation. Under schedule 1B, the total required for appropriation- combining both recurrent and development- is Shs 224,338,678,000. In the addendum, we have a total of Shs 25,800,000,000. The total of the two schedules is given in the last column.

Overall, including statutory expenditure, we have a total request of Shs 1,041,130,990,000. That is the grand total covering both statutory and appropriation.

The sources of financing this supplementary expenditure include:
a) 	Technical supplementary re-allocations, which constitute about 17 per cent; 
b) 	Self-funded, through appropriation in aid and external financing, which constitutes about 14 per cent; and 
c) 	The suppression of the budget, which is about 69 per cent of the total supplementary. 

We note that Government proposes to raise funding for supplementary expenditure through technical re-allocations within the votes; this, the committee was informed, means votes that were enormously given more funds than they actually required and returned them to the pool as they could not absorb them by the end of the financial year. This source accounts for Shs 177.9 billion, which is equivalent to 17 per cent of the total supplementary request.

The second proposed source of financing to this supplementary is by suppression of the budget. This entails removal or change of budgetary provisions to Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) as approved by Parliament. This accounts for Shs 715.5 billion or 69 per cent of the resources required under supplementary.

The third source of funding is: the supplementary expenditure provides that Government has accessed external funding, which had not matured at the time of appropriation of the budget for 2015/2016, to a tune of Shs 147.5 86 billion, coming from the African Development Bank.

The expenditure by selected votes is presented according to schedules that were submitted to the committee.  The table on page 4 has a summary of the recurrent and development expenditure for financial year 2015/2016 as presented under schedule 1A, covering different votes for the following MDAs:
    (i) Office of the President;
    (ii) State House;  
    (iii) Office of the Prime Minister; 
    (iv) Ministry of Defence; 
    (v) Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs;
    (vi) Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; 
    (vii) Ministry of Health;
    (viii) Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development;
    (ix) Ministry of Education, Science, Technology  and  Sports; 
    (x) Ministry of Energy;
    (xi) Ministry of Water and Environment;
    (xii) Electoral Commission; 
    (xiii) The Uganda Tourism Board; 
    (xiv) The Uganda Police Force;
    (xv) NAADS; 
    (xvi) Cotton Development Organisation; 
    (xvii) Uganda Land Commission;
    (xviii) External Security Organisation;
    (xix) Uganda Mission in Washington;
    (xx) Uganda Mission in Berlin;
    (xxi) Uganda Mission in Guangzhou;
    (xxii) Various votes- wages; and
    (xxiii) Missions services allowances.

Under statutory bodies, we have:
    (i) The Judiciary;
    (ii) Inspectorate of Government; and
    (iii) Various votes benefiting from pensions and gratuity.

The totals are as I read them earlier. That is schedule 1A.

The justification for the supplementary expenditure in schedule 1A is given on page 6 of the report for those various votes that I mentioned. Pages 7, 8, 9 and 10 give the justification for each of these expenditure votes.

Madam Speaker, with your permission, I beg to proceed to page 12 of the report to present the summary of recurrent expenditure for schedule 1B. I beg that I am allowed to proceed with this because Members can assess the other details.

THE SPEAKER: If the report is there, they can read it. Did you upload it on their iPads?

MR LUGOLOOBI: I believe so.
 
THE SPEAKER: They can read it.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On page 12 of the report, we present a table summarising the various sectors’ supplementary requests and the totals. The total supplementary request for recurrent expenditure under schedule 1B is Shs 102.524 billion. The supplementary expenditure development request in this same schedule is Shs 146.615 billion. The overall supplementary amounts to Shs 249.139 billion.

Under statutory, we only have the Judiciary with Shs 2.8 billion. Page 11 presents the narrative of the justification for each of these votes that received money. I now proceed to page 16 to present the committee’s general observations and recommendations:

1. 	The committee notes that from the overall submission of Shs 1,041,130,999,244 for supplementary expenditure under schedule 1 for financial year 2015/16, only Shs717,169,571,523 qualifies within the provisions of section 25 of the Public Finance Management (Amendment) Act, 2015. Section 25 sets a ceiling of three per cent of the total approved budget as the allowable supplementary expenditure limit to which Government can spend and report within four months to Parliament, which they have done.

2. 	A total of Shs 156,368,561,294 is over and above the three per cent in the Government supplementary expenditure request under schedule 1 of financial year 2015/16. This is what requires prior approval of Parliament before expenditure can be legally authorised.

3. 	The Government has requested Parliament to take note of the statutory revision totalling to Shs 167,592,866,427 as presented under schedule 1 for financial year 2015/16.

Table 5 presents a summary of supplementary schedule 1 for financial year 2015/16 of amounts recommended for approval. In this table, we attempt to show you the votes that benefit from that threshold of three per cent, which go up to page 17. All those votes have benefitted from the money equivalent to three per cent of the total approved budget. 

Beyond page 17, we present other votes that are now requesting for resources which go beyond the three per cent. Those votes include: 
    (i) Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development; 
    (ii) The Uganda Cancer Institute;
    (iii) The National Agricultural Research Organisation;
    (iv) The Uganda Police Force;
    (v) Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs;
    (vi) Ministry of Local Government;
    (vii) The Judiciary; 
    (viii) Inspectorate of Government; 

There are also various votes, which we have outlined this time under pensions and gratuity. 

In schedule 1B, under statutory we have the Judiciary again, the Parliamentary Commission, and pensions and gratuity for various votes, which we have presented in the annexes.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that Parliament approves a total of Shs 873,538,132,817 for appropriation and Shs 167,592,866,427 statutory revision under schedule 1 for financial year 2015/2016 as detailed in table 6. 

Table 6 does not defer at all from the table I have just presented except that it is more comprehensive for purposes of appropriation. So, it is now properly laid out. As you will note, after page 20 we have presented various annexure of information that had been compressed in the main tables. Annex 4, for example, presents the supplementary budget for wage with numerous votes, which continue to the next page. On the next page we have the wage supplementary again for various votes and a supplementary budget for pension and gratuity. Very many votes are being included under that. We also have the supplementary budget for foreign service allowance plus the various votes of the various foreign service missions; they have all been given there.

The supplementary funding for loss of poundage and again for various missions is given there with various vote codes. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member. Are there any comments? If there are no comments -

3.29
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, in the spirit of reconciliation and compromise, I spoke to the stakeholders - the Minister of Finance and others – and told them that I am not presenting a minority report but that I would, at an appropriate time, be able to highlight areas where I feel Parliament should address their minds to.  I have decided to spare them. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member.

3.30
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE: (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): I would like to appreciate the spirit hon. Cecilia Ogwal has exhibited, but I also appeal to Government to take caution and be serious. This ping-pong in Parliament when they have some valid issues which should have been taken care of should be appreciated and taken seriously. That is why I appreciate hon. Cecilia Ogwal for that spirit of reconciliation. Thank you very much.

3.30
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Reconciliation is good but when you reconcile today and tomorrow somebody repeats what you reconciled upon, then it stops being reconciliation.

Madam Speaker, we have been talking about re-allocation of resources. When we give a ministry or any department money to spend on an activity and we re-allocate, it means that department or ministry will not do the activity we told them to do. We are re-allocating Shs 720 billion, for example, which is 69 per cent and you are suppressing. Supposing it was for the construction of a road to Kisoro or somewhere else- It is not good. You supress the construction of the road, you suppress the budget for food, drugs, education and you are saying that is good? That is not good budgeting because supressing the budget by 69 per cent is quite dangerous.

The budget process should not be about us coming to talk and then we go away and after tomorrow, you do suppressions – (Interruption)

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, for giving way. The suppression of 69 per cent is not on the total budget. It is suppression of the entire supplementary request. So, of the Shs 883 billion, 69 per cent is financed by suppression. That is the information that I want to give him. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: My brother, I have been around for long and I know what I am saying. I am an accountant like you and an economist. They are not getting other resources; these are resources meant for certain activities from which they are pooling to do the suppression. I am not saying anything contrary but I know you will learn from now. Therefore - (Interjection) – No, he is my younger brother. This suppression is where we are going wrong. 

Madam Speaker, the other point I would like to raise – (Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, for yielding the Floor. You have said that suppression is wrong; are you trying to say that if we budget for construction of a road, for instance, and an epidemic strikes part of the country, we cannot – (Interjection) – Well, I am a medical doctor and I will tell you that epidemics exist. Are you saying that in such a situation, it would be wrong to re-allocate money from an activity to manage an epidemic so that you can save lives of people? Is that what you are telling Parliament?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much. Dr Baryomunsi, I know you are the Minister of State for Health but I hope you know that we have got a contingencies fund. Are you not aware of it? What are you doing in Cabinet? That is where you should place money for emergencies. 

However, the suppression we are talking about is in this instance where you take Shs 6 billion to West Nile  because of drought and yet even in Teso and Karamoja people died. Why did the Shs 6 billion go to only West Nile while people die in Karamoja? In Sironko too there was drought; why did the money go to one place? Why didn’t you take it everywhere? You suppress money to save for classified expenditure, but how do you have classified expenditure for one area?

Madam Speaker, my contention in this case – (Interruption)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you for giving way. The concern of Parliament should be to know from which sector money has been removed, how much, and to which sector it has been taken. It is important so that we can trail this money. 

That is why yesterday, I insisted that one of the reasons I disagreed with the issue of re-allocation was because we did not even have evidence of the technical accounting officers agreeing on that re-allocation. It is important that they agree and say, “I am giving you, Shs 2 billion, because I know this is how I am going to bridge my gap.” However, there is no evidence. There should have been a letter written by the Attorney-General or somebody; I have not been able to see it. Probably, I will have to take it to some lawyer to help us understand it – (Interjection) – Please, I do not need it.

Madam Speaker, it is very important that Parliament addresses its mind to why some ministries or sectors will continue to perform poorly. We pass budgets here after we have understood the figures. However, the moment we disperse as Parliament, they go and sit down and start re-allocating. Now that they know we have been very emotional about health, they come and say, “Maternal health is a high priority; let us go for hepatitis B and we get the money”, and then they sit down and start re-allocating.

If the law is not sufficient, we need to amend the law and make sure we completely stop the transfer of resources from one sector to another so that a sector must budget for money and be able to show its value by utilising that money. I thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the suppression we are interested in - The money was not even for epidemics, as Dr Baryomunsi said. It was spent on different things; for example, Shs 3 billion went to defending a case in the International Criminal Court and there is no evidence to show how that amount was arrived at and how it was accounted for.

Shs 7,900,000,000 was sent to the Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports to train science and technology students for PhDs and masters. However, from the list, they only trained in arts and the cost is higher than normal for a student per year. We have people studying for masters and they pay about Shs 5 million per year but here, they claim it was Shs 12.5 million per year. Why is Government expenditure more expensive than others?

Madam Speaker, what is more annoying is the State House scholarships and medical treatment, instead of putting medicines in Mulago. I would like to know from those who benefit how they get medicines from State House. They should tell us so that any villager can know - (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, for giving way. The Committee on Education stopped State House sponsorship three years ago. Let this go on record. We do not have it in our policy statement. That is the information I would like to give. Therefore, whoever is talking about State House sponsorship as supplementary is misleading this House. It is on record in this House.

THE SPEAKER: I thought that was a settled issue. Please, complete.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, we are raising this because we need to know how people can access State House scholarships and medical treatment. First of all, there are so many guards before one can enter State House; how do they get in? Is it the children of the ministers? Hon. Bahati, is it your son? How do people get medical donations?

This is a serious matter. We need the President to clearly tell us that people who apply for scholarships and medical assistance are of a certain nature; otherwise, medicines should be in Mulago for everybody. As for education, if we need it to improve, we should take money to Makerere, IUIU and other institutions so that everybody benefits.

This classified expenditure of Shs 70 billion in State House is also very dangerous. How do you have classified expenditure of Shs 70 billion – Shs 50 billion for State House and Shs 10 billion for Office of the President? What is this classified expenditure? Is it the money he used during campaigns? If it is money for campaigns, then it is not classified; just state that it is “election money”. 

Madam Speaker, at committee level, I am going to raise some objections on some issues. As much as Mama Cecilia Ogwal has forgiven them, I need answers. If you give me answers, I will keep quiet but without answers, I will raise objections to this classified expenditure of the Office of the President and State House, State House scholarships and medical care, students at higher institutions studying sciences and yet it is arts and many more issues. I will raise them unless I get answers from the minister.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there being no other comments, the question is that the House do dissolve into a committee of supply.

(Question put and agreed to)

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE UNDER SCHEDULE 1 OF FINANCIAL YEAR 2015/2016

Vote 1 - Office of the President

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that a total sum of Shs 13,664,000,000 be provided as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2015/2016.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I could be wrong but what I see here is Shs 8.66 billion from the committee – (Interjection) - Where is the summation because I have schedule 1, section A. Let us first reconcile the records because this one has Shs 8.664 - (Interruption)  

MR LUGOLOOBI: Do you have your iPad?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: My iPad got spoiled and that is why I have a hardcopy. (Laughter)

MR LUGOLOOBI: You have a higher version for dimensions; we have a version for appropriation which sums up the figures according to -

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 13,664,000,000 be provided as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2015/16.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 2 - State House

THE CHAIRPERSON: The question is that a total sum of Shs 61,491,877,551 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2015/2016. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, before we continue, can we know those who benefited from the Shs 66 billion we are going to pass? The chairperson never gave us the list. The figure we have is Shs 21 billion, but it has increased to Shs 66 billion. Can we know what it is so that we can reconcile with the schedule?

MR LUGOLOOBI: The detail, which I mentioned and did not elaborate, is where the information is and it is combining both schedules 1A and 1B. Under schedule 1A, there was money provided for State House to cater for budget shortfalls that arose out of the increased activity levels during the financial year; for example, travel inland, travel abroad, classified expenditure and donations through training, aircraft insurance and dollar rate fluctuations, which affected several contracts under State House.

Schedule 1B is classified expenditure intended to cover budgetary shortfalls arising out of increased activity levels in State House.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that Shs 61,491,877,551 be provided for as supplementary or recurrent expenditure for financial year 2015/16.        

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 3 - Office of the Prime Minister

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 5,335,224,870 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2015/2016.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 4 - Ministry of Defence

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that a total sum of Shs 253 billion be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2015/2016. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we know we need defence and we approved Shs 1.7 trillion; what is this Shs 253 billion that they never foresaw that we now have to budget for under a supplementary? We need to understand.

MR LUGOLOOBI: The justification given here is that this money was provided for operational shortfalls including election security - remember we did not provide for it in the budget. It is to cater for shortfalls in wages, welfare, fuel, medical expenses and classified expenditure.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, elections were managed by the Electoral Commission and any budget for security was under the Electoral Commission; so what is this?

DR LULUME BAYIGGA: Madam Chairperson, the chairman should have been in position to explain to us how wage shortfalls arise but he has not. That should be the basis for us to accept that kind of expenditure.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, there are a number of ways in which a shortfall in wage can arise. One of them is recruiting people in the middle of the financial year and another way is through promotions, which affects the increment of the wages, and that was the issue. 

It is not true that all security budgets for elections were under the Electoral Commission. What we catered for under the Electoral Commission was a limited amount of money to cater for just half the security. However, the real security budget was under the ministries of defence and security. We are glad, as Ugandans, that despite the differences and a few cases that happened, at least on average there was peace during the elections.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, the minister has spoilt his case because what he is telling us are foreseeable expenditures. The supplementary is for emergencies and unforeseen expenditures. When you talk about recruitment, what is unforeseen and what is an emergency in promotions? How do you justify that promotions and recruitment are emergencies? Whatever was an emergency was properly planned for. Recruitment of the policemen, the constables and the crime preventers was all provided for by this House. What was that emergency that was unforeseen?

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, we need to clear this concept of supplementary so that everybody understands from the law how we defined it. Not all unforeseen circumstances are emergencies and yet emergencies are part of unforeseen circumstances. I will give an example; if you retire in the middle of the year, how would Parliament have known that you are going to retire?

MR BAYIGGA: Madam Chairperson, the minister is spoiling the case further. Is he oblivious of how many people have not got their retirement benefits? Do you mean there was something new that created an emergency that people needed retirement benefits this time? Madam Chairperson, that is a lie. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I see the minister and chairman losing their tone a bit but let us continue with this clarification. I would like to assure you that most of these security officers out there are complaining about an increment, depending on their ranks. Some have served for more than three years and their salaries have never been increased according to their ranks. How does this happen during campaign time?

Secondly, Madam Chairperson, we all have constituencies; I did not see soldiers in some constituencies but they were in particular areas. Indeed, honourable minister, you have stated that there are limited funds. If they are limited, then you cannot go for Shs 60 billion yet when you brought the policy statement, you asked for Shs 1.2 trillion and those were some of the issues that were raised in the committee.

I attended a meeting of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs one day and those are the reasons that they raised and now you are coming for a supplementary. Be fair to yourselves and do not cheat yourselves as you cheat others. Let us go for the right funds before we release them. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 253 billion be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2015/2016. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 7 - Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 20,160,962,164 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2015/2016. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 8 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 6,159,874,638 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2015/2016. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 11- Ministry of Local Government  

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 22,800,000,000 be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for financial year 2015/2016. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 12- Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development   

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 99,930,000 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2015/2016. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 13 - Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports   

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that Shs 115,535,965,189 be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for the financial year 2015/2016. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, there is Shs 7,909,000,000, which was supposed to train students of science and technology. However, these are students studying arts in Uganda Management Institute (UMI) – (Interjections) - Yes, that was a programme for science and technology but they are studying arts. I would like us to remove Shs 7,909,000,000 because it is not in the right sector.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can the Minister for Education enlighten us on this issue?

MAJ (RTD) ALUPO: I would like to thank the chairperson of the Budget Committee and also thank hon. Nandala-Mafabi for accepting that all the programmes that are offered under this project in other institutions of higher learning are science based.

Uganda Management Institute is one of the beneficiary institutions for this project. The institute offers business programmes and that is why those students are there. There is no engineering or medicine in UMI. However, when the project was developed right from the start, the component of some training money for PhD and masters was factored into all the beneficiary institutions. It is therefore not a surprise and neither was it an error for those UMI students to be part of the programme.

I would like to persuade hon. Nandala-Mafabi to accept that we also need those students to continue training in those programmes offered at UMI because they matter in the world of work. I thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 115,535,965,189 be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for the financial year 2015/2016. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 14 - Ministry of Health    

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that a total sum of Shs 11 billion be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2015/2016. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Under this vote, there was also a request for hepatitis B and I do not know where it has disappeared. I do not know whether it is coming under a different – (Interjections) - No, I am not campaigning for hon. Sarah Opendi. I just want to make sure that hepatitis B is catered for under this supplementary. It is only Shs 2 billion.

MR BAHATI: I would like to correct the committee. The request for the Ministry of Health is Shs 11 billion and not Shs 13 billion because the Shs 2 billion for development has already been catered for in the fourth quarter. Therefore, the request to be approved is Shs 11 billion to cater for the kits because they have already secured the vaccines.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, this was a very serious matter in the committee because the vaccines are there. We discovered that officials from the Ministry of Health and National Medical Stores erred because they brought the vaccines but there was no money for kits. They also had specimens and needed money for investigations. 

Hon. Bahati, the figure that the committee had recommended is the true figure. We have specimens that have been collected over time that we need to investigate to find the prevalence of hepatitis.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is it Shs 11 billion? Honourable members, I put the question that the total sum of Shs 11 billion be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2015/2016. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there was also the development expenditure for the Ministry of Health. The question is that a sum of Shs 2,430,921,097 be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for financial year 2015/2016. 

MR BAHATI: The request from the Ministry of Health was to do with hepatitis B, which is the Shs 11 billion that we are providing. We have already provided Shs 10 billion and for this quarter, they are remaining with Shs 2.5 billion, which they are receiving next week. 

I think that there was confusion on the figures that were submitted by the Minister for Health when she was trying to explain the Shs 2.5 billion, which is remaining in this quarter, and the Shs 11 billion which we are providing under the supplementary. I really beg that we amend that and adjust it to zero.

Madam Chairperson and honourable colleagues, we cannot just provide for -

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chairperson, I have got the information; it actually came from the Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development. Development expenditure - a total of Shs 2.43 billion provided to cater for shortfalls on refund of VAT payments that were made by the contractor on JICA projects after completion and handover of rehabilitation of Hoima and Kabale hospitals and supply of medical equipment. This is already available in Schedule 1A.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, with that clarification, it is now clear. I withdraw the previous statement.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total of Shs 2,430,921,097 be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for financial year 2015/2016.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 15 - Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 5,055,709,862 be provided for as supplementary expenditure for financial year 2015/2016. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 17 - Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 76,422,529,920 be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for financial year 2015/2016.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)


Vote 19 - Ministry of Water and Environment 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 1,559,922,915 be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for financial year 2015/2016. 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 21 - East African Community

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 7,230,000,000 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2015/2016. 

(Question put and agreed to)

Vote 102 – The Electoral Commission

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I propose the question that the sum of Shs 47,155,974,000 be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for the financial year 2015/16. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the Electoral Commission made the expenditure; I would like to find out whether the biometric voter verification machines, which could not tally and had no data information, were part of the equipment bought. Are they the ones, such that we know whether this is part of the nugatory expenditure which should make immediate interest for an investigation?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chairperson, the justification is that this money was provided to the Electoral Commission to cater for shortfalls under the electronic results transmission system. (Laughter) Kindly listen. This was after external partners pulled out at a critical stage, and it was to enable full payment for the procurement of the biometric voter verification system. 

MR KWIZERA: Honourable members, we appreciate that they need the money but when I attended the meeting in the Budget Committee, they did not prove that this money was urgent. I beg, Members, that we consider it in the upcoming budget.

MR LWANGA: Thank you very much, hon. Kwizera. We are talking about a supplementary budget; so, the money is already spent. How are they going to wait for it?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I think this is one of the eye-openers. As we enter into the Tenth Parliament, the Auditor-General should take interest because this seems to be money which was eaten by a few people. I am sure that this is one of the first motions that we are going to move for quick investigations of the Electoral Commission.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Shs 47,155,974,000 be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for financial year 2015/2016.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 114 - Uganda Cancer Institute

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that a total sum of Shs 494,431,694 be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for financial 2015/2016.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the Uganda Cancer Institute should have more money. I would like to ask the Minister of Health - We need to get him more money. We can amend this supplementary for the cancer institute and even add Shs 10 billion because people are dying of cancer all over the country. If you went to Mulago Hospital, you would fall sick. Is this enough or did they supress you as they have been supressing other budgets?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson and hon. Nandala-Mafabi. I would like to agree with hon. Nandala-Mafabi that we have a challenge of cancer. Actually, the trajectory is quite worrying; the prevalence and the burden of cancer are increasing. However, this supplementary request was to cover some VAT costs. 

The appeal I would make is that you support us in the coming budget because we have made provisions within the budget, where we want to support and fund cancer prevention and management services. The supplementary is to be expended between now and the end of the financial year. The appeal I would like to make is that you support us in the coming budget so that we can address the issue of cancer in this country.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 494,431,694 be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for financial year 2015/2016.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the minister is appealing to you to support him in the forthcoming budget. This was supplementary.

MR BIREKERAAWO NSUBUGA: Madam Chairperson, if you went to the Uganda Cancer Institute now and saw the people who are lying on the floor, you would not ask for that kind of money. I have taken interest in the cancer institute because I had patients there. If this Parliament was to move to the cancer institute and see how people are suffering, you cannot ask for that kind of money when people are sleeping on the floor.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, can I advise? There is a Bill before this House for the cancer institute which we shall debate and we see how to facilitate them. It is here with us and I have asked hon. Bitekyerezo to deal with it because we want that done before the Ninth Parliament closes.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Chairperson, as the Ministry of Health and indeed Government, we are trying to transform Mulago into a centre of excellence and we have identified departments to start with; Uganda Cancer Institute is one of them.

A few months ago, this Parliament approved a loan to support construction, provision of addition space and training of experts for the Uganda Cancer Institute. As you have said, there is a Bill before this House- the Uganda Cancer Institute Bill- which is intended to create autonomy for this institute.  

We want to be methodical. We could ask for money in these two months but we do not also want to come back and find we have not spent the money. That is why our request is for you to let us move steadily to build the capacity of the cancer institute, and we have made provisions in the budget for the coming year. That is where we want you to support us.

We do not want to work haphazardly and then fail to absorb the resources. What we put in the supplementary request was the VAT expenses which are outstanding. However, we have made provision in the budget and we would like the support of the House.

We are not sleeping; we are aware of the burden of cancer in this country and we call for support from Parliament to do the work with the Ministry of Health and decisively deal with the issue of cancer. We are aware of the burden, but we shall have to work with you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much. The health committee is reminded to quickly process those Bills and bring them before 13 May.

Vote 117 - Uganda Tourism Board

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 1,500,000,000 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2015/2016.
(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 141 - Uganda Revenue Authority

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 9,940,000,000 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2015/2016.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 142- National Agricultural Research Organisation

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 15,000,000,000 be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for the financial year 2015/2016.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 144- Uganda Police Force

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 24,000,000,000 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2015/2016.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 70,400,000,000 be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for financial year 2015/2016.

(Question put and agreed to.)


Vote 152- National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that a total sum of Shs 6,000,000,000 be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for financial year 2015/2016.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I want the minister to explain to me if drought was only in West Nile and no other part of Uganda so that only West Nile should benefit from the Shs 6 billion and not any other parts of the country. You must also come with the temperature measurements which you were using.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Chairperson and members, the drought was in the whole of the northern region but in West Nile it was more severe. Instead of posho, they requested for hoes - (Interruption)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, I think the minister is being unfair to the House because he is very aware, and I am sure he has the records, that people actually died in Karamoja and some parts of Teso during this drought. We have been asking for that justification. 

Why West Nile, which was less hit by the drought than Karamoja? You may think it is personal interest, but I do not come from Karamoja. Let us be realistic if we are really Ugandans. Why would you cater for less affected regions and you forget the one that is most hit with even people dying? Does it mean that it is not important to see a Karimojong dying?

The minister should help explain because the people from West Nile and Karamoja are watching us. They are asking, how come you gave West Nile and forgot Karamoja and yet it is the same Government. Therefore, we have to find out what is actually happening. Can the minister help explain?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we would not have a problem if the Shs 6 billion was going to cause rain in West Nile. What they did was to buy hoes, but how do we use these hoes? What was the purpose of hoes in the dry weather? These are the issues we are raising. Therefore, the minister should come and explain. Do hoes cover people during the hot season?

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, as the committee has noted in their report, the Shs 6 billion was provided to NAADS for procurement of one million hoes for distribution to farmers in that region. We have made a provision, as you saw in the Budget Framework Paper, of close to Shs 50 billion to cover the entire country, making sure that we target three hoes per household. 

We are sure that the Minister of Agriculture is noting the preference of the Members of Parliament. When this comes up, he should take into account that some of these regions should receive before others. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, he has even made matters worse by saying that the plan is to give three hoes per family; so, it was not for the drought. He has said it started with West Nile and yet it is a supplementary. It was considered urgent for West Nile but not for Bugisu, Kigezi, Buganda or Busoga. This is being unfair.

Madam Chairperson, don’t you think we should put this aside for the time being until we approve the others. We must get the motive behind this; why, during the dry season, would one take hoes instead of rain. They are saying this plan was in the budget and yet we have to support it through a supplementary request. Why should we support something in the supplementary budget and yet it is in the budget? Why didn’t they wait for the budget? 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Right now, the Office of the Prime Minister is handling the issues of Karamoja and Teso regions. In fact, they are ferrying seeds and other things and Members are aware of that. However, Madam Chairperson, we have just passed money that went to Bugisu Cooperative Union and Masaka Cooperative Union did not get. In that regard –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I am the chairman of Bugisu Cooperative Union and he is for Masaka Cooperative Union. They lost nothing but we lost our resources. Therefore, when Government compensates for what they mismanaged, is it a crime? Is the minister in order to come and lament here that Bugisu Cooperative Union got money when he has abandoned his own Masaka Cooperative Union? (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that a total sum of Shs 6,000,000,000 be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for financial year 2015/2016.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 155 – Uganda Cotton Development Organisation

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that a total sum of Shs 3,800,000,000 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2015/2016.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, I think this House deserves further clarification on that matter because Cotton Development Organisation (CDO) got Shs 10 billion from the earlier supplementary. It was for building capacity for a private investor. 

The 	request of today is very interesting and I would personally be very interested in it as a farmer. My reservation is on how CDO is managing the revenue it gets by selling these seeds. These seeds are not given to farmers for free. Even the local seeds of cotton are not given to farmers free of charge. 

It is okay that CDO might have imported some seeds. It is also okay that CDO might have spent some money in buying the seeds. 

Cotton Development Organisation gets money through the budgetary line, seed cotton and very many other avenues. What I am asking is: how much did CDO get by selling the imported seeds? If they got money, why did that revenue not go towards reducing the amount that is being asked from the taxpayer or the cotton farmer who is the poor of the poorest in Uganda? I would like to know why CDO cannot declare how much revenue was generated by selling the seeds and where that money is being kept. I also want to know why that money should not be used for paying for this importation.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we will go through the budget process very soon. I think there will be an opportunity to interrogate how CDO handled money. This one is about the supplementary.

I put the question that a total sum of Shs 3,800,000,000 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2015/2016.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 156 – Uganda Land Commission

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 3,000,000,000 be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for financial year 2015/2016.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 159 – External Security Organisation

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 2,000,000,000 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2015/2016.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 210 – Uganda Mission in Washington

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 145,614,150 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2015/2016.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 212 – Uganda Mission in Kigali

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 279,218,070 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2015/2016.

(Question put and agreed.)

Vote 225 – Uganda Mission in Berlin

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 48,100,923 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2015/2016.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 232 – Uganda Mission in Guangzhou

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 450,973,687 be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for financial year 2015/2016.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Statutory Expenditure

Vote 101 – Judiciary

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chairperson, I thought that before we go to statutory expenditure, we should deal with the various votes which we have presented in the annex. I do not know whether you have the annex with you. Annex 4 has several votes and it is going to be a fairly cumbersome exercise reading them all. It is a total of Shs 62 billion plus Shs 1.9 billion, but there are very many votes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, you are moving ahead of me. I wanted to deal with the Judiciary first.

MR LUGOLOOBI: We had not completed appropriation.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why don’t we finish all the votes first?

I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 7,800,000,000 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2015/2016.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, you are moving ahead of me. I wanted to deal with the Judiciary first.

MR LUGOLOOBI: We had not completed appropriation.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why don’t we finish all the votes first?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Even these are votes.


THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 7,800,000,000 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2015/2016.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 103 – Inspectorate of Government

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 1,109,000,000 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2015/2016.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 101 – Parliamentary Commission

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 66,555,138,122 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2015/2016.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: For the Parliamentary Commission you are saying no? (Laughter)

Various Votes - Wages Recurrent Expenditure

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 64,245,995,902 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2015/2016.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Various votes - Pension and Gratuity

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 92,128,728,305 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2015/2016.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Foreign Mission Services- Recurrent Expenditure

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 8,227,951,146 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2015/2016.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Loss of Poundage and Various Missions

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 14,902,955,039 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2015/2016.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Total Supplementary Recurrent Expenditure

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 512,287,414,305 be provided for as total supplementary recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2015/2016.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Total Supplementary Development Expenditure

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 361,250,718,502 be provided for as total supplementary development expenditure for financial year 2015/2016.
(Question put and agreed to.)

Grand total supplementary, recurrent and development expenditure

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 873,538,132,817 be provided for as grand total supplementary recurrent and development expenditure for financial year 2015/2016.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Total Statutory Expenditure

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 167,592,866,427 be provided for as statutory expenditure for financial year 2015/2016.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Grand total statutory expenditure

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 1,041,130,999,244 be provided for as grand total statutory expenditure - 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Where is this Shs 1 trillion coming from? Is it for development and recurrent expenditure?

MR LUGOLOOBI: It is combining everything: recurrent, development and statutory. It is actually the grand total of everything. It is grand supplementary expenditure.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: So is the grand supplementary one trillion? 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House resumes and the Committee of Supply reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

4.44 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the Supplementary Schedule 1 for Financial Year 2015/2016 and passed it with amendments. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

4.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, it would not be proper to end this supplementary without thanking you and the Members. Some of the items in this budget were supposed to have a first call in next year’s budget. Some of the Members here may not be aware, but because of your good leadership, you managed to bring it forward. 

Therefore, I would like to thank you, the cooperation of the Members and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for ensuring that the issues that were supposed to make first call have now closed out the financial year. 

Most importantly, the issue of pension that we have passed here is very critical to our elders in the village. We just hope that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will expedite the process. We also expect this money to be released so that our sick elders can get this money within very few months before the end of the financial year. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: I hope you have heard that all these things are very necessary and urgent. We want a commitment from you, honourable minister, that the needful will be done quickly. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for presiding over this House. I also want to thank the honourable colleagues for the cooperation, especially the Members of the Budget Committee. You have our commitment that we are going to move very swiftly. We also request Members that on Tuesday, when we receive a similar matter that is going to help in this issue, you will be able to cooperate as you have cooperated. Thank you. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

STAMP DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016

4.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Stamp Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2016.” be read for the second time. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Okay; it is seconded. 

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, the object of this Bill is to amend Schedule 2 to the Stamp Duty Act, 2014 and Act 13 of 2014 to vary same duties charged on certain instruments under the Act. 

4.47
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Anthony Okello): Madam Speaker, this is a report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the Stamp Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2016. 

The Stamp Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2016 was read for the first time on 10 March 2016 and referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development in accordance with rule 118 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

The object of the Bill is here mentioned and stated by the honourable minister. The methods are here. Honourable members can read through. With your permission, Madam Speaker, allow me go to the observations: 

The committee observed that: 
    (i) Increase of stamp duty from one per cent to two per cent charged on exchange of property is high. Analysis from the Parliamentary Budget Office indicates that GDP growth will decline by 0.2 per cent relative to current projections. As a result, household consumption will decline by 1.8 per cent leading to a decline in employment by 0.5 per cent. Resulting from the analysis, stamp duty should increase gradually from one per cent to 1.5 per cent. 

    (ii) The increment may deter people from transferring properties, which will affect their ownership. This may negatively affect compliance and, therefore, the revenue anticipated to be collected from the increment may not be realized.   

    (iii) Section 28 of the Stamps Act, 2014 provides for stamp duty on transfers during the life time of the person transferring. The provisions of Section 28 mean that most of the transactions, which were previously not subject to stamp duty are now subject to stamp duty of one per cent of the total market value of the property or share, including where there is no change in beneficial ownership. 

Some of such transactions are: Transfer of property from husband to wife and vice versa including a transfer from one spouse to joint partnership; the vesting of family property into a trust and vice versa; transfer of property or shares from beneficiaries to a trust and vice versa; transfer of property during divorce or dissolution of marriage; transfer of property or shares from parent to children or vice versa; and a gift made for no consideration. 

    (iv) Section 28 of the Stamp Duty Act, 2014 be amended and the provisions contained in subsection 35 of the repealed Stamps Act, 342 be reinstated as the current provisions are very disadvantageous to families that would like to enjoy joint ownership of family property bearing in mind that stamp duty is proposed to be increased from one per cent to two per cent in the Bill. The committee shall propose an amendment to this effect. 

Recommendation 

The committee recommends that the Stamp Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2016 be passed into law subject to the proposed amendments.

Madam Speaker, allow me to lay on the Table the relevant documents to this report, the original copy of the report and the minutes of committee meetings that took place on 22 March 2016, 23 March 2016 and 30 March 2016, related to this Bill. 

Regarding the opinion of the stakeholders, we have bio-light energy saving and electricity generating cook stoves and Civil Society Organisations Position Paper on tax revenue proposals for Financial Year 2016/2017. We also have the Uganda Manufacturers Association question paper on the proposed tax.  Madam Speaker, I beg to lay and to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson and the Members of the Committee, we would like to thank you very much for the report. Are there any comments, honourable members?
 
4.54
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (NRM, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for their report. 

Over time, the stamp duty has been increased from 0.5 per cent to one per cent. Increasing it from one per cent to two per cent is very dangerous because one, it is going to promote corruption. Anybody who is transferring property will definitely have to undervalue. Officers in Government in charge of evaluation will be compromised to undervalue so even the revenue the minister proposes to get will definitely not be got.

Two, it will be a disincentive in property transactions because either most people will buy and keep their properties instead of taking them for transfer or in terms of shares, you will see less activity on the shares exchange market or even in the companies registry.

Therefore, I invite Members that we maintain the current position of one per cent because the two per cent will be a disincentive to the economic growth of this country and will also affect the poorest of the poor who intend to get property or buy shares. I so pray.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you did not comment on the proposal by the committee of 1.5 per cent. They thought that it should come from two per cent to – I do not know -

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, 1.5 per cent is still very high. Indeed, I am an advocate in practice and I know what it means. Any increment from one per cent will still bring problems in the economy. I, therefore, pray that we maintain the current position of one per cent as 1.5 per cent is also too high in the circumstances.

4.55
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think what Government needed to inform us about is the intention of stamp duty because Government looks at it as a way of raising revenue. Instead of expanding the tax base, they are desperately looking for areas where they can conveniently collect revenue.

When we talk about stamp duty, in itself it would not be a way of raising revenue. Stamp duty is raised as a result of contracts. For instance, if I bought land from hon. Bahati, what confers to me the right to own that property is the agreement between hon. Bahati and me.

However, people normally go ahead to transfer in order to avoid the risk of being deprived of their property. Therefore, for Government to look at this as one of the areas from which to raise revenue is very challenging.

The way we have been managing the tax regime in this country is what is causing problems. I would like to associate myself with submission of hon. Niwagaba and add that we may need to give the minister time to go and think outside the box as a way of expanding the tax base. 

Madam Speaker, 85 per cent of the tax base in this country is within the central business area. The other parts of the country raise 15 per cent. What Government is doing is instead of expanding the tax base, it is always looking for a way of increasing the burden on the few people who keep contributing.

In conclusion, when it came to conveyance of motor vehicles, people would sell these vehicles with blank transfer forms and that took a long time for them to get on the system. Similarly, when stamp duty is raised in such a way, people will sell their property and give blank transfers, which will never be effected. In effect, the revenue that Government expects to get out of this stamp duty will actually drop; it will not be as expected. 

I would like to conclude by saying that I support the position of hon. Niwagaba. Moreover, the committee is simply afraid to come out boldly and say that they are opposed to this because it will appear like they are opposing Government’s attempt to raise revenue. Let Government think outside the box and come up with better ways of raising revenue instead of this proposed avenue. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.59
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the work that they have done and I support the 1.5 per cent position. 

Madam Speaker, as a country and as Members of Parliament, we need to support the drive to broaden the tax base. This country has largely been relying on import duty and customs taxes. We need to broaden domestic taxes. Moreover, it is a good culture for the propertied class to be benevolent and think for the have nots.

During the regime of indirect taxes, you made a lot of small people to pay a lot of taxes. The intention of progressive tax is to make the haves contribute to the national coffers on behalf of the have nots. It is, therefore, a good culture for the propertied class to start paying taxes. I think this is a good culture and as Members of Parliament, even if some of us are propertied, we must be the ones supporting the culture of paying taxes. 

Therefore, we need to support the culture of paying taxes. We need to support direct taxes and if we are the ones to resist that culture, it will be very unfortunate as we shall continue the culture of indirect taxes and relying on customs duties only. In fact, I would like to hear of more taxes on land – (Interruption)- I can take the clarification.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification that I would like to seek from my good friend, hon. Mukitale, is, are you aware that one of the canons of a good tax is that it should not be a burden to the taxpayer?

MR MUKITALE: I have clearly mentioned that this is a progressive tax. As an economist, I am aware that this is a progressive tax and we must –(Interruption)- I know that the propertied class does not want to pay tax – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, my brother is putting up a very good case but in the opposite direction. What is a progressive tax? It is not a progressive tax simply because you have increased the rate. By the way, if you want to talk about taxes, I am here. (Laughter) The customs tax that you are talking about is an indirect tax. The only direct tax is Pay as You Earn and Corporation Tax because in these cases, what you have got is what they tax from. However, the others are put on to a commodity from which you all service and then consume.

The clarification that I would like to seek from you is, suppose somebody has left Makerere, bought land of Shs 500,000 and would like to transfer it, does it mean that he is now in the other class of the rich and that he should not be able to transfer that land at a lower rate so that he gets ownership? Would he rather keep it until tomorrow when he gets money?

MR MUKITALE: Honourable colleagues, I am making a case for raising money for national coffers. I am raising a case for those who are in the propertied class to make a contribution so that even the have nots can benefit from what goes to the national coffers. I am not speaking for a class of people who would not want to contribute more to the national coffers. 

Therefore, I would like to stand my position and support the 1.5 per cent increment. As Members of Parliament, we should provide leadership and be in support of this country finding more money. Tomorrow you are going to condemn borrowing but how do you condemn borrowing if you do not want the country to raise more money?

Therefore, let the propertied class, including ourselves who are propertied, have the willingness to pay more taxes. I do not see this causing a very big administrative problem in terms of collecting these taxes. All we need is to sensitise our people that we should make contributions in terms of paying more taxes. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.04
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am trying to understand the import of an amendment that has just been brought before this House. This particular amendment is trying to target areas of transaction. You will find it at the Ministry of Lands and at the Companies Registry. Basically, that is where the focus will be.

Madam Speaker, I have witnessed instances where, for example, the moment you obtain the first transfer forms from the original owner, you get the subsequent sales agreements together with the original transfer forms. Therefore, I would like to implore my colleagues to see how they can be able to overcome this scenario. 

The moment you increase stamp duty, it will mean that you are encouraging that practice. You will be getting transfer forms together with the photocopy of the identity card and that is all. What you intended to achieve by a way of collection will not be achieved. 

Secondly, we are trying to monetise the economy but it is not an incentive when you raise taxes and particularly the stamp duty. You will not be able to monetise the economy by way of each and every transaction obtaining stamp duty because once you put it at two per cent – In fact, you are going to tempt the tax collector. I know that many people will come and say, “Yes I can see that it is two per cent and I am supposed to pay Shs 2 million from a particular transaction but take this Shs 1 million.” 

At the end of the day, you will find that you will be aiding the practice of undervaluing properties and assets in this country. Whether you like it or not, you will be running away from the actual and true market value to values that are now linked between the one paying the tax and the tax collector. 

Look at land transfers and hon. Mukitale should be an authority in this. Take for instance an acre of land, which should fetch Shs 200 million. Because of this tax, they will agree and conspire amongst themselves – (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, sometimes I sympathise with Government because this tax is boxing us in the colonial regime before independence. Why am I saying so? Since independence, no Government has titled land in this country more than what was done. In the entire north, western and eastern regions of the country, land is exchanged. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi can come to me and I give him 2000 acres of land that belonged to my grandmother through customary law and I will not pay anything. 

Therefore, we are only talking about issues that are applicable within the central region and also part of Bushenyi and Ankole where land giving was done during the colonial regime.

All in all, Government should think outside the box instead of remaining within the colonial era and trying to pick money from the colonial mentality. That is the information I wanted to give to hon. Ssekikubo.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you for the information but the line I am driving at - I agree with colleagues who have said that we need to diversify on the taxes. We need to diversify and even increase the rate of tax to our GDP. We need to be self-sustaining and the only way is to have taxes. However, let us be realistic and not send the minister with a basket and we come with half a basket – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague for giving way. A stamp means a stamp. You know a stamp, right? – 

THE SPEAKER: The red stamp.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It is not that it should be a percentage. It is the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which has created the one per cent or zero per cent but it was supposed to be Shs 1,000 or Shs 5. If you look from the colonial days up to now, the issue of percentage came recently.

What we are saying is that stamp duty should not be a tax that we should debate on. It is just to evidence that a transaction has taken place. If you make it expensive – maybe people are not explaining it very well. 

For instance, if I have a plot of land and sold it to Col Tumwesigye at Shs 200 million, two per cent stamp duty will translate to Shs 4 million. He may say, “No, I want to pay Shs 1 million. Therefore, write for me an agreement which is equivalent to Shs 1 million” and that is about Shs 50 million. 

When I give him the agreement for Shs 50 million, he will say, I need to give something to the valuer and that is why I should reserve another Shs 500,000 for him. At the end of the day - Hon. David, you are shaking your head yet you know what is happening. At the end of the day, Government, which was expecting to get Shs 4 million, will get only Shs 500,000 million because the rate is high. 

However, if it is too low, somebody will say, why should I pay a bribe? Quote for me the right value. 0.5 per cent is Shs 1 million and he will go comfortably. Higher rates are the ones causing corruption and causing Government not to collect the expected money. 

If you want money, as my colleague was stressing, talk about Capital Gains tax or Inheritance tax. Those are the things that you should be talking about but not these small things. You are saying that we are property owners. Yes, but property owners do not sell. They just buy and keep. The ones you are talking about are those who do the daily transactions. You will find that a transfer form has moved 10 times. The one for hon. Nandala-Mafabi will go; hon. Ekanya will keep it, among many others, until after about 10 years. What would Government have gotten in 10 years? Make it small and affordable in order to make more money.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I would like to plead with colleagues that prematurely increasing stamp duty from one to two per cent will not only distort the property economy but it will make all actors to be informal. They will not come to register transfers. The person at the extreme end will be the one to effect the transfer.

To that extent, you would be generating and giving more to those who are involved in corruption. I have seen somebody say, “To have the transfers done formally, we need to have this but if you agree, we will distort the price and you will pay a different amount.” Usually, people in the country and elsewhere in the world would rather go for that option of paying little and in the process, they will be cheating Government and distorting the property market. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR OMACH: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Ekanya is asking me to think outside the box yet the box is right in front of me. I do not know whether he would like me to move away.

This measure is to get revenue and also try to obtain value for money. Our projection is that this measure will give us up to Shs 9 billion if we raise it to two per cent. We would appeal to Members that we accept the position of the committee to move it from one per cent to 1.5 per cent so that at least we get revenue of about Shs 6 billion. This is because in the final analysis, the Budget must balance and this has already been embedded in the resource measures. This is my appeal and we are ready to go down 1.5 per cent.

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, I think it is important that the minister appreciates that when we talk about stamp duty - if you go to the Uganda Registration Services Bureau (URSB), the big companies, which pay stamp duty in debentures, all have tax exemptions. After paying, they normally put in a claim and receive back all the money. If you would stop those tax exemptions, there would be a lot of collections at URSB.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, the last time we amended this was in 2014 and now we are in 2016, going to 2017. It is my appeal that we just increase by the 0.5 per cent from one per cent to 1.5 per cent. I thank you.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, Uganda Registration Services Bureau has been trying to expand its services to upcountry towns and in doing so, at the rate of one per cent, it has increased its revenues from Shs 2 billion to almost Shs 20 billion.

If you increase from one to even 1.5 per cent and I am registering a company, I will make sure that I register a company at the lowest share capital possible for me to pay the lowest stamp duty. If I have a company with a very high share capital and I want to sell shares, instead of paying the two per cent, I will enter an agreement for sale of the shares. I will then sign forms to change directors and the new directors will become registered as the directors in the company. I would not transfer those shares because the stamp duty rate is prohibitive.

The services that Uganda Registration Services Bureau (URSB) is now taking to these upcountry towns will definitely not yield results because of the rate of 1.5 per cent; it is high. Look at it in that economic friendly way. You will capture more people if your rate is reasonable than if it is unnecessarily high. 

For land transfers, what people will now do is have the transfer form and keep it. If I do not intend to sell soon, I will lodge a caveat, pay Shs 10,000 and keep my title and transfer forms. Will you have gotten the money?

Honourable minister, one per cent is good for you to get many more people transferring their shares and land than a higher rate, which will be very prohibitive.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there being no more comments, I put the question that the Stamp Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2016 be read a second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE STAMP DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2

THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Anthony Okello): Madam Chairperson, we are proposing that we insert a new clause, immediately after clause 1, as follows: “Amendment of the Stamp duty Act, 2014. The Stamp Duty Act, 2014, in this Act referred to as the principal Act, is amended in section 28 by inserting after sub-section (3) the following: “(4) These sections shall not apply to a conveyance or transfer made for nominal consideration for the purpose of securing the repayment of an advance or a loan homemade for effecting the appointment of a new trustee or the retirement of a trustee whether the trust is expressed or implied or under which no beneficial interest passes in the property conveyed or transferred or made to be a beneficiary by a trustee or other persons in a fiduciary capacity under any trust whether expressed or implied and this subsection shall have effect not withstanding that the circumstances exempting the conveyance or transfer form charged under this section and not set forth in the conveyance or transfer.”

The justification is that the stamp duty should not be charged on transfer of property from husband to wife and vice versa including a transfer from one spouse to join partnership; the vesting of family property into a trust and vice versa; transfer of property/shares from beneficiaries to a trust and vice versa; transfer of property during divorce or dissolution of marriage; and a gift where there is no beneficial consideration. 

Two, the current provision discourages families that would like to enjoy joint ownership of the family property and most women will be kept out of ownership of family property if they are required to meet the stamp duty.

Madam Chairperson, the cost equivalent to the market value of the property before their names can be registered as joint owners of such property.

Three, individuals should be accorded the same benefits that are accorded to transfers between associated companies under section 27 of this Act. I thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, I am at a loss because these proposed amendments confuse too many branches of the law. It is bringing in the law of trust, it is bringing in the Succession Act, it is bringing in family relations and all sorts of things. I think it is too confusing.

One, for purposes of trust, their registration is a different law and at a different registry.

Two, when it comes to transfers to beneficiaries, for example, of properties of a deceased person and you present your transfer and show that you are a beneficiary; the stamp duty is not paid. It is actually very nominal and you do not pay because there is no consideration for purposes of valuation.

Therefore, this proposed amendment, if it even goes through, will totally whittle down the little that Government wanted to collect because it would be a question of saying, on transfer of land, that this is a “wife” and there is no evidence on how we can prove a wife. I can go and get a marriage certificate or this is a “child”. Hon. Bahati, what you wanted to correct, even with that amendment, you will never get. 

I beg to move that let this proposed amendment be withdrawn because it serves no purpose.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I think the people sponsoring the Bill realised that they would also be trapped in that increment of 1.5 per cent and they are only creating a window on how they would escape from being equal before the law.

On a serious note, if we are deleting the proposed amendment, I can support the 1.5 per cent because they realised that they would also be affected. Therefore, they are creating a window which they will be abusing. 

I propose that we delete that amendment. I can even go with the committee’s proposal once we delete that portion because they are the ones abusing it.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I beg to disagree with the interpretation of my learned brother, the hon. Wilfred Niwagaba. My disagreement stems from the law. The committee makes reference to section 28 of the Stamp Act, as amended in 2014, which provides that stamp duty shall be paid by any person transferring during his lifetime.

Therefore, if you are talking about transfers for purposes of successors in title, the argument of hon. Wilfred Niwagaba holds some water. However, if you are talking about any other gift, during the lifetime of a person then stamp duty applies. If I transfer property to my wife today, stamp duty applies. If I transfer property to a partnership that has only two partners: Fox Odoi and Sanyu Bernadette, the wonderful name of my wife, stamp duty applies. The argument of the committee makes sense; it should not apply. Why should I pay stamp duty to transfer beneficial interest to my spouse?

The 1995 Constitution makes her entitled to equal shares with me in matrimonial property –(Interjection)- it does and that is the law. Why should I pay stamp duty on that? Therefore, if we take out transfers to people who are inheriting, I would be very comfortable but transfers to spouses and children should not attract Stamp duty. I agree with the committee in that respect.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, before the shadow minister of finance comes in, I agree with hon. Niwagaba that this window can be abused. You can own a property and transfer it saying that this is your child. Who will verify that it is your child or not? After all, hon. Odoi-Oywelowo, if it is your wife, why are you transferring from your wife to yourself because you are one – (Interruption)

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: I thank you, hon. Bahati for yielding the Floor. Madam Chairperson, we passed the registration of persons law. Under this law, I am required to register my children and you are required, as Government, to register them. You will be having a central registry so I am not going to call hon. Ssekikubo’s child mine. It is not possible.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to plead with hon. Bahati and colleagues that so many of our sisters, mothers, wives and children are missing the right to have a say in property because of stamp duty. Therefore, to me, the amendment by the committee is valid as it will protect the interest that is provided for in the Constitution so that people do not fear to transfer property to their children and wives when they are still alive, instead of waiting when they are dead then you go to administrators of estates and there are family conflicts.

This amendment is meant to resolve conflict. Hon. Bahati, you have declared all your properties to the Inspector General of Government (IGG). They know all your children and your wife. How will you forge a child outside those who are known? This cannot happen. Really, this amendment is good and we need to support it.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. There is one issue that I would like this House to understand. There is no stamp duty charge when a company transfers to an associate company. From the accounting that I studied, it is the same situation like transferring from a husband to a wife. In companies, it is like transferring from company A to company B, both owned by one person. 

Therefore, Madam Chairperson, for companies of similar nature where an associate and a parent are transferring, there is no stamp duty charged –(Interjection)- Yes, I refer to section 27 of the Stamp Duty Act. For individuals, this is not the case. If a husband is transferring to a wife, you are charged one per cent so what the amendment is seeking –(Interjection)- no, we are not increasing. 

We are saying that the benefit that we are giving to companies should be extended to individuals as well. That is the only issue under debate. I am not a lawyer and whenever I have legal constraints where I need explanation, I refer to my good friend, hon. Wilfred Niwagaba and I would like him to take his time to understand and appreciate where we are coming from before he rushes to conclusions.

Madam Chairperson, we took time to research about this and the committee is fully aware of the proposal we are seeking the House to amend. I would like the House to appreciate us, think about it and pass this clause because it is necessary.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Musasizi, what will remain in the market are people who are buying and selling? 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, transfers from wife to husband with no consideration or with zero consideration –

THE CHAIRPERSON: I am asking, if you pass this amendment, does it mean that the people who are left to be taxed are those selling to -

MR MUSASIZI: Yes, it will be those who are transferring for business purposes or for consideration. However, where there is no consideration - I may have a house and would like to give it to my child. I should not be asked to pay stamp duty. 

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I rise on a procedural matter. I am wondering whether the amendment being proposed by the committee is procedurally right because it conflicts with the object of the Bill. 

The object of the Bill is to vary stamp duty charge on certain instruments under the Act and the proposal from the committee is to exempt -(Interjections)- yes. The reason as to why I am raising this is, the assumption was that Government was looking for ways of raising money under the stamp duty. The object is to vary so that Government can raise money. The amendment being proposed will be abused and even defeat the object of the Bill. 

I am wondering, Madam Chairperson, whether we are proceeding correctly by introducing another object, which was not part of the Bill because in my opinion, we might be excited here but it will be subject to abuse. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What you mean is that the amendment is in conflict with the object of the Bill?

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, for instance, when you are transferring land, there is a part of consideration and other people even put gifts. This means that I can give gifts to anybody; it does not need to be my child. 

Therefore, I think the Attorney-General must come in and address this otherwise the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will never have revenue. Whenever a transaction is carried out, they will say consideration and gifts.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, I have consistently attended this House for the last four years and several months now. Today, for the first time, I have heard novel arguments from my learned brother, hon. Mwiru, that this House can never pass any amendment that departs from the object of the Bill.

I would like to submit that this argument has no basis in legislative practice. First and foremost, every Bill has several clauses and not all those clauses conform to the object.

Secondly, what the House is trying to do is to rationalise the proposal that the minister brought. Hon. Musasizi has argued, and very ably, that if you look at section 27, transfers from one company to an associate company do not attract stamp duty. However, transfers from a spouse to another spouse attract stamp duty. This is a fundamental conflict. If you are dealing with a juridical company, you do not charge them Stamp duty but when dealing with a person like a spouse, you charge them stamp duty.

The object of the Bill is not only to increase revenue but also to rationalise the collection of revenue –(Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I benefited from a course paid by this House concerning legislative drafting. When introducing a bill, it starts with Cabinet memoranda from the line ministry and it must emanate from a policy. A policy position informs the Act and the Cabinet memoranda will normally state the object of the Bill. 

For you to depart from the object of the Bill would mean that you are dealing with something outside because it is assumed that once a Cabinet memoranda comes into force, Cabinet or Government would have made reasonable considerations as to whether what they are fronting into a Bill is in line with Government policy.

Madam Chairperson, you will realise that in most instances, it is not proper that you can have a Bill without a policy. A policy informs the Bill and it is from that perspective that you know what the mischief is. Now the mischief has been that Government is finding problems in raising revenue because under the circumstances, the current Government does not invest in production so the tax base is narrow.

Due to that, we are saying that we can raise revenue from the narrow tax base. If your object is to raise more revenue and we are narrowing the source then it defeats the object and that does not exist in drafting. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, how do you reconcile the proposal by the committee to raise the stamp duty from one to 1.5 per cent? Isn’t that varying?

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, that is varying because varying means either you increase or decrease. That is varying in as far as increasing is concerned because the spirit of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, by reproducing this tax, is to raise revenue. If you are going to create an amendment, which defeats the object then it would be a big problem and I think the Attorney-General should address this. Otherwise –(Interruption)

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Chairperson, I had decided to keep quiet on this matter because I am not a neutral participant. I have my personal views on the matter. However, hon. Mwiru is correct that if we would like to carry the amendment, as proposed, then we may have to amend the object clause to say that this Bill is intended to vary the duty and exempt certain categories of human beings.

If we do not then the amendment is not consistent with what is contained in the object clause because the object is to vary the duty chargeable on certain instruments. However, if you say certain categories should not be charged then that is different from varying –(Interruption)

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, hon. Rukutana, for yielding the Floor. I have a lot of respect for hon. Rukutana; he taught me law at Law Development Centre in 1992 and you know very well that I was a very good student. 

Hon. Rukutana taught me that if you are making a submission on the law, it must be on the basis of an authority; an authority being written law or judgement precedent.

I would like to know from the Attorney-General and my former lecturer, what law specifically provides that to make any amendment we must conform to the object of the Bill? If I may put it in another way, if the amendment is at variance with the object of the Bill, must the object of the Bill be amended by the House?

Secondly, when have we ever done that? Thank you.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to support the position of the committee. The object of the Bill is to amend Schedule 2 of the Stamp Duty Act No. 13 of 2014, to vary stamp duty and charge certain instruments under the Act.

The report of the committee says that we amended this section and discriminated against some members last year. What we did was to take the whole blanket. We exempted companies, which are associates and left families, which are bound to be affected negatively –(Interruption) 

MR NIWAGABA: Let me give you information, honourable. The amendment of 2014 in respect of transfers between associated companies had four specific conditions:
    1. It can only be in respect of a transfer from one company to another if the beneficial owner of that transfer has no less than 90 per cent of the issued share capital.
    2. If it is less than 90 per cent of the issued share capital, then each of the companies in the beneficial ownership with the third party must also have at least 90 per cent.
    3. It is the commissioner to satisfy him/herself that this conveyance is pursuant towards those interests of the associated company. 

Had the committee, maybe in its amendment, been very explicit that transfer of property between spouses and even defined “spouses” bearing in mind the questions of proof when presenting an instrument that shows this is somebody’s spouse then maybe I would have got the idea. However, as presented in the present amendment, I am afraid it is too wide and subject to abuse. 

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, arising from what he has submitted, when we amended, we did not put that into consideration but we exempted some like the associate companies and this impacted on the families in Uganda. (Interjections) Someone is commenting. I have an experience. Men die and yet you have not streamlined and these people have no money to transfer your property; they go to court and there are conflicts created. The amendment that we are bringing to the committee is that we should rationalise. 

The moment we exempted these companies, we put it in the context of families in Uganda that can be negatively affected so that we are at the same footing with these companies that were exempted so that we narrow. 

The framing may have been bad but our aim was what I have said. There is no way that you can make a discriminatory law and you find that it is very effective.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members. Supposing we proceed under Rule 123 (18) of the Rules of Procedure and incorporate what the Attorney-General proposed to amend the preamble. This will assist us to have both of them fit together.

MR RUKUTANA: That would be okay. I would like to respond to my very good student, who was very brilliant at the time. (Laughter)

The object of the Bill is to amend Schedule 2 to the Stamp Act. The matters proposed in the amendment here are not contained in Schedule 2 and so there is no way that you can accommodate them when the object clause is very express to amend Schedule 2 -(Interruption)

MR MWIRU: The information that I hasten to add is that when a Bill is coming to this House, it is accompanied by a Certificate of Financial Implications. This means that Cabinet has studied the object of the Bill and commits itself to that extent.

Therefore, if we are to create the financial implication that we do not know on the Floor of Parliament and it is a loss, then it is another matter. I thank you. 

MR RUKUTANA: I was still on the Floor. Madam Chairperson, I do not want to tie the hands of the committee but as you rightly proposed, it is possible for us to amend the preamble and cater for what is being proposed. 

We could formulate an amendment to accommodate matters proposed in the proposed amendment and then we shall be home and dry. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, can we stand over this matter and arrange to get the proposals done so that we are sure about what we are doing? We need to do something.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the procedural issue I am raising is that, if I am giving my child a property, the consideration will be zero and this means the percentage is 100 multiply by zero is zero. 

I do not know what the worry is. There are considerations, for example, when you say, “My father gave me land” and the value for free land is zero, I am sure the tax authorities will multiply by zero. (Interjections) I will give you a very good example. You cannot value a gift because the gift is equal to zero.

Why am I raising this? In 1992, one old man gave me a property but I had to fight with the Uganda Land Commission when they wanted to put a value to it. I said that the property was a gift and I fought until the end and it was not taxed. What is the problem? Supposing my son pays me money before I give him the House, then he must pay transfer fees. 

We must also be very careful that if it is a gift between spouses or from parent to children, including adopted children, then that will be a gift and it should be exempted. But if my son is buying – like sometimes there are old men who say that they should be fed until they die. If you feed him, you must cost that and charge it as a value.

Madam Chairperson, I would like to propose that we say, “It should be only in respect of a gift” Failure to do that, where there is a value, it should attract stamp duty - (Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: I am afraid that the committee was being sentimental when it came up with this amendment. If the object of the Bill is to value – we are trying to jumble up many issues into this amendment and we should take heed of hon. Mwiru’s proposal and recommendation to this House.

The object, as captured in the memorandum sometimes could be referred to as the law of title.  

The issue that I am raising is that we are trying to put many things in this Bill and we are losing the gist as to why we have this amendment.

If, indeed, it is to maximise revenue collection, then let us be sincere. Like this, we end up creating loopholes that would defeat the gist and purpose of the amendment of the committee. 

I, therefore, pray that the committee be sincere with us. We can have this information somewhere but not under this legal regime that they are trying to –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I had proposed that we stand over this particular matter and reflect on it. We go and examine the rules and see how it can be done or whether it can be done. But I do not know whether we cannot go to the 1.5 - do we still have a problem with that.

Clause 2 

MR OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Clause 2 amendment of schedule 2 in paragraph (b) substitute for “two per cent” the figure “1.5 per cent.” 
The justification; one, tax should be incremental and progressive. The 100 percent increment is too high and the analysis from the Parliamentary Budget Office indicates that GDP growth will decline by 0.2 percent relative to the current projection. The household consumption will decline by 1.8 percent leading to a decline in employment by 0.5 per cent.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have looked at the justification of the committee, specifically the advice of the Parliamentary Budget Office. The last time I attempted Mathematics was in 1987 and I got a seven. I am not very good at Mathematics but this evening I will use my limited knowledge of Mathematics. The argument of the Budget Office is the following:
“If you increase by one percentage point, you have the following negative effects:
    1. A decline of the GDP by 0.2 per cent;
    2. A decline of consumption by 1.8; 
    3. A decline of employment by 0.5” 

My limited mathematics only indicates one thing, that if you increase by 0.5 per cent, you still have negative effects that are the following: A decline of the GDP by 0.1 percent; 0.2 divided by 2 is 0.1 percent; you will also have a decline of consumption by 0.9 percent. 1.8 percent divide by 2 is 0.9 percent; and you will have a decline in employment. Put positively, you will have an increase in unemployment by 0.25 per cent.

So, whichever way we go, we are still going to negatively impact on the economy.

So, honourable minister, are these negative impacts of the economy desirable? For the taxes you are going to raise, will they sufficiently mitigate this negative impact on the economy?

MR KAKOOZA: Chairperson of the committee, when we were in the committee, when did we change to come to one per cent? When you look at this law, it is of 2014, now these people are saying we go to two per cent. We said no. When you do the situational analysis on what is happening and what was collected last time, what was the impact? We found out that two percent is at a higher side.

Also, you look at the other side of the coin. Anybody in the exchange of property, any Ugandan must have a contribution to the development of this economy. We said we take a win-win situation of adding 0.5 - (Interjection) - let me finish my point. Two per cent is too high. When you stay at one percent and you have a projection of Shs 6 billion do not think it is a simple thing in the budget. It is not; you cannot want Shs 9 billion and you go away saying that you do not want to tax people.

There was some argument somebody brought on the Floor that because we were going undervalue, you cannot sell fish and fear flies. No one has ever wanted to pay taxes. If you are making a law and a policy, you have to expect anything but your focus should be on what you want to do.

That is why the committee said no. The best way forward was to move to 1.5 by adding 0.5. We collect that Shs 6 billion; may be a research can be done to gauge its effectiveness rather than saying no to the proposal. This is how we came up with 0.5.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Actually what hon. Kakooza is saying is that whenever there is inefficiency by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and they propose a figure, we must accept something. This takes me to the proposal that this clause has a relationship with the one we have just deferred for one reason. I said here before that if we are to go to any percentage when everybody is paying, personally, I would have no problem.

When we talk about tax exemptions, how many people in Kamuli have benefited or in Jinja? The law comes for the common people yet when we put the tax, the way we intend to do, it will affect everybody.

It is my humble submission that this clause we are dealing with has a relationship with the one we have just deferred because to me, even if we are to increase then everybody should pay but the people who are moving this amendment know that they close the window for themselves. At the end of the day they are escaping in that other exemption.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us defer the entire matter and have time to think about both the increments and also the structure of the first proposal.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, what I would like to bring, research has been done that in Uganda, every year, Shs 1.5 trillion is lost in exemptions. This was done by Oxfam and the World Bank. I am sure the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development knows about it.

If we only plugged the exemption loophole, the Shs 6 billion we are talking about is just peanuts. You know hon. Kakooza is a consultant for taxation on the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development but of course, he does his consultation in a negative direction. This is because if somebody has raised GDP, the moment GDP goes down and consumption goes down, that means VAT will go down because the consumption of goods with VAT will go down. If you did not know this, when consumption goes down, then goods that are consumed with tax on them will go down.

That is why we would have advised that since the consumption was going to go down we do not need to overtax people, we need to leave them some money so that they can consume and taxes are collected. 

With that in mind, hon. Kakooza, I would advise that with effect from tomorrow, you come and we train you before you come to speak here.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let me invite the minister to move a motion for the House to resume.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed and the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Stamp Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2016” and deferred it for further consultation.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

6.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we laid a request by Government to borrow $200 million from the East Africa and South African Trade and Development Bank for fiscal purposes and there was a mix in the resolution and in the Hansard. I am requesting to resubmit it so that the Hansard can capture the right record. I beg to submit.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, the minister needs to read what he has laid. He has not indicated the date.

THE SPEAKER: What is the one we are changing from what you presented before? What is the structure of what you are saying, which is different from the other one you brought last time?

MR BAHATI: The current record in the Hansard is a request by Government to borrow $200 million for a revolving foreign exchange facility to stabilise the exchange rate.

Madam Speaker, thank you very much for allowing me to correct this record. The current resolution, which we laid was to authorize Government to borrow $200 million from the PTA bank for fiscal purposes. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: I think he is correcting the heading but the body remains the same.

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, even the purpose is not the same. The first one was to stabilise foreign exchange. This one is for fiscal purposes. The purpose is different. I do not know how you initiated the loan. 

My understanding on how loans are initiated, they are for different purposes and the object is different. I do not know how my good friend found it convenient just to type and change casually like that.

MR BAHATI: Can I make this clarification? I hope it will help Members. We brought here a loan request from the PTA bank and Parliament resolved that that purpose was not the right one in its wisdom. 

We have a new purpose but we are borrowing from the same bank and the same figure.  That is what we are requesting Parliament to authorise and that is what I have laid, Madam Speaker.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thought the minister was being mean with his explanation because we needed further elucidation.

In the first place, you say you are borrowing from the same source and the same amount of money - $200 million. Whereas the original request was for the stabilisation of the foreign exchange, now, it is for fiscal policy; in other words taxation. What you spend and what you gain; that is basically fiscal.

Madam Speaker, can we be assisted, as Parliament, under what rule is the minister proceeding? And there is a Parliament’s position; the same Ninth Parliament rejected the same. He is now circumventing that resolution by presenting it as if it is a novel request and yet it is the same? It is like changing the bottle but you have the same old wine. 

Madam Speaker, is the minister really right to proceed giving us the same old wine but changing the bottles and he expects this Parliament to take it without any question?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I think we are confusing two things. This is a new loan. (Interjections) Listen. What happened, when we laid it here the other week, was that Parliament did not capture the right resolution. 

They have advised that we should put the right one. It is just a coincidence that we are getting from the same source and nothing stops us from borrowing from the same source but for different purposes.

This loan is already with the committee and they had invited us to discuss it but the purpose changed. It is only that it is PTA and the records of Parliament have not captured this resolution. We are putting the right resolution to Parliament.

MS KAABULE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The brief and resolution that was laid on the 3rd March is different from the one he is reading and that was what was referred to the committee. As far as we are concerned, what we have in the committee is the old one and that is what he is trying to withdrawal to put a new resolution.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, I believe we need to consider our Rules of Procedure, particularly rule 209. If the request before the committee is for intent and purposes similar to the one Parliament pronounce itself on, then the procedure adopted by the honourable minister violates our Rules of Procedure, because if we find that there is the same specific questions arising, then he should have moved under rule 209 and sought leave of this House to rescind its decision.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, this is a new request but different purpose and from the same bank. It has happened here many times. For example, we brought a request to help the Public Service institution from Africa Development Bank. We refused that request. 

However, subsequently, we have been borrowing from ADB for different purpose. Therefore, this is a different purpose and has nothing to do with foreign exchange. It is about supporting the budget, which is a fiscal purpose. It has already been laid in the House and I am correcting the record.
	
THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, it seems you do not want the committee to proceed with the other one which you sent, but want them to proceed with this one. That means you might have to withdraw what you sent so that you can put in this one for the committee’s consideration. This is because what they have is not what you need.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we laid the correct resolution on the 3 March 2016 but the request which was sent to the committee is the old one. This afternoon, I was advised by the Clerk that the right thing is to submit the exact one so that they capture it. This request to borrow $200 million from the PTA Bank for fiscal purposes was submitted here and referred to the committee. However, the documentation which is there is for the old one. Therefore, Madam Speaker, can I beg to withdraw the old one and replace it with the new one? I beg to move.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, the way the minister is proceeding imputes a negative intention on the Office of the Speaker and that of the Clerk – that our people captured wrong information. To the best of my knowledge, the Office of the Speaker and that of the Clerk always capture the right information based on the Hansard. Therefore, it is proper that he proceeds properly. 

Hansard is the true record of Parliament and it is a very serious matter for him to impute that it was captured in error. The minister may need to reconsider his position.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, as you have instructed me, I have withdrawn the old request and substituted it with the request that I have laid at the Table. (Interjections) I would also like to apologise for any mix or wrong impression that could have been created. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: That means the committee will discontinue work on the other document and commence on this one.

Honourable members, we have a number of Bills to do but we also have the policy statements to complete. Therefore, we shall adjourn the plenary until next Thursday. Use these remaining days to finish the policy statements and write your reports. When we come back, we will start with the Bills and receive the reports from the committees. House adjourned until Thursday next week.

(The House rose at 6.20 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 14 April 2016 at 2.00 p.m.)
