Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.




Tuesday, 30 April 2019

Parliament met at 2.02 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. We now have a report from the Committee on Health ready as the final report on the ministerial policy statements and budget estimates. That will be the final one on the last day. Therefore, we have not done too badly. The chairperson of the Committee on Health, if you are here, we have not done too badly. We should be able to finish with this and conclude.

Honourable members, you heard of the accident that happened to two of our colleagues; hon. Anthony Akol got a bad accident coming from Gulu around Kiryandongo and hon. Michael Tusiime. However, by God’s grace they are not badly off and are out of danger. We continue to pray for them.

Honourable members, you are also aware that a few days back, we received the Speaker of Parliament back to this building – (Applause.) We would like to thank you for your prayers and for the Mercy of God to have given her this recovery that has enabled her to come back and resume her activities as Speaker of Parliament.

We would like to thank you, for your prayers and spiritual support to her and the family that has given her strength to fight whatever was disturbing her and to come back in full force; knowing that the entire Parliament and country is praying for her. Thank you very much.

On behalf of the Parliament and staff, I take this opportunity to also - in this capacity representing the people’s representatives in this House - and on behalf of the people of this country, we would like to wish the Speaker a very speedy and total recovery; so that she can come back and do the thing she does best - helping with the activities of this House and chairing the proceedings of this House. We are delighted that she is back and at an appropriate time we will be giving her the necessary “thank yous” and support that she needs to give her full recovery.

Honourable members, we have now the next stage of the Budget. Today we will finalise with the reports from the sectoral committees and forward these matters to the budget committee. The same zeal with which you have handled the ministerial policy statements and proposals on the Budget estimates should be carried to what will be done in the budget committee.

Those of you, who are members of the budget committee please, look line by line, vote by vote and see what you can do to change the Budget to deal with what this country wants for next financial year. 

There are some items called “unfunded priorities”; when they are priorities they must be funded - (Applause) To say “unfunded priority” is a complete mix up of words that cannot be permitted by this House. How can it be a priority and it is not funded? It does not make sense to me; I do not know whether it makes sense to you that you can have priorities which are unfunded. Then why call it a priority at all.

Therefore, let us look at vote by vote and to those numbers with details and see if we can tilt this Budget to support those identified priorities, which will support the people of this country and make some changes.

Therefore, Members of the budget committee, we have a tight timeline. Let us try and stick to those timelines so that this House can have a debate on those issues. If you take us far towards the end, then we will have difficulties. It will again be like the reports of the committees on the ministerial policy statements and Budget estimates; there will be no time for us to debate. However, if the Committee on Budget concludes early enough, then we will have sufficient time to have discussions about this thing.

The happiness I would like to report to the House is that the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development has finished with all the revenue Bills and they are on the Order Paper today. If we could finish with all of them, then we will leave everything now waiting for the budget committee to come back. And when it comes back, we will be able to do the good thing that we should do.

Secondly we still have Bills that are urgent that we should also handle. We had set ourselves a target of doing at least 20 Bills in this session; 20 Bills excluding the revenue Bills and annual Bills that we do for purposes of financing the Budget. We wanted to at least finish 20 Bills this sitting of Parliament.

Of course we have those that are already in the House; those that have been returned by the President - like the Sugar Bill and so forth; it is on the Order Paper today. We will see how to proceed with that matter.

However, by and large, let us see if we can gear up and do more Bills. We will be very delighted with our report when we go to the State of the Nation Address and we will be looking very good. This time the people of Uganda will say, ”Yes, they have done it,” and we will all be happy that we will have achieved a lot for this country.

In the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation of Uganda Sugarcane Growers Association from Busoga, Buganda and Bunyoro sub-regions –(Applause)– they have come to observe the proceedings of the House this afternoon. We also have - Order!

We also have a delegation from Kityerera Sugarcane Growers from Bunya South Constituency, Mayuge District –(Applause)– represented by hon. Robert Ntende and hon. Julie Mukoda. They are here to observe the proceedings; please join me in welcoming them.

Honourable members, there are Members who had some urgent issues to raise; I could deal with them now and then we see - I will start with hon. Luttamaguzi. 

2.12
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the terrible state of Nakaseke main Hospital. The hospital has had no water for the last four weeks and as a result, the operation theatre is to be closed this Friday. Mothers delivering from Nakaseke Main Hospital are forced to carry their own water if they are to operate on them. 

The x-ray machine also broke down a long time ago and ultra-sound services are no more yet the facility is a referral and the hospital has no substantive radiographer. Lastly, Nakasekke Main Hospital also has only one anaesthetic officer who cannot work 24/7 yet this referral hospital covers almost seven districts.

My prayer is that Government intervenes quickly such that they repair the water pump that has broken down for the people to have water services and they should also repair the x-ray machine. Thank you.

2.14
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Luttamaguzi. I visited Nakasekke Hospital on the 14th day of April this year and also witnessed the need. I informed the Minister of Health about it. I pledge to follow-up on this issue so that we can save our people there.

2.15
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I rise on a matter of national importance. As the country anticipated to receive rains, it did happen in Teso on the 17th of this month.

Unfortunately, it came with very strong winds and de-roofed one of our traditional schools with a population of 1,600 pupils. A whole classroom block, housing primary 5 and 4, with 470 pupils, was blown off.

As I speak those pupils study under mango trees and once it rains studies don’t go on. 

I pray that Government should quickly organise to make sure that this block is reroofed - we are lucky now that they are breaking off. However, Government should not delay to repair because when the term begins, they have nowhere to study from. Thank you. 

2.16
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, the first Deputy Prime Minister, who is the Leader of Government Business, was on this Floor to explain the challenge that we face, as Government and the people of Uganda, emanating from erratic weather and/or rainfalls. We register such incidents almost on a daily basis.

This morning, the Prime Minister’s Office held a meeting to come up with modalities on how we can roll out rapid short term and long term responses from Government.

We are working with the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Ministry of Health, whose institutions suffer majorly, to ensure we improvise, in terms of first aid, so that our children do not continue to suffer.

Right now I cannot promise the date that we will be able to secure some building material. What I can say is that we are registering the incidences so that we can apportion relevant budget to procure materials for that purpose.

Therefore, I will make sure that the Soroti incident is also taken care of. Probably by the time our children go back to school we would have done something. Thank you.

2.18
MS WINNIE KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise in regard to a matter that concerns wildlife with the neighbouring communities. Those of us who live close to the national parks have had our own share of the problems that are associated with this neighbourhood.

Last year, as the House may be aware, many of our people living close to Queen Elizabeth National Park, precisely in Hamukungu and Katwe, were roughed up because animals died and they were suspected to have killed them; it was so sad.

On Wednesday, we woke up to a sad moment when an elephant moved from the park to the communities and seriously injured two people who were in their own garden, some distance way from the national park but who later on died.

When we passed the Wildlife Bill, our assumption was that our people would be helped when such calamities befall them and that was part of the object of the Bill.

Mr Speaker, we continue to ask when this Bill will be turned into a law so that our people who encounter such disasters - leave alone the so many acreages of land that have been destroyed by the animals but now the lives of the people who died - will be helped.

Our prayer is that the Bill gets signed so that victims of such incidences can be compensated, helped and possibly even when people porch, as the law was meant to provide, can also be held culpable.

As much as NEMA went there, little was made in terms of contribution and of course they would not have saved lives. People have been praying that Government gets a way of erecting electric fences to stop animals from unnecessarily straying into the communities to harm the population that neighbours the national parks. 

Mr Speaker, that is the situation and as I said, we pray that the head of state signs the Bill into law to help people who live closer to the national parks. Thank you.

2.20
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I will remind the President to assent to the Bill.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Talking about assenting to Bills, you remember the Human Rights Enforcement Bill that we passed at the beginning of the year? The good news is that the President has assented to it. Maybe you could activate some of the provisions of those ones and handle those things in the meantime. 

The Human Rights Enforcement Bill has been signed into law by the President. Congratulations, hon. Kamateeka for championing this. The Government Chief Whip has also undertaken to remind His Excellency to sign the Wildlife Bill into law so that its provisions can be activated to assist the affected people. Thank you.

2.22
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent national importance concerning the budgeting process. Mr Speaker, I have two letters one dated 3 April 2019 addressed to the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development by the Chairperson LCV Moyo District. He states that Moyo District Local Government will not pass the budget for Obongi District and Moyo District if funds which were previously allocated to vote 539- the vote for Moyo District under the project called Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development (USMID) are not returned.

The vote was relocated from vote 539 to vote 629 for Obongi District under the instruction of the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees and Permanent Secretary (PS) on grounds that USMID was meant for refugee hosting districts. With the creation of Obongi District, Palorinya refuge settlement which used to be in Moyo District now falls under Obongi District. The letters of the minister and PS of Lands, and Office of the Prime Minister (OPM) are here to the PS of Finance and Secretary to the Treasury. To that effect, an amount of Shs3.6 billion for USMID 2 was reallocated from vote 539 of Moyo to vote 629.

However, the chairman is saying that this money should be taken back to Moyo District and if it is not done, they are not going to approve the budget for Financial Year 2019/2020 for Obongi District.

Mr Speaker, this seems to be coming to pass because with me here is a letter calling for the district council to approve the budget as required by law and on the Order Paper Obongi District is missing. This means the threat of the Chairperson LCV is real. They are not going to lay and pass the budget for Obongi District yet the Central Government has done its part in preparation for the beginning of the district since Obongi was created on the 3rd September 2015.

The Ministry of Finance gave a vote, IPF, instructed the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) to get staff and they have been recruited and a budget made.

Now, what happens if the budget for Obongi District is not laid or if it is not passed by Moyo District? How will the district begin? 

I have written to the Speaker, the Ministers for Refugees Affairs, Local Government, Permanent Secretary Local Government, Lands and all of them have made one statement that according to the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, Section 20, there is reallocation of funds from vote to vote once the funds or the purpose for which money is allocated shifts to another place, Parliament or Government can reallocate.

Now, this is what the Government has done, it is within the law and the policy. However, here is a district local government saying, if you do not give the money to Moyo District even when the district no longer has refugees they will not pass the budget. What do we do?

The people of Obongi are worried because the district may not start without the budget. Mr Speaker, I lay at the Table these two letters one from the Chairman LCV and the other from the Clerk to Council calling people to go for the district council. As a district ex-officio of the council and Member of Parliament, I have also been invited to attend. I would like to put you in the know.

Our prayer here is that the Central Government should carry on the implementation of its policies properly to the end. So far, it is okay from the Central Government. It is the Central Government that created the districts and policies on how these districts are implemented and I see no problem from here.

Secondly, I request the Central Government to prevail on the leadership of Moyo District particularly on things that are managed under the Office of the Prime Minister.

There is another vote for a USMID project with an amount of Shs 10,113,000,000 supposed to be for refuge hosting districts put under Moyo District and yet the Minister of Refugee Affairs and the Permanent Secretary said there are no more refugees in Moyo but in Obongi. We have all the statistics of refugees in the whole of Uganda- this has already been done by the technical team.

Therefore, I pray that you help in the preparation of these two districts and you help Moyo to recover from the shock. Moyo should be given some special help. I pray, Mr Speaker. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is this a Local Government matter? Honourable members, you remember we passed here a district called Obongi with some sub counties in them, why is this happening?

2.29
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, this matter is multi-sectoral. It touches the Minister for Disaster Preparedness because it has refugee issues, Minister for Local Government and probably Ministry of Finance.  I would like to suggest that on Thursday this week at 10.00a.m. we have a meeting in the Office of the Prime Minister-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is the sub-county called Palorinya found? Where is that sub-county?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: To harmonize this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is that sub-county? It is a simple thing. Which district is it in?

2.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEATH (Primary HealthCare) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue that my colleague hon. Fungaroo is talking about is true and it is something that is within Moyo District. As we speak, Obongi is still part of Moyo but come July, it will become a district. What I can say is that before the coming of the current refugees, Moyo District was hosting refugees; they were in Palorinya and Lama.

The current refugees that came in Moyo are right now in Obongi County. However, they were previously in both West Moyo in a place called Lama and Obongi in Palorinya and the rest. The issue now is now that Obongi is becoming a district, the point which my colleague has been raising is that why should Moyo benefit or receive the funds, which are meant for refugee hosting districts?

Mr Speaker, the entry point for screening the refugees is at a sub county called Lefori which is in Moyo District. In addition, because of the present influx as of now, there are new entrants. OPM wrote a letter through the Minister of Refugees to open Lama which was previously for refugees to become a settlement for the refugees.

As we speak, demarcations were done and everything put in place. This means that as refugees enter in Lefori which is in West Moyo County, Moyo District, they are taken to Lama. This means, come 1st July and Obongi County becomes a district West Moyo County will still host refugees by the fact that the new entrants are being taken to Lama and the screening point is in Lefori.

The point my brother is raising is that we have been settling this issue at a district level such that Moyo is giving birth to Obongi but Moyo still remains the mother, therefore it should  nurture Obongi as child. There should be no division for these two districts. However, Palorinya – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wait. That is the question. Let us finish this. The issue is the other sub-county. Where is it? 

DR MORIKU: Palorinya Sub-county is under Obongi County. I am the Woman Member of Parliament for the entire district; both Obongi and West Moyo. I can choose to go to Obongi as the Woman Member of Parliament. 

What we are saying is that Parolinya is in Obongi County but it was previously Itula Sub-county. The recent administrative unit created a sub-county in Parolinya, which is not yet effective. Therefore, it will automatically still be under Obongi County. 
As you know, the problem is that the people of Parolinya do not want to be under Obongi District, which is not yet brought on your table. That is what I can say. 

As I conclude, I would like to say that the problem of Moyo District and Obongi is that we, the politicians, are the ones actually dividing and bringing uncalled-for conflict in the district. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when Obongi becomes a District on the 1st of July, it will be a refugee-hosting district on account of Lama Sub-county, which will remain in Moyo District. Moyo District will remain a refugee-hosting district. 

Let me try and summarise the issue before you come in, hon. Fungaroo, if I understand them at all. Lama Sub-county remains in Moyo District and Lama Sub-county will be hosting refugees. In other words, the two districts will be refugee-hosting districts. Is that the point? 

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, once more. I would like to help Members of Parliament understand this point. We, as the people of the soon-to-be district, Obongi District, have no problem with any district in Uganda hosting refugees and receiving money for hosting them, including Moyo. 

Our problem is only if Obongi is excluded. When the refugees – I am driving the point home. That is where the problem is. Lama is not a sub-county and yet it was a refugee settlement. There are no refugees in Lama presently. 

Mr Speaker, Uganda’s reputation as a good refugee-hosting district was tarnished because of falsifying data. We had a review of the number of refugees in this country and we do not want to go to that direction. The data is here and I have it. 

IPF means Indicative Planning Figures. You plan for the district now so that it takes shape on the 1st of July. You do not begin planning for it in July. That is why this document I am holding is from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the OPM on the indicative planning figures. The one for Obongi reads zero – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think we have understood the issue. The issue is that there are going to be two districts –

MR FUNGAROO: That is a lie, Mr Speaker. Send people there. There are no refugees in Lama. If you want to give money to Lama tomorrow, then go ahead. I accept. However, give Obongi what belongs to them. Give whatever you want to give to Moyo District but the fact is, give Obongi what belongs to them. 

2.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank hon. Fungaroo for raising the issue. This matter has arisen because there is a project called USMID which is Uganda Support – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! That includes the member from Moyo District. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Speaker, this matter has come up because there is a project called Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development, which we passed here in Parliament. It is housed in the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. 

We did complete the first phase and we are now beginning the second one. It so happens that for the second phase, there is a window for supporting the districts that are hosting refugees. We have a number of districts included in this programme, one of which is Moyo District. It is true that as of now, the refugee camp is located in Obongi County, which effective 1st of July, will become Obongi District. 

About two weeks ago, we had a meeting of the refugee-hosting districts in Jinja and hon. Fungaroo and the other leaders from the various districts attended. I presided over the meeting and assured hon. Fungaroo that Obongi District will receive support for this programme. His district chairperson and the other leaders were present. 

I have also seen correspondences where the Office of the Prime Minister has earmarked another area, now in West Moyo County, to be a refugee-hosting community. The assurance we have given the people of Moyo and Obongi is that if there are refugees in the remaining parts of Moyo, then they will also participate in these programme. Hence, both Obongi and Moyo will benefit. 

It is the same situation we have with Arua District because Arua is also one of the districts. On the 1st of July, Madi-Okollo District will be created and it hosts the majority of the refugees; even Rhino Camp is in that county. The remaining part of Arua also has 20 per cent of the refugees; so Madi-Okollo District as well as Arua will benefit. 

Therefore, I would like to urge my brother and repeat the assurance I gave him that Obongi District, on the 1st of July, will benefit from the USMID resources, as a refugee-hosting district. I thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Local Government, do you have a comment on this one of passing or refusing to pass the budget for Obongi District?

2.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Jenipher Namuyangu): Mr Speaker, I would not expect a mid-wife to kill a baby and so I do not expect the local government leaders of Moyo to stifle Obongi. 

Like the Government Chief Whip – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In this case, it is actually not a midwife; it is a mother. 

MS NAMUYANGU: Mr Speaker, we are going to have a meeting and interface with the leaders of Moyo to ensure that we have our baby (Obongi) catered for. After all, this is the same area; so we need to support each other but we shall also involve other sectors to ensure that the budget is approved for both Obongi and Moyo. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. These urgent matters are becoming very complicated. (Laughter)

2.42
MS RUKIYA CHEKAMONDO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Mr Speaker, I was in the constituency last weekend and I wish to report that in the history of this country, Kapchorwa and Sebei in general have never experienced dry spell sunshine up to April. The first rains were received on the 25th of this month, yet usually by the 25th of April we would have Irish potatoes ready.

Last season our area was hit by a dry spell till last week. Matooke, which had been one of the foods helping the people of Kapchorwa was –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the urgent matter?

MS CHEKAMONDO: The urgent matter is that right now people do not have food. It is my prayer that Government finds a solution to rescue the people of Kapchorwa and Sebei sub region in general. Thank you.

2.43
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I will instruct the responsible commissioner to move to Kapchorwa and interact with the leaders so that we find a solution for our people.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Go to the Order Paper, Clerk. Yes, point of procedure.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On Tuesday last week I raised a very important matter on this Floor and you guided that the Minister of Internal Affairs should respond accordingly. The matter was about Uganda Prisons planting mark stones two kilometres inside Agago District. Uganda Prisons, through Amita Prisons, illegally entered two kilometres into my district, two weeks ago.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In which district is Amita?

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Amita is in Abim District and we know that the boundary of Abim District and Amita ends at River Agago. However, Uganda Prisons officials from Kampala went and planted mark stones two kilometres inside my district.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please, help me here. You already raised the matter and we are waiting for a response from the minister. Is there a response?

2.45
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): I request that I check on the responsible minister to find out whether there is a statement because I am not seeing him in the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If that statement comes in, we will alter the Order Paper to accommodate it. However, if it is not there, it has to be made and presented here on Thursday.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE NATIONAL COFFEE BILL, 2018

2.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The National Coffee Bill, 2018” be read for the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it accompanied by the necessary documentation?

MR BAHATI: It is accompanied by the certificate of financial implications.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the Bill stands referred to the appropriate Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to handle expeditiously within 45 days and report on what Parliament should do.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON HEALTH ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Committee chairperson, you have five minutes.

2.48
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Michael Bukenya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am here to present the Report of the Committee on Health on the health sector ministerial policy statements and budget estimates for financial year 2019/2020, in accordance with the Constitution, the Public Finance Management Act and the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

In view of the fact that I have five minutes, I am going to go straight to the unfunded activities and the figures.

Mr Speaker, the new specialised hospital at Mulago requires a wage of Shs 11.4 billion. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development created Votes for Kawempe, Kiruddu and Entebbe hospitals. However, for Kawempe they offered only drugs and emergency supplies budget of Shs 1.5 billion, which we think is inadequate, given the shortages we have been experiencing. They require another Shs 4.5 billion.

Wage budget for Kawempe to fill the Public Service structure requires an extra Shs 14.5 billion – the details are in the text. Kiruddu Hospital, where they do dialysis, requires an extra Shs 5 billion to run the medicines and supplies for dialysis at a subsidised rate.

There is a table that shows the staffing levels for the critical cadres in the ministry and there is lack of availability of some of those cadres. Therefore, we require money for training to the tune of Shs 10 billion.

Mr Speaker, regional referral hospitals outside Kampala and Wakiso have failed to attract specialists because of the hard-to-live conditions. Therefore, we recommended an extra Shs 5 billion to cater for them.

To equalise the specialists in Government, the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Education and Sports will require an extra Shs 35 billion.

Interns’ allowances and those for senior health officers require a total of Shs 13 billion. 

Despite the fact that the ministry is emphasising promotion and prevention of non-communicable diseases and other diseases, those departments are allocated only Shs 150 million for the whole year. We recommend an extra allocation of Shs 7 billion.

Mr Speaker, this Parliament adopted a motion to specifically fund the prevention and management of kidney disease to a tune of Shs 7.6 billion. High blood pressure is one of the leading causes of maternal mortality and the committee recommends that National Medical Stores be added an extra Shs 10 billion to cater for drugs that manage high blood pressure.

The Government of Uganda committed to fund reproductive health supplies during an international meeting to a tune of $5 million but it has not been fulfilled.

There are 132 subcounties without any health facilities and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has not provided money, despite the fact that this is a manifesto commitment and the estimate is Shs 145 billion.

Mr Speaker, there is a Government’s commitment of constructing health centre IVs in constituencies, which require Shs 102 billion, which is not available.

Half of the districts in Uganda do not have district health officers because the position is paid less than the people they supervise and so, they require extra Shs 2.2 billion to achieve that.

The Ministry of Health no longer does supervision in regional referrals and district hospitals because when government was making cuts, they cut the travel cost. We require an extra Shs 10 billion for that.

Mr Speaker, regional referral hospitals also do not have radiological diagnostic machines in terms of CTs, x-rays and MRI. We require an extra Shs 70 billion. 

Mr Speaker, maintenance of equipment is not funded. When the equipment break down, there are problems. Uganda Heart Institute has been here several times – they were given land and they wanted to construct a centre of excellence at a cost of Shs 262 billion.

There are still drug and supply shortages in all public facilities. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development allocated only extra Shs 50 billion to procure ARVS but other drugs require an extra Shs 50 billion.

Mr Speaker, laboratory supplies in Government facilities are funded by Shs 3 billion. That is why when you go to these facilities, you do not find reagents and you are sent to the nearest laboratories or clinic and so, we require extra money for that.

Health Service Commission has failed to recruit. As a result, there is unspent wage in most of the health sector facilities right from the centre and we require money for recruitment.

Mr Speaker, Uganda Red Cross signed a Memorandum of Understanding with the Ministry of Health this financial year which is running and Parliament offered them Shs 1 billion to do mobilisation. The availability of blood has not been questioned. It is only the issue of reagents to test the blood. Therefore, to enhance their capacity to mobilise, we recommend that they are given Shs 2.2 billion.

When we were passing the promissory notes, hon. Bahati promised to allocate Shs 35 billion required for the completion of the Mulago Super Specialised Hospital, which was not reflected anywhere in the statement. We, therefore, recommend that he makes fulfilment of his promise.

Entebbe was upgraded to a Regional Referral Hospital but no money has been allocated to that vote.

Uganda Virus Research Institute (UVRI) has challenges to the tune of Shs 2.6 billion.
All regional referral hospitals are undertaking capital development projects to construct accommodation for health workers and they have been doing this for a long time. However, every year, they are allocated Shs 20 billion, which they share amongst the 17 hospitals. They have already signed contracts but the projects are not going to be completed in the foreseeable future. We thought if we could raise another 70 billion so that it is done in one year.

Mr Speaker, we do not have emergency medical ambulance service system in the country. This will require an annual Shs 68 billion, every year, for the next four years, in order to establish that system. Busolwe and Kawolo hospitals were funded under the same project but the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Government have failed to fulfil the commitment of Shs 6 billion, making donors have second thought of abandoning the project, if Government does not commit to pay the Shs 6 billion.

The Government is undertaking a lot of capital development projects in the sector but there is minimal supervision. We, therefore, recommend that Shs 6 billion for the constituency health assembly be reinstated.

As you are aware in this running financial year, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development made a one allocation of Shs 1.4 billion to handle Nodding Syndrome; we thought this would continue for the next five years, as we rehabilitate the victims. Unfortunately, there was no allocation to that effect and we recommend that this money is found for continuity up to when we have sorted the problem.

Mr Speaker, the unfunded activities give us a total of Shs 1.143 trillion. I can now go to the final page which is the figures of the different votes. 

 a) Vote 014: Ministry of Health 
 Recurrent expenditure - Shs 91,926,652,000
 Development expenditure - Shs 1,105,388,360,000
 Total - 1,197,315,012,000

b) Vote 107: Uganda Aids Commission 
Recurrent expenditure - Shs 6,731,122,000
Development expenditure - Shs 127,809,000
Total – Shs 6,858,931,000

c) Vote 114: Uganda Cancer Institute 
Recurrent expenditure - Shs 19,674,224,000
Development expenditure - Shs 71,217,477,000
Total – Shs 90,891,701,000 

d) Vote 115: Uganda Heart Institute 
Recurrent expenditure - Shs 19,679,410,000
Development expenditure - Shs 4,650,000,000
Total – Shs 24,329,410,000

e) Vote 116: National Medical Stores
Recurrent expenditure - Shs 396,172,205,000
Development expenditure  0

f) Vote 122: Kampala Capital City Authority  
Recurrent expenditure - Shs 10,730,000,000
Development – Shs 940,000,000
Total – Shs 11,670,000,000

g) Vote 134: Health Service Commission 
Recurrent expenditure – Shs 6,807,270,000
Development expenditure - Shs 263,400,000
Total – Shs 7,070,670,000

h) Vote 152: Uganda Blood Transfusion Services 
Recurrent expenditure – Shs 16,198,641,000
Development expenditure - Shs 2,870,000,000
Total - Shs 19,068,641,000

i) Vote 161:	Mulago Hospital Complex
Recurrent - Shs 58,553,663,000
Development	Shs 6,020,000,000
Total		Shs 64,573,663,000

j) Vote 162:	Butabika Hospital 	
Recurrent		Shs 13,007,192,000
Development	Shs 8,308,141,000
Total		Shs 21,315,333,000

k) Vote 163:	Arua Regional Referral Hospital 
Recurrent		Shs 7,959,569,000
Development	Shs 1,060,000,000
Total		Shs 9,019,569,000

l) Vote 164:	Fort Portal Regional Referral Hospital	
Recurrent		Shs 8,814,178,000
Development	Shs 1,060,000,000
Total		Shs 9,874,178,000

m) Vote 165:	Gulu Regional Referral Hospital 
Recurrent		Shs 8,140,106,000
Development	Shs 1,488,000,000
Total		Shs 9,628,106,000

n) Vote 166:	Hoima Regional Referral Hospital
Recurrent		Shs 8,429,836,000
Development	Shs 1,060,000,000
Total		Shs 9,489,836,000

o) Vote 167:	Jinja Regional Referral Hospital
Recurrent		Shs 10,612,090,000
Development	Shs 1,488,000,000
Total		Shs 12,100,090,000

p) Vote 168:	Kabale Regional Referral Hospital
Recurrent		Shs 7,003,726,000
Development	Shs 1,488,000,000 
Total		Shs 8,491,726,000

q) Vote 169:	Masaka Regional Referral Hospital
Recurrent		Shs 7,241,335,000
Development	Shs 2,058,000,000
Total		Shs 9,299,335,000

r) Vote 170:	Mbale Regional Referral Hospital
Recurrent		Shs 11,229,995,000
Development	Shs 3,058,000,000
Total		Shs 14,287,995,000

s) Vote 171:	Soroti Regional Referral Hospital
Recurrent		Shs 7,090,710,000
Development	Shs 1,488,000,000
Total		Shs 8,578,710,000

t) Vote 172:	Lira Regional Referral Hospital
Recurrent		Shs 7,995,875,000
Development	Shs 1,488,000,000
Total		Shs 9,483,875,000

u) Vote 173:	Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital
Recurrent		Shs 9,936,265,000
Development	Shs 1,987,800,000
Total		Shs 11,924,065,000

v) Vote 174:	Mubende Regional referral Hospital
Recurrent		Shs 6,999,719,000
Development	Shs 1,060,000,000
Total		Shs 8,059,719,000

w) Vote 175:	Moroto Regional Referral Hospital
Recurrent		Shs 5,750,343,000
Development	Shs 1,488,000,000
Total		Shs 7,238,343,000

x) Vote 176:	Naguru National Referral Hospital
Recurrent		Shs 7,920,642,000
Development	Shs 1,055,562,000
Total		Shs 8,976,204,000

y) Vote 177:	Kiruddu National Referral Hospital
Recurrent		Shs 8,730,000,000
Development	Nil
Total		Shs 8,730,000,000

z) Vote 178:	Kawempe National Referral Hospital 
Recurrent		Shs  8,657,000,000
Development	Nil
Total		Shs 8,657,000,000

aa) Vote 179:	Entebbe Regional Referral Hospital
Recurrent		Shs  2,577,618,000
Development	Nil
Total		Shs 2,577,618,000	

bb) Vote 180:	Mulago Specialised Women and Neonatal Hospital
Recurrent		Shs 11,778,000,000
Development	Nil
Total		Shs 11,778,000,000

cc) Vote 304: Uganda Virus Research Institute
Recurrent - Shs 6,805,128,000
Development	Shs 2,450,000,000
Total		Shs 9,255,128,000

dd) Vote 501-850: Local Governments
Recurrent		Shs 465,810,000,000 
Development	Shs 54,900,000,000 
Total		Shs 520,710,000,000	

Total Sector Allocation 
Recurrent expenditure - Shs 1,258,962,524,000
Development expenditure - Shs 1,278,462,549,000

Mr Speaker, before I conclude, I beg to lay a copy of the minutes of the meetings and an original signed copy of the report. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes and the original text of the report. Thank you. 

DR BUKENYA: Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson. Honourable members, the question that I propose for your debate is that the Report of the Committee on Health, on the ministerial policy statements and budget estimates for Financial Year 2019/ 2020 for the health sector be adopted. Yes, point of procedure.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The day we considered the matter concerning the Lubowa Hospital, the Minister for Health made a comprehensive report on the state of health on the country and the matters that arose were referred to the Committee on Health.

Before we proceed to debate this report, we would be interested in hearing the committee’s responses particularly on the actions they have picked on critical issues the minister raised on the state of health in this country first.

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, I have had a chance of looking at this report and indeed this House has been waiting for this report; but it does not have enough signatures. Is it procedurally right if the signatures of the Members do not meet the required numbers as per the rules? I rest my case. Maybe it has a minority report and –(Interruption)

DR BUKENYA: Mr Speaker, before we -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the committee has 22 Members and the Members who have signed are 10. I do not know whether I did mathematics -

MR SSEWUNGU: I withdraw the statement, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the matter that was raised by hon. Ssewungu is not sustainable. He must have had a problem with his arithmetic having studied long time ago. (Laughter) So, he cannot understand what number would be a third of 22. Certainly the figure 10 would be more than a third of 22. However, sometimes these things happen because of memory lapses but we have to accept them as part of human nature.

Anyhow, honourable members, as we have been saying, today is the last day when we do these things. I do not know whether this issue substantially affects my transmission of this particular numbers to the Budget Committee because if it does not, I will transmit this whole thing to the Budget Committee so that they start working today for us to catch up with what we have, to be able to finish these things.

However, if it affects the budget - and maybe the chairperson would say one or two things – but if it does not affect the numbers that we have dealt with, it should be sent to the Budget Committee today by law. 

Therefore, honourable members, I am seeking your indulgence if you could allow me to finalise with this last report from the sectoral committee so that I can transmit it to the Budget Committee to enable it look at the numbers again and take a decision.

Would that be okay? Can I put the questions? Yes, that is what I am talking about: does it affect the numbers in the budget? If they do not, can I transmit this to the Budget Committee and then we deal with these matters at an appropriate time?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Speaker, there are critical areas that were raised by the minister. For instance, she said that Mulago Hospital in its current state does not have sufficient funding particularly to complete rehabilitation. There are many other areas she cited; it is because I have not carried the report but at least everybody was here. We had hoped that the committee was going to synthesise - because it was very detailed and thorough - and come up with those critical areas that would inform the budgeting process.

Therefore, if we proceed to forward this matter to the Budget Committee and they proceed without us at least hearing that these issues have been dealt with - we would like to at least hear from the chairperson -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought the chairperson read a long list of proposed reallocations to take care of the gaps that have been previously identified. Isn’t that what you did? What page is it?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, let us look at - what page is it? Did you propose any reallocation?

DR BUKENYA: Mr Speaker, for the record the committee made a report on that and it was even uploaded but the time for debate was on, it was not available but it is on business waiting. Anyway, what the committee did, on the unfunded activities, was to list all the issues that the minister mentioned and they are part of the –(Interjection)– yes, because we do not have the money. 

It is true, the report wasn’t debated but the ministerial policy statements did not cater for those allocations the minister mentioned. So, we listed them here as unfunded activities. They are the ones constituting the bigger portion of the Shs 1.143 trillion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Therefore, have you not proposed any reallocations?

DR BUKENYA: Well, we have nowhere to reallocate because we are already squeezed and so we thought Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development would find a way of getting us this money.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What page is that, chairperson? Is it on page 48?

DR BUKENYA: Yes, it is on pages 47 to 48.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the numbers are there. The unfunded items are there. Can we send these figures that are approved to the Budget Committee to see if they can find the money because that is what we are trying to do here? We cannot find the money here now. However, the Budget Committee can look globally and see if there are areas they can deal with to generate numbers that can accommodate these priorities that do not seem to have monies allocated to them. Can we deal with it that way? Can I put the question? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, I put the question that the Report of the Committee on Health on the ministerial policy statements and the budget estimates of financial year 2019/2020 for the health sector be adopted?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. We have been able to achieve what the law requires of us to finalise with the discussion on the reports of the committees under Rule 148 (2) of the Rules of Procedure. We now require that these matters be referred to the Budget Committee. 

Under that same rule, I now accordingly instruct the Clerk to Parliament, to extract those numbers and everything that has been passed as recommendations from the sectoral committees and forward this to the Budget Committee today to enable it proceed with its work and report to the House by the 15th May so that we can have a discussion on this matter. Budget committee, we have agreed that no one second will be added to the time assigned by law.

Please, chairperson and members of the Committee on Budget, report to this House by 15th May so that we can engage with other processes. Thank you, very much.

MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION OF THE SUGAR BILL, 2019 AS RETURNED BY H.E THE PRESIDENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 91(3)(B) OF THE CONSTITUTION AND RULE 142 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I did indicate that the trend of the debate that took place the last time this matter came up was not supportive of what this House should be doing. Voices were raised prompting me to say that we need to have arguments winning and not voices.

We need to sharpen our arguments but not our voices to be able to come to a meaningful resolution of this tension. Honourable members, sometimes when you get lost or when you feel you are not up to date with what you should be doing, the general rule is that you go back to where you started so that you can again begin to see where you missed the turn. When you do that sometimes you solve a journey that could have taken you 40 years like it did with the Israelites to cover a journey of 620 kilometres in 40 years.

It could take this House a much longer time to travel a journey that is very short. It might need to come back to the original position and compass, which was the original Bill. That is where we started from and if we got lost that is where we got lost. It would be a good idea if we went back to the original Bill. The original Bill proposed a zoning policy in clause 22; that sugar mills will be certain distance apart”. 

Sometimes you need to listen, honourable Member. It says; 

“(1) In licencing sugar mills, the board shall ensure that there is only one mill in a zone… and (3) In this section, a “zone” means an area of radius of 25 kilometres measured from one mill to another.” and this is what was approved by Cabinet.

If you come to what was proposed in clause 32, transitional provisions; “A person who, immediately before the commencement of this Act, is operating a lawful sugar mill or jaggery mill, shall continue to operate such a mill in accordance with this Act.”

(4) A sugar mill or jaggery mill existing immediately before the commencement of the Act, shall not be denied a licence under this Act on the sole basis that there is more than one sugar mill or jaggery mill in a particular zone.”

Initially what was intended by this Bill was to regulate new industries that are going to join the market. For them to be licenced, they need to be apart by 25 kilometres. It was not intended to affect what is already established now. (Applause)

Honourable members, sometimes we bring problems upon ourselves by reading interests other than those in the Bill and importing them into the Bill, diverting the purpose of the policy and making a mess of it and then we start dancing around it as if we are trying to solve it when we have already made the problem. These are situations which we must avoid, as Parliament.

Honourable members, you will not believe it but that day when I left here I found in my office a pile of letters, petitions of same wording, same date but different letterheads. They were from Uganda Sugar Growers Association, Uganda Farmers Crop Industries Limited, Uganda Sugar Manufactures Association, GM Sugar Ltd, Mayuge Sugar Industries and all of them were writing because we, in our discussions, moved away from the original policies and started creating things that jeopardised their interests, which were initially protected by the Bill.

Just look at the gallery if you would like to understand where we are – honourable members, I urge you that when these matters are sent to committees let us not attempt to re-invent the wheel. Let us look at the policy that has been interrogated and proposed to this House and assess on the basis of what we do in pre-legislative scrutiny.

Ask a fundamental question; how does it sit with the constitution, how does it sit with the existing laws, how will it affect court judgement, how will it affect vested interests of people who are going to be affected by the law? Those are the questions we ask, as Parliament. 

If they do not, we do not even have to amend it; if they are only are at par with the Constitution, the laws, they sit well with court judgements, with the interests of the people of this country, we do not have to amend it but we go and read too many things into these things and get ourselves and the whole country confused and excited about something that should not be exciting anybody and we end up where we are. I am being told, “We are waiting for that one.”

All the Members who have been coming here have been asking about the Sugar Bill; probably that is why I have this amount of quorum today but it is because we have read into the proposal from Government, something we should not have let come in that Bill.

Therefore, honourable members, how do we go back to the basics so that we create winners - so that the sugar growers win, the established factories win and the country wins? How do we go back there?

3.22
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. I stand here on behalf of Government to request you and this august House to allow us more time to find where we are. I have listened to your guidance and I agree; that is why I am here to request for some more time to do more engagement so that we get to the win-win situation, which you have explained. I beg to request.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in this Bill, we cannot afford to have any loser; we can only have winners. We can live with winners better than we can live with any loser. I will grant you the period to consult further and come back to this House. In how long?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I ask for a minimum of four weeks because I do not want to interrupt the budget process.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the request is for one month. I hereby grant the one month; we shall come back here after a month and deal with this matter. 

Honourable members, I am not going to allow anybody to leave this Chamber –(Applause)– because we have financial Bills to deal with. Stay put. Now, we are dealing with taxation and one of the principles of taxation is; “no taxation without representation”. We are going to pass tax laws now but we must have representation of all of you, therefore, be here.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE STAMP DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

3.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Stamp Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the representative for Persons with Disabilities, Eastern; Members for Apac Municipality, Busia District, Kumi Municipality and Buliisa District.

(Motion seconded.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to speak to your motion?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, the object of this Bill is to define a citizen, to provide for uniform stamp duty payable on bank guarantees, insurance performance bonds, indemnity bonds and similar debt instruments and to reduce the capital threshold for developers and operators.

Mr Speaker, what is happening currently with the bank guarantees for stamp duty and such instruments is that we are charging a certain percentage on the value of the guarantee. This has affected a number of people including investors. Therefore, what we are proposing now is to charge a uniform fee - after all this is the same work that is being done. We are going to charge a uniform fee of Shs 100,000 for every stamp duty on all these instruments instead of charging a certain percentage.

Recently, we had an investor who was just registering a debt instrument of around $600 million and because we are charging one per cent, that translated into $6 million. You can imagine by just registering a piece of paper to pay $6 million would affect your capital. Therefore, what we are trying to do here is to be uniform to all the people who are registering these documents. 

Secondly, we are also reducing - remember, last year, we passed here a measure to offer incentives to the investors in different categories. We said for foreigners to qualify for incentives, they would be required to have a minimum capital of Shs 10 million and Shs 5 million for the local person. We found out along the way that this is very prohibitive and we are reducing that amount of money to allow people to access these incentives and support investments in our country. That is the purpose of this Bill. It is a brief and straightforward Bill, for which I seek support of the entire House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion that I now propose for your debate is that “The Stamp Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read for the second time. That is the motion for your debate and debate starts now. To start our debate off, I ask the chairperson to report briefly and we proceed from there.

3.40
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development considered the Bill entitled, “The Stamp Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2019” and made the following observations:

First, the Bill proposes to reduce the minimum investment requirement for investors in order to benefit from the tax incentives provided for in The Stamp Duty (Amendment) Act, 2018. 

The proposed amendments will reduce the cost of debt financing and ease tax compliance and administration. However, the committee noted that $2 million was slightly high for citizens to benefit from the incentive. This amount should be reduced to $1 million so that citizens can benefit.

Secondly, the reduction of the threshold from $100 million to $50 million will attract more investments in the country, as this will make it cheaper for investors to benefit from this incentive.

Thirdly, the Bill seeks to provide incentives for investors in technical and vocational institutes. These will help to provide skills, especially to the youth, which are relevant to the market.

The committee recommends that the Stamp Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2019 be passed into law, subject to the proposed amendments. I beg to move. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table, a copy of the original report by the committee together with the minutes and other documents that were scrutinised during the process of considering the Bill. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let the records capture that. Honourable members, the debate starts now but let us remember the key principles of this Bill - it is the financial revenue Bill that should support whatever is proposed in the budget. Let us debate the principles of the Bill. Each Member will take two minutes. 

3.42
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the committee for processing this Bill. I would like to support the committee, especially on the proposal to reduce the minimum amount of money required for our local investors. I know that the proposal brought forward is for both the foreign and local investors. However, I would like to lend my support more to the local investors because for quite a long time, many of the incentives have been going to the foreign investors, who come here and register but with our local investors being excluded most of the time. So, this reduction for somebody to qualify in incentives is very positive, especially to encourage local investments. 

I am not so persuaded on the reduction of the minimum for the foreign investors because we have so many people here who bring in money but end up in retail business in Kikuubo. If you reduce it farther, those people that bring money here and become retailers will continue yet we want serious investors; people who can invest in the industries and not people who are going to just come and be retailers. Therefore, I support this Bill on behalf of the local investors and not the foreign investors. Thank you very much. 

3.45
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to agree with the decision of the committee that the amount be reduced to $1,000,000. However, I would also like to tow the same line with the previous contributor that having the same amount for both nationals and foreigners may not be good to promote local investors. 

I think we should maintain the $2,000,000 for foreign investors but $1,000,000 for local investors. Foreign investors will continue to invest depending on the economic, social and political grounds. Where situations are not favourable for them, they might move but local investors will remain regardless of the conditions. 

However, although the idea behind reducing this amount of money to benefit the locals is important, we should encourage serious investors who invest a lot of money, create meaningful employment and improve on our GDP. Otherwise, a situation where we put both local and foreign investors at the same level may be disadvantageous to our nationals. 

Therefore, in my opinion, the figure $1,000,000 should be for the local investors but we should maintain the $2,000,000 for the foreign investors. I beg to submit. Thank you. 

3.46
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to oppose the proposed amendment. This is because the minister has no survey or feasibility study findings to show that investment has failed because the investors do not have capacity to pay stamp duty in the proposed terms, as in the original Act. 

Most of the foreign investors we are talking about have tax holidays and exemptions. They normally come to Uganda and we even give them free land. I can give an example of some factories that have been exempted even on output VAT. 
Therefore, if we are talking about funding the budget and we are looking at 85 per cent of our tax coming from the central business area and 15 per cent coming from the remaining part of the country, one cannot again talk about – because the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has slept on the job. Whenever they want to raise tax revenue, they tax the same group of people to raise money. 

If this has been a source for revenue collection to support the budget and we are in this House trying to create an inequality of some sort – because whereas today they have limited this to only guarantees, insurance and performance bonds, what about the one who is transferring land? It is a source of revenue in terms of stamp duty. 

Therefore, if we want to support our budget and we are serious about it, this can only be informed by a survey where the taxpayers and investors have informed you that the reason they are not investing in Uganda is because the stamp duty is very burdening in that they cannot pay it, as provided for in the original Act. I beg to submit. 

3.48
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you for this opportunity, Mr Speaker. I also beg to disagree with the minister’s proposal and the committee’s findings.

In this matter, if you are carrying out a land transaction, you are required to pay stamp duty. It is not fair that someone getting a bank guarantee - a bank guarantee from any bank or financial institution is money in itself and it is tradable. That is why when people come to get bank guarantees, it does not only mean that Government has committed that they acquire these monies with their support; it is also equity in itself. 

Therefore, stamp duty on bank guarantees is paid everywhere based on percentage. In Kenya, it is between 2 to 4 per cent. In Tanzania, it is 1 per cent. So, how do you give someone wealth in form of a bank guarantee of $600 million and tell them to only pay $100,000 in form of stamp duty? It is not fair to someone who carries out a land transaction - for example, you tell someone selling his land in Omoro or Obongi at Shs 2,000,000 to pay 1 per cent, which is Shs 200,000?

If you are looking at sources of raising revenue, I would like to implore Government to stick to the original position. If they want to reduce, you can do so bit but not at a flat rate and for particular businesses. If you want to do it, put it sui generis for every business. Where it involves transfer, let the stamp duty be 100,000 even if it is a land transaction –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The information I would like to give is that if one goes for a bank guarantee on a loan, there is no transfer. With land, one purchases an asset and they can own it. A bank guarantee is not an asset but a liability, where one gets a liability to get an asset, which will attract the stamp duty you are talking about; if I bought land.

Therefore, this is just registration. If I take a document to URSB, it is just registration. It is the same as taking – even if I have paid for an agreement of 1.5 per cent for transfer, when I go to register it, I do not need to pay another; I just pay Shs 100,000 for registration. This is basically registering an instrument.

3.57
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Mr Speaker, I would like to agree with hon. Nandala-Mafabi. We are simply talking about registration and I think the minister took time to think about this and he got the right answer. Therefore, the Shs 100,000 across the board is perfect. It is like when somebody goes to register their marriage, the registrar will not ask you about the size of your wife so that if she is 100 kilogrammes, you pay more and if she is 50 kilogrammes, you pay less. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, on the second issue of incentives to the foreign companies and domestic companies; the foreigners already have a lot of incentives that are helping them to come to the country. First of all, we are commissioning power-generating units; Karuma is coming on board and Isimba is also coming on board. We are generating several megawatts of power and that is already an incentive.

Secondly, there is the issue of land that people are getting. As a foreign company, if you go to Mbale for instance, there is already land for the investors and that is an incentive on its own. We are also working on the issue of the tariffs –(Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you. Mr Speaker, the information I would like to give to my colleague is that we passed here a loan for the other hospital. If these people were to obtain a guarantee, they would be required to pay stamp duty of the value, which would be Shs 14 billion. I suspect that this Bill is to even avoid the payment of that Shs 14 billion.

MR AOGON: Everybody has heard you clearly. Thank you very much. Mr Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, your time was up. (Laughter)

5.54
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Ordinarily, we would not have issues with a Bill of this nature. However, there are specific principles that should apply across the board and one of the principles most of us tend to look for is the principle of equity. Before, I go to that principle, I will begin with the definition of a “citizen” under the Bill. 

I would like to know from the minister whether as a country, we have a similar reciprocal arrangement with other states bearing in mind that one of the states has closed borders with us. I do not know whether Ugandan citizens in partner states have a similar treatment under the definition of a citizen, bearing in mind that this particular definition ousts the definition in the Constitution. If the other partner states accommodate us, I will have my reservations withdrawn.

Secondly, it is good you have given a flat rate for debt instruments. However, why don’t you extend it to the other similar instruments which are not of a debt nature so that the principle of equity applies? If you apply stamp duty in terms of percentage in other instruments and in this particular one of debt instrument you apply a flat rate, I see the danger of citizens rushing to court that we are being discriminatory.

This discrimination runs through under the proposed amendment (e), where you are giving many incentives to only one sector - technical or vocational institute operator. You will find people writing and naming their companies as technical or vocational institutes because you have given it very many reliefs against other investors, who are maybe in a similar business. This particular law will be subject to abuse. 

I wish that the minister brings a Bill that will accommodate everybody in the same area so that the principles of fairness and equity are applied. I rest my case.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

5.57
MS EVERLYN CHEMUTAI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukwo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have no issue with the Bill, except the currency used. I am of the opinion that we use our local currency instead of the US dollars and maybe keep the dollars for the foreign investors. If we use dollars, it makes us look like foreigners in our own country. These days if you go to a local hotel, you are given a bill in dollars. My view is that we change this currency to Uganda Shillings.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

5.57
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to oppose the proposed amendments. First, the principle of taxation is that it must be proportionate. Therefore, the minister fails miserably when he advises that Government should apply Shs 100,000 across the board. We lose on that very principle of proportionality. You cannot suggest that even somebody paying much more should be given a flat rate.

I also understand stamp duty to be a form of tax. Therefore, you cannot compare and justify it by calling it registration. The minister knows very well that he has never brought to this House any figure for registration purposes. What we are discussing here are matters of taxation. On that ground alone, this amendment should fail because it is not proportionate and it infringes on the principle of taxation.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, even with the amount proposed for investors to come to this country - they have found their way and we have discussed over time in this House that a number of people coming to this country and claiming to be investors are doing something else. Therefore, why should we make it easier for them to come and flood our economy? 

If you want to attract investors to this country, they do not need these incentives. They want stable electricity, a corrupt-free government, security for their property and labour. Those are the things that you should put in place but not bending down and going low like the Government is doing without embarrassment, saying we are going to reduce for them to come when Ugandans are suffering.

I think the provision of lowering it should apply –(Member timed out)

4.00
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have to keep in mind that we have been having problems with these new investors from China. We had a problem with Chinese in Kikuubo who termed themselves “investors”. By that time we had $100 million as their threshold. At the moment we want it to go down to $50 million. This means that it will be simpler for those Chinese to come to Uganda and do their businesses – and it is common knowledge that after coming in as investors, another Chinese or Indian comes in to use the same money. 

We have been grappling with those foreign investors who do not do the businesses they came here to do because $100 million has been little on their side because they have cheap loans while we have very expensive loans.

Another issue is about the flat rate of Shs 100,000 as the stamp duty for all investors in Uganda. Imagine Shs 100,000 and tomorrow it will change because the exchange rate is dynamic. It does not have to be in shillings. Let it be in percentage. Even if you put it in dollars, the value of the dollar will change and if you put it in Uganda Shillings, the value of the Uganda Shilling –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, may I advise? This is a national Parliament. When we debate, can we avoid mentioning other countries on the record? Otherwise, we do not know what they are doing. If you are singling out a global community of countries, they might take offence. Therefore, if you are talking about a foreigner, just say “a foreigner” so that no one can attribute it to any country. Otherwise, it might cause issues of discomfort in foreign relations, if we start mentioning countries and citizens. Let us avoid mentioning specific countries on the record of this House. I would like you to heed that.

I hope you remember the situation that happened in the past; a Member from the border of this side said something and it was captured in the press in that country and it became a big issue. Let us avoid mentioning countries and citizens of other countries. Let us have a general discussion because this is national a Parliament and we have some obligations.

4.03
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the committee for the brief but clear report. I also want to thank the minister. In simple terms, I support the Bill. 

However, I have two concerns. The first concern is that the minister and the committee have not processed to us the people who complained that the amount was high; they have not given us that information here. That is what I want them to help me understand. What was the basis of the reduction - I think we should be able to know why they are changing downwards.

Secondly, on the amounts, we should not be lenient with foreign investors. Actually, the $10 million should remain. Otherwise, if you compare the interest on the loans with where they come from, it is low. I wonder what $1 million can do in terms of establishing a serious factory in this country. We are doing this to avoid a scenario where a foreign investor comes to Uganda to sell rolex, mandazi, threads or popcorn. That is what we should be mindful about –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the debate is only around those two issues. Can I have the minister clarify and then we move? The issue is violation of two principles of equity and proportionality. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, as hon. Nandala-Mafabi informed the House, the transfer of land confers to a direct benefit by the person who is transferring but the registration of a guarantee or document is something different. Therefore, we think that it should remain at 1.5 per cent for land and registration of these instruments should go at Shs 100,000.

The second point –(Interruption)

MR NSEREKO: Thank you very much. Honourable minister, the principle we are asking here is proportionality. You are not here to regulate registration fees; you are seeking the authority of Parliament to regulate stamp duty.  

Honourable minister, fairness was asked from you on the issue of citizenry. Are all East African citizens in this case, as proposed by your Bill, citizens of Uganda? Is it in line with the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda? In any case, are there any treaties that clearly show reciprocation that a Ugandan company shall also enjoy similar privileges in Kenya or Tanzania so that we see the proportionality and equity? As we promote investment within East Africa, are Ugandan companies having this leverage across borders?

Secondly, there is no way you call a bank guarantee “just a mere paper”. A bank guarantee possesses value and it can be transferred on international market from one person to another unless a clause in the bank guarantee clearly shows that the guarantee is non-transferable. That is why bank guarantees are tradable and have different values at international markets. All of you know this in banking. Bank guarantees are tradable. Some at cash value presented –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is: what are you registering? Are you registering a document or an interest? 

If you are registering a document, it is different from registering an interest. If you are registering a land transfer, you are registering an interest. If you register the same land title with Uganda Registration Services Bureau, it is a document that you are registering. It is not an interest you are registering. Is this the same thing or are they different?

Let us take the case of bank guarantees; when you go to register it, what are you registering and where are you registering it?

MR NSEREKO: Mr Speaker, there is no reason the honourable minister would have been here seeking lifting of the reduction of this stamp duty, if that did not have value. That is my answer.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am just posing a question to help us solve this problem.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, for example, if I come to you to supply me with goods, you say; “To be able to supply, I want you to give a bank guarantee of Shs 2 billion.” So, I go to the bank and get a bank guarantee and hand it over to you. In case I fail to pay, the bank should be able to pay you for the goods I have got. It is a liability. 

Mr Speaker, I do not want us to confuse two things. If for example, I have bought land and I want to transfer it in my names, I must pay stamp duty of 1.5 per cent, which is the value of the land. If I have a piece of paper to be registered - in fact, if you want to add liability, I will go high. What the ministry is doing is that to do business – supposing I have gone to get a bank guarantee of $2 million at the current rate, I must pay you $300,000 before I can do anything. 

If I have $300,000, why don’t I start with that instead of going for $2 million because I will pay money? Well, I think I have said what I wanted to say.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. The second question is whether other countries in the East African Community are doing what we are doing. Yes, Kenya and Tanzania are doing it. I would like to assure you that we have a duty to promote the East African Community and be committed to the protocols we sign. That is our first responsibility. Even though the other people have not done it, I think we should show leadership because other countries are doing it.

The most important question is: why are we, in the East African Community, doing this? We are doing this to make our country more competitive and attract more investments. Those are the two issues that you asked me to clarify and I am sure that I have done that.

MR NSEREKO: Thank you very much, honourable minister. The only way you can prove to us what you are talking about is through a treaty or a signed arrangement. Can you tell us which treaty was signed that shows the reciprocation from Kenya? What is explicit – and you can search it right now – is that it is at 2 to 4 per cent depending on where you are investing. 

If it is in the urban areas, it is 4 per cent and 2 per cent in the rural areas while in Tanzania, it is at 1 per cent –(Interjection)– I am asking him. The burden to prove is on him; it is not on us. Do not shift the burden.

MR NIWAGABA: Honourable minister, I notice your noble intentions of treating Ugandan citizens similarly with citizens of partner states from East Africa. So, why should you adopt a definition that clearly contravenes Articles 9 to 13 of the Constitution instead of maintaining the definition of a citizen, as provided for in our laws and add to the definition, “a citizen of a partner state” so that we do not violate our Constitution but give the benefits we want the people of East Africa to enjoy under this Bill. Yes, they can enjoy them similar to the benefits enjoyed by Ugandan citizens but not conscripting citizens of partner states as citizens of Uganda because you will be violating the Constitution.

MR BAHATI: I respect hon. Niwagaba very much on matters of law but on this particular one, I think, Mr Speaker, you will guide us. (Laughter) We are doing this for purposes of this particular law.

The Common Market Protocol for the East African Community clearly spells out all these issues and on how we should treat citizens when it comes to issues of trade and investment –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister. Members, do we all agree on issues of the East African Community? Yes! Initially, before we got the East African Income Tax - it used to be called East African Customs Tax – that time we were partner states. 

What I see in this Bill - which I would like to agree with and which I also thank our Shadow Attorney-General for – is that is it reciprocal? If we have gone East Africa, it means that under the protocol, it should be reciprocal. What it means is that if we are treated equally in Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania, Rwanda and Burundi, as one goes there to invest, they are treated like citizens and when they come here, they should be treated like citizens.

Maybe you wanted others to start and I have no problem with that. Let Uganda start and when the others do not reciprocate, then we shall go back to the original position.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are we clear now, honourable members? Can we go to the next stage and see what we can do with this Bill? Can I put the question to the motion for the second reading?  

Honourable members, I now put the question that the Bill entitled, “The Stamp Duty Amendment Bill, 2019” be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE STAMP DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 1 stand part of this Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairperson, I still maintain that we cannot make a definition in this particular Bill that contravenes the definition in the Constitution. If the minister wants it, there is no reason he does not mention specifically “citizens of partner states” in addition to “citizens of Uganda.” It causes no harm. Other than that, it will contravene the Constitution and I will be among those to take it to the Constitutional Court.

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, we recently enacted a law called the Investment Code Act, 2018. In this law, we defined a local investor to be an East African. These amendments are seeking conformity with the Investment Code Act, which we passed in this House recently. Therefore, with that information, I seek your guidance on the issue.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But honourable member, I thought that is what the Bill is saying; that “a natural person who is a citizen of a partner state of the East African Community…” I thought that is what it is saying; “a citizen of a partner state…” Isn’t that what it is saying?

Can I put the question? I put the question that clause 2 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend it as follows: 

    (i) In paragraph (d) in the proposed (i), by substituting for the word “two” appearing immediately after the word “or” with the word ‘one’ and 
    (ii) In paragraph (f) in the proposed (e), by substituting for the word “two” appearing immediately after the word “or” with the word “one.”

The justification is to reduce the minimum investment capital threshold required of a citizen to benefit from the incentives.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I would like to propose an amendment to clause 3 (a) item 36 on the wording “to delete similar date instruments.”

The justification is that it can be easily abused; it should end at “indemnity bonds.” Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Have you circulated that amended? Have we shared it? I thought we agreed that we need to be able to interrogate the full effect of the amendment and that is why we asked for the amendment to be brought in time. What would be the implication if that is that way, honourable minister?

MR BAHATI:  Mr Chairman, that is why we always agree that we first circulate them so that we study because we now cannot tell to what extent this will impact. However, what we know is that they are similar debt instruments that will be required to be registered and may not be in the Bill at the moment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think it is among - hon. Paul Mwiru, the law I taught you, I thought there was something called ejusdem generis when you are beginning to list things. It is things that qualify to be like the ones we have listed in the sample.

Therefore, it should not be something which is outside what is listed. I thought that was the principle that is adopted. We use this because you cannot list everything exhaustively. That is how you end up using terms like this.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The ejusdem generis rule has been abused in most cases and I was coming from a point where I was abandoned to object to the entire clause to avoid - however, with your guidance I will concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can we proceed? Can I deal with the amendment proposed by the committee? Honourable members, amendments have been proposed in clause 3(d) and 3(f). The principles have been explained; can I put the question to those amendments?

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NSEREKO: Mr Chairman, you stated in this House and clearly told all Members not to leave. We held fort because we are here to discuss national matters as the Parliament of Uganda. We are dealing with taxation. It is within that spirit that I invoke rule 24 of the Rules of Procedure. Rule 24 clearly states, “The quorum of Parliament shall be one third of all Members entitled to vote.” As we determine, we are voting on matters.

The Chairperson was very explicit in his call; he told Members not to leave. I would like to seek the indulgence of the Chairperson to assert this rule and ascertain whether we have adequate quorum in order to vote on every matter here before. Members present here.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Honourable members, can we proceed? We are properly constituted.

Clause 3, as amended

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that clause 3, as amended, do stand part of the Bill?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for the resumption of the House to enable the committee of the whole House to report. I put the question to that motion?

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Stamp Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2019” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE STAMP DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

4.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Stamp Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Stamp Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read for the third time and do pass. I put the question to that motion?

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE STAMP DUTY (AMENDMENT ACT), 2019”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations. Thank you, honourable minister. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE EXCISE DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

4.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by hon. Katali, hon. Baba Diri, hon. Kamateeka, hon. Aogon, hon. Eituganane, hon. Agaba and hon. Nagwomu. 

(Motion seconded.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to speak to your motion, honourable minister?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, this particular Bill is to amend the Excise Duty Act, 2014 to empower the minister to make regulations prescribing the equivalent tax treatment of supplies made in the course of Islamic financial transactions, to amend part three of the Act to provide for registration of manufacturers, importers and providers of excisable goods and services and to prescribe an interest rate payable on unpaid excise duty and to amend the second schedule to vary the duty in respect of non-alcoholic beverages not including food or vegetable juices. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the motion that I propose for your debate now is that the Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2019 be read for the second time and debate should start now. To start our debate, chairman please report.

4.29
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development considered the Bill entitled, “The Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2019” and made the following observations.

i. 	The Bill seeks to empower the minister to issue regulations prescribing the equivalent tax treatment of supplies made in the course of Islamic financial transactions. However, the mandate to prescribe excise duty and designate items to be charged with excise duty lies with Parliament. Government should propose a Bill for consideration by Parliament to prescribe the equivalent duty treatment of supplies made in the course of Islamic financial transactions.

ii. 	The Bill proposes to introduce a uniform interest penalty of 2 per cent per month compounded on the late payment of all excise duty. This will improve the parent Act as it only provides for interest on unpaid duty in relation to manufactured or imported goods with no penalty applying to excise duty on services.

iii. 	The Bill seeks to amend part (iii) of the Excise Duty Act to provide for registration of manufacturers, importers and providers of excisable goods and services.

The amendment is intended to streamline procedures for registration for provision of excisable goods and services and reinforce the other tax reforms like digital stamps.

iv. 	The Bill seeks to amend the second schedule of the principal Act by reducing the excise duty on non-alcoholic beverages not including fruit or vegetable fruit juice from 12 per cent or Shs 200 - whichever is higher - to 11 per cent or Shs 5 per litre - whichever is higher.

Non-alcoholic beverages like soda, energy drinks and non-fruit juices are sin goods which, with increased consumption, could negatively affect the health of the consumer.

Furthermore, the reduction in the tax will lead to loss of Government revenue, which is needed to improve service delivery.

v. 	The Bill proposes to reduce the threshold of a foreigner to $10 million and for a citizen to $2 million. However, the committee noted that $2 million is high for a citizen and this may prevent them from benefiting from this incentive. This should be reduced to $1 million to enable a citizen to benefit from this incentive.

The committee further noted that the incentive for construction in an industrial park or free zone does not distinguish between a foreigner and a citizen.
The proposed $50 million is high for a citizen; there should be a lower amount that can be afforded by citizens which the committee proposes to be put at $10 million.

The committee recommends that; 

(i) 	A Bill to regulate Islamic financial transactions should be tabled in Parliament to operationalise Islamic financial transactions. 

(ii) 	The tax on non-alcoholic beverages  - not including fruit or vegetable juice - remain at the current rate of 12 per cent or Shs 200, whichever is higher.

We recommend that “The Excise Duty Amendment Bill, 2019” be passed into law subject to proposed amendments. I beg to move. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a copy of the original report, minutes and other documents which we used in scrutinising the Bill.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the text of the report and the minutes of the committee meetings. 
Honourable members, are there any issues of principles on this Bill or should I put the question and we go to the committee stage?

I put the question that the Excise Duty Amendment Bill, 2019 be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE EXCISE DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

Clause 1 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 1 stands as part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 2 stand as part of this Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, we propose to delete clause 3 and the justification is that this is the mandate of Parliament and as such, the Executive should bring a comprehensive Bill addressing all issues concerning Islamic banking.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No taxation without representation; I put the question that clause 3 be deleted from the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, deleted.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairman, I am proposing an amendment on clause 5(6) to stipulate the timeframe within which the Commissioner should give reasons in writing for her refusal to register the applicant of the premises. 

The justification is: 

(i) 	To avoid abuse.
(ii) 	If you read sub-clause 15, there is a penalty; so when should the penalty start running, especially if a person has not been notified? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You are justifying before proposing the amendment?

MR NIWAGABA: Yes, I am justifying before proposing the amendment. I am proposing that the Commissioner should give - like in sub clause (3), if he or she answers in one month, then he or she should give reasons for the refusal within one month. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is correct; Chairperson, would you like to be on record?

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. It is important that when you deny someone, you give a reason within a specified period. Therefore, I agree with hon. Niwagaba. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister?

MR BAHATI: I have no objection.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that is proposed by hon. Niwagaba that in clause 5(6) the amendment proposed is that a timeframe of one month be included in that sub clause.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend clause 6 (a) by deleting paragraph (a);
(b) 	in paragraph (c) by adding the following words; “for a foreigner and $10 million in case of a citizen” immediately after the word “dollars”;

(c) 	in paragraph (d) in the proposed (a) by substituting for the word “two” appearing in the second line with the word  “one” and;

(d) 	in paragraph (e) in the proposed (b) – (i) by inserting the word “medical sundries or pharmaceuticals” immediately after the word, “appliances” appearing in the second line;(ii) By inserting the words “pulp paper printing and publishing of instructional materials,” immediately after the word “furniture” appearing in the fourth line.

(e) 	By substituting for the word “two” the word “one” appearing in the eighth line. 

Mr Chairman, the justification is: 

(i) 	Reduction in the prices of these non-alcoholic beverages poses a great risk to human health.
(ii) 	To clarify the thresholds that are applicable to both a foreigner and a citizen to benefit from incentives in regard to construction materials and for development of industrial parks or free zones.
(iii) 	To provide for a comprehensive list and clarity on investors who would qualify for the investment incentives.
(iv) 	To lower the threshold for both foreign and local investors for purposes of benefiting from the incentives. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, those are the amendments proposed by the committee in clause 6. Honourable minister?  Silence means consent. Shall I put the question to the amendment? I put the question to the amendments as proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

The Title 

MR NIWAGABA: We have skipped one clause. It is listed as clause 5, amending section 15 (a) of the principal Act. I beg that we go back to that clause. Unfortunately, it should have been worded as clause 5(a) because we now have two clause 5s. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There are two clauses 5s. The second clause 5 -

MR NIWAGABA: We make it maybe clause 5 (a) as an amendment. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is okay. We have not yet adopted it. They will just renumber. 

The second clause 5

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, in the Bill, there is a second clause 5 - clause 5 appears twice. I put the question that the second clause 5 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The second clause 5, agreed to.

The title agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports there to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House report. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker, presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill titled, “The Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2019” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE 
WHOLE HOUSE

4.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for the adoption of the report from the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE EXCISE DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

4.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg move that the Bill entitled, “The Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that “The Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read the third time and do pass. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE EXCISE DUTY (AMENDMNET) ACT, 2019.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister and Members. (Applause)

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE TAX PROCEDURES CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

4.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill titled, “The Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read the second time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Okay, it is seconded by members from Ntenjero, Buyaga, Bokora, Koboko, Apac, and Luuka counties. Would you like to speak to your motion?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, the intention of this amendment to the Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill, 2019 is to seek approval of Parliament to write off all unpaid taxes by Government as at 30th June 2019. It is also to empower the Commissioner General to compound offenses and provide for a list of returns filed with the Commissioner General.

As you recall, last year, we came to this House to seek your approval in relation to unpaid taxes by Government, which were as result of the commitment that we had done to different companies. 

Secondly, as result of the resources we are borrowing and out of the counterpart funding. Sometimes, when we borrow money, we are required to cater for the component of taxes. 

Therefore, we came to this House and requested that we budget for these resources to pay off the taxes. In the wisdom of the House, you advised that we do not get this money to pay them off. We asked for permission to write them off but it was not granted. You again insisted that they should not continue to appear in the books of Government as unpaid.

Therefore, we find ourselves in a situation where we need money to pay them off and Parliament says there is no money. We need permission to write them off but Parliament says no permission, yet, at the same time insists that these unpaid taxes must be off the record of Parliament.

Therefore, we have come back to appeal to this House that we make commitments when we are approving loans, that some of the resources under counterpart funding are actually taxes and must be paid or written off. 

This is why we are here to ensure that we get this approval and clean up our records properly and also meet the commitments we have already made with different lenders where Parliament has already approved these resources. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion I propose for your debate is that “The Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read the second time and debate starts now with the report from the committee.

4.48
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development considered the Bill titled, “The Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill, 2019” and made the following observations:

1.	The Bill seeks to empower the minister to write off all unpaid taxes by Government as at 30 June 2019. The arrears arose out of Government’s commitment to pay taxes on behalf of entities deemed to be of strategic importance to the county and on behalf of NGOs, which had contractual obligations with Government. 

2.	In most donor projects, the obligation to pay taxes rests with the Government. These arose out of Government’s commitment to pay a tax component for a contract under counterpart funding arrangements.

In some cases, Government has not met this obligation and as such, arrears have accrued. This category includes arrears that accrued out of failure by some Government entities to complete payments to contractors of Government projects. The Government tax arrears amount to Shs 499 billion, which are in this category.

The Bill proposes to give the minister powers to pay taxes due and payable by the Government arising from commitments made by Government to pay taxes on behalf of a person or owing from Government as counterpart funding. These projects had already been budgeted for while in the private companies, the funds were budgeted for but not approved. 

Mr Speaker, we would like to recommend that the Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill, 2019 be passed into law. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have already proposed the question but the committee is not even proposing any amendments. Can I put the question? 

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the original committee report together with the minutes and the other documents that we used in scrutinising the Bill. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes and the report of the committee. Honourable members, debate starts now. Can we use two minutes each?

4.52
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I only wish to get clarification. For us to make a meaningful contribution, the committee has stated here that there is a list, which is unattached. It would appear as if we are offering a blank cheque, which can be abused. 

In light of that, would the committee first clarify this? Even by reading on the record here, all the names of those strategic partners or entities so that we can substantially debate it? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that all? Chairperson, do we have a list? Is it capable of being read? How many are they? Is it attached to the report? Is it uploaded? Why didn’t you make it part of the report. 

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Speaker, can I propose that we stand over this Bill until we get this information? We will need to examine, in detail, the individuals and entities involved, the amounts involved and possibly even ascertain from the company records the people behind those companies. This is a matter that is subject to abuse and Parliament cannot be used. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, we have a list of companies that we are proposing to write off. If you allow me, Mr Speaker, I can quickly, in five minutes or less, read through the list. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are those companies to whom Government owed money to be paid to them? 

MR BAHATI: Most of them are out of counterpart funding.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, proceed. 

MR BAHATI: They include:
 
    i. The Arab Contractors, which was constructing Mulago Women Hospital Project - counterpart funding of Shs 28.3 billion. 
    ii. ROKO Construction Limited on the Mulago Renovation Project - counterpart funding of Shs 10.8 billion.
    iii. Cementers Uganda Limited - construction of a one stop centre at Malaba and Busia of Shs 9.2 billion. 
    iv. Nippon Parts - road maintenance contract under UNRA for counterpart funding of Shs 2.79 billion. 
    v. Azu Properties Limited - rehabilitation of community roads at Shs 2.1 billion under the Ministry of Local Government. 
    vi. Dott Services Limited - Shs 8.3 billion under the Ministry of Local Government for counterpart funding.
    vii. Net World Limited - Shs 1.9 billion, Ministry of Local Government counterpart funding.
    viii. Trace Mark - Shs 368.1 million Ministry of Local Government. 
    ix. SGI Studio Galli Consultancy - for development catchment water protection plans counterpart funding for Ministry of Water and Environment at Shs 1.2 billion
    x. Summit Project Limited, Muyenga Water Supply System - Shs 318.1 million under the Ministry of Water and Environment.
    xi. Steel and Tube Industries Limited under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – Shs 20 billion for tax holiday. (Interjections) I have an agreement to that effect, which was a commitment from Government 
    xii. Cipla quality Chemicals Industries - manufacture of ARVs, a commitment by Government of Shs 57 billion under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 
    xiii. Guangzhou Dongzhou Energy Group - Shs 8.4 billion under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development counterpart funding. 
    xiv. Oil Palm Uganda limited in Kalangala - Shs 41.06 billion, tax holiday. 
    xv. Oil Palm Limited - Shs 134.7 billion tax holiday under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.
    xvi. Southern Range Nyanza Limited - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Shs 86.8 billion, Government undertaking to pay the tax.
    xvii. Fine Spinners Uganda limited - Shs 2.5 million with Government undertaking to pay the tax. 
    xviii. Mutoni Construction - Shs 5.06 billion under the Ministry of Defence counterpart funding. 
    xix. The Bugisu Cooperative union, Government committed to pay the tax for the cooperative and it has nothing to do with the chairperson of this union. (Interjections) It is to help the cooperative. We made a commitment to help the people of Bugisu at Shs 2.3 billion. 
    xx. Ministry of Health - Shs 900 million for Cementers Uganda Limited. 
    xxi. Aya Investments Uganda Limited - Shs 3 billion under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development
    xxii. Liao Shen Industrial Park - Shs 26 billion under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 
    xxiii. Lydia Home Textiles Limited - Shs 400 million. 
    xxiv. Lilly Benefits Centre 2.3 billion. 
    xxv. Office of the Prime Minister for rice - Shs 29 billion under Office of the Prime Minister. 
    xxvi. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development - Shs 300 million.

All these are out of Government commitment to pay tax. (Interjections) It does not make sense in a situation where we do not have resources to appropriate, to continue having these tax arrears because we do not have money on one side to appropriate. What we are asking is to write them off. 

Mr Speaker, you had given me permission to read the list and I have read it.  I beg to –                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you read the complete list?

MR BAHATI: 
xxvii) Great Value Investment Limited – Shs 2.3 billion.
xxviii) Great Value Investment Limited – Shs 55 million.
xxix) Cooperation and Development Uganda – Shs 345 million.
xxx) Oil Palm Uganda Limited – Shs 43 million.
xxxi) All Nations Christian Care – Shs 10 million.
xxxii) National Cement Company – Shs 2.5 billion.
xxxiii) Office of the Prime Minister – Shs 29 billion.
xxxiv) Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – Shs 389 million.

I have read the entire list and I also beg to –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I think the minister should be honest to this House and read – [Mr Bahati: “Can I first finish?”]- You said you have read the whole list, yet you have not. Why have you skipped Aya Investment Limited?

MR BAHATI: I mentioned it. You were not here. (Laughter)

MR OKUPA: For avoidance of doubt, can you repeat it?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It was read. Honourable members, can we move forward with this matter? Can you lay those lists on the Table properly so that we capture them as part of our record? Actually, they should have been a schedule to the Act.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay Annex 1 on domestic arrears as at 31 March 2019 and Annex 2 on customs international tax arrears as part of the schedules to this report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record capture that. 

Honourable members, in the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have students and teachers of Apac Model Primary School, Apac District. They are represented by hon. Patrick Ocan and hon. Betty Engola. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

We also have a delegation of pupils and teachers from Horizon Nursery and Primary School, Kitgum District. They are represented by hon. Okin and hon. Margret Lamwaka. They are here to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

Honourable members, can we go to the next stage of this matter? Is there anything else?

5.03
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. From the presentation of the minister, he was very clear that he wants Parliament to authorise him to write off the debts in form of taxes that are due to Government in regard -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, “due from” Government.

MR NSEREKO: Yes, due from Government in regard to counterpart funding. We would not withhold this consent in anyway. However, it should not be to individual companies like we are seeing here that did not perform duties that were beneficial to Government in form of contracts where Government had an input. We would like the minister to be courteous enough to add another schedule showing engagements these particular companies had with Government. For Arab Contractors, you were clear that it was for the construction of Mulago Hospital. 

However, when we continue to companies like Steel and Tube, Aya, Guangzhou Dongzhou Energy Group Limited, you exempted them from stamp duty. For Oil Palm (Uganda) Limited, you exempted them from income tax and VAT. 

Mr Speaker, several companies toil to pay these taxes and we are creating an unfair competition in the private market. Let the minister tell this Parliament what they were contributing. I will cite only Oil Palm (Uganda) Limited, which had VAT exemption. Please, just give us what contribution it made to get this tax holiday.

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The proposal in the Bill is very clear that “taxes due and payable by Government as counterpart funding for aid-funded projects”. What we must only consider and allow the minister to pay or write off are those funds from Government as counterpart funding for aid-funded projects.

The list that has been submitted to us has matters like tax holidays and all sorts of things. Can we get a proper list of aid-funded projects from that list where Government offered to pay counterpart funding and we pass that one? For these other ones that are not part of aid-funded projects, honestly speaking, how do you want to continue throwing away the taxpayers money to benefit a few individuals?

MR BAHATI: Let me make this clarification, Mr Speaker. The amendment which we are proposing, hon. Niwagaba, is that the minister shall pay any tax due and payable by Government arising from a commitment made by Government to pay tax on behalf of a person or owing from Government as counterpart funding for aid-funded projects. Therefore, you have not read the entire paragraph for purposes of making the argument.

The issue of equity of companies has been resolved by this House. Before last year, incentives had been an argument in this House and you directed us, as the Executive, to sort out this matter. We were handling the issue of tax holidays as the Executive for those institutions and companies we thought were providing strategic benefits to our people. 

For those of you who have been to Kalangala, you have seen the Palm Oil Project and the members of Parliament from Kalangala can testify that it has done wonders in that community. Therefore, what we did is that we would give tax holidays to those specific companies. However, we changed the law and for now, there is no company that the Executive can give a tax holiday because everything has been legislated. The current law provides incentives, which companies are entitled to. 

However, there are those commitments which we had made before we passed these laws and we signed memoranda of understanding, commitments and we submitted these lists to the House and we have submitted it again. These are the commitments we are saying we have to write off because we have already committed as Government and Government must be credible all the time. 

If you commit to pay tax for an investor and they invest, you cannot come after three years and say, “I cannot pay for you. I have changed.” We must be credible. (Interjections) When we came and said, “Can we budget for them?” You said there is no money and now, we are stuck with these arrears.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the issue is not what you are arguing about. That one has been agreed. The issue is: who are these people, how much and for what purpose? That does not seem to be clear on the list. This is what you are going do. You are going to desegregate that list, prepare it properly and bring it back here on Thursday for us to deal with this so that we understand what it is before pass it. Can we stand over this matter? (Members rose_) Please, we are not going to debate this twice. Can we get the list and then we finalise with it?

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

5.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by Members for Pakwach, Ntenjeru, Kashari, Jinja District, Kaberamaido, Kapchorwa and Butambala county. Would you like to speak to your motion, honourable minister?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, this amendment is aimed at;

    a) defining a citizen in the context of this Bill; 
    b) to provide for a percentage of withholding tax to be remitted; 
    c) to empower the minister to make regulations for prescribing the equivalent tax treatment of supplies made in the course of Islamic financial transactions; and 
    d) to provide tax incentives to investors by exempting certain supplies from value added tax.
    e) to align this law with the existing laws regarding VAT and the tax incentives, which we already passed.
 
Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion I propose for your debate is that the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2019,” be read the second time. The committee chairperson will report to kick off the debate.

5.13
THE CHAIRPERSON, FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The committee considered the Bill entitled “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2019” and made the following observations:

    1. The Bill seeks to empower the minister to issue regulations prescribing the equivalent tax treatment of supplies made in the course of Islamic financial transactions. However, the mandate to prescribe tax rates and designate tax items lies with Parliament. Government should propose a Bill providing for the treatment of supplies, accounting and taxation equivalent of al1 Islamic financial transactions.

    2. 2)The Bill seeks to re-introduce withholding of VAT but at a lower rate of 6 per cent, of the taxable value and also provides exemptions for compliant taxpayers. Bearing in mind that at times, Government does not have money to pay all the VAT claims in time, the amount withheld should be included as part payment in the subsequent VAT returns.

    3. It is proposed to zero-rate supply of drugs and medicines manufactured in Uganda. This means that suppliers of drugs and medicines will be able to recover input VAT incurred. The proposed amendment leaves out sundries, which are necessary in the medical-value chain. These should be included to make health services more affordable.

    4. Imported mathematical and geometry sets used for technical and vocational education are proposed to be VAT exempt. The committee also noted that the Bill did not cover mathematical and geometry sets used in non-technical and vocational schools. There is need to exempt all the mathematical and geometry sets used in educational establishments. 

    5. Supply of imported crayons, colored pencils, lead pencils, rulers, erasers, stencils, technical drawings sets, educational computer tablets, educational computer applications and laboratory chemicals for teaching science subjects used in educational establishments should be exempted to reduce the cost of educational materials.

The committee recommends thus:

    i. Government considers exempting VAT from educational materials to reduce the cost of education;
    ii. A Bill to regulate Islamic financial transactions should be tabled in Parliament to operationalise Islamic financial transactions; and
    iii. The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 20I9, be passed into law subject to the proposed amendments.

I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is report of the committee.

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Speaker, allow me to lay on the Table the committee’s original report together with the documents we used in scrutinising the Bill.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the report and the minutes of the committee meetings. Honourable members, the motion for your debate is that the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2019,” be read for the second time and the time is for debate.

5.17
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Mr Speaker, it is highly evident that the committee did a good job. I, therefore, would like to move a motion, without notice that you put the question. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the question be put. I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2019, be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 1, stand part of this Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, we propose that clause 3 is amended, in paragraph (b), by inserting immediately after subsection 2(b), the following:

“2(c) The six percent of the taxable value withheld shall be recognised as a payment in the subsequent VAT return of the tax payer from whom the tax is withheld.”

The justification is that this will offset the VAT liabilities of the persons making supplies. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I put the question to that amendment? I put the question to the amendment from the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR YAGUMA:  I am objecting.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are you objecting to this amendment?

MR YAGUMA: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Then you should have just put it again – Which amendment? 

MR YAGUMA: In subsection (2) that “the minister shall, by notice in the gazette, designate persons who shall withhold tax on payment of tax on supplies.” I would like to know from the minister why we should not state in the law the people who will be allowed to withhold tax. Why should we wait for minister to identify these persons and then put them in the Gazette? Why don’t we specify them in the law?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The list is so flexible and changes any time a situation arises, in which case you have to come back to Parliament to amend. Can I put the question to the clause as amended?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, we propose that clause 4 be deleted. The justification is that this is the mandate of Parliament and as such, the Executive should bring a comprehensive Bill addressing all issues concerning Islamic banking. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that is the proposal, which we adopted in another Bill. Can I put a question to this motion for deletion? I put the question that clause 4 be deleted from this Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, deleted.

Clause 5 agreed to.

Clause 6

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, we propose that clause 6 be amended as follows:

    (a) In paragraph (d) in the proposed paragraph (pp), by substituting for the word “two” appearing immediately after the word “or’, the word “one”;
    (b) In paragraph (f):
    (i) In the proposed paragraph (zz), by substituting for the word “two” appearing immediately after the word “or”, the word “one” and
    (ii) In the proposed paragraph (aaa), by inserting the word “imported” immediately after the word “of” and the words “and medical sundries” immediately after the word “medicines”.
    (c) In paragraph (f) in the proposed (bbb) by substituting for the words “for technical and vocational education”, the words “in educational establishments”.
    (d) By inserting, immediately after paragraph (f) (ddd), the following:
	“(eee) Supply of imported crayons, coloured pencils, lead pencils, rulers, erasers, stencils, technical drawings sets, educational computer tablets, educational computer applications and laboratory chemicals for teaching science subjects used in educational establishments”.

The justification is to reduce the cost of health and education by exempting all items in the education and health value chain. I beg to move.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairperson, we agree with the amendments. We only seek one clarification from the chairperson about the inclusion of computer tablets and educational computer applications. These might be very confusing and difficult to identify which one is an educational computer tablet. 

If I have a tablet, how can you tell that this is an educational computer tablet, as opposed to the normal tablet? Then, explain the educational computer application.

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, we are promoting the use of computers in all our environments of work and in schools. We are also promoting use of computers, which is now a subject taught in schools. So, the spirit of this amendment is to allow for reasonable pricing of all these items used in schools and the educational computer tablet is one of them. The issue of specifying will be done after we have concluded with the law. The users of the law can specify.

MR AOGON: Mr Chairman, one time, we talked about the Persons with Disabilities (PWDs) and now we are talking about exemptions. I need to get clarification from the chairperson whether you have catered very well for Persons with Disabilities. 

When it comes to learning, there are specific details as to their requirements. For instance, I do not know which category the machine that hon. Baba Diri uses falls under; whether it is a computer or another thing. Have you catered well for the PWDs when it comes to aids or assistive devices for learning purposes? Thank you.

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Speaker, I have to be honest. When we were considering this Bill, the idea for catering for PWDs under this arrangement did not come to our notice. Therefore, I am unable to respond to his question.

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Chairperson, the services referred to by my colleague are already catered for in the Value Added Tax Act which we passed earlier, in Schedule 2 (b) (d) under social welfare services, which means care for the elderly, sick and disabled, including care in hospital, aged persons’ homes and similar establishments. So, it is already catered for.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. The proposal by the chairperson will take care of the concerns of hon. Aogon. That is why I support the chairperson’s amendment to the Bill. I think you need to support the chairperson and committee on this because it is all encompassing. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question to the amendment, as proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7

MR MUSASIZI: We propose to amend in paragraph (c) as follows:
    (i) By deleting the word “and” appearing immediately after the word “drugs” and
    (ii) By inserting the words “and medical sundries” immediately after the word “medicines”

The justification is to reduce the cost of imported drugs and medicines and to cover the medical value chain in the medical system. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: By deleting the word “and” appearing immediately after the word “drugs”, by inserting the words “and medical sundries” immediately after the word “medicines.”

Therefore, the supply of drugs and medical sundries - is that what you said? Therefore, it is going to be; “...the supply of drugs, medicines and medical sundries.” We need to punctuate it somehow. In the place of the first “and”, maybe you put a comma; that could be for details. 

Therefore, it would be something like “the supply of drugs, medicines and medical sundries manufactured in Uganda.” Can I put the question to that amendment? I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7 as amended, agreed to.

Title agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for the resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the Whole House to report. I put the question to that motion?

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2019” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the Whole House. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

5.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members the motion is that the Bill entitled “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read for the third time and do pass. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, ”THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2019”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, honourable minister. Thank you, Mr Chairman for this. (Applause)

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

5.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by hon. Katali, hon. Chekamondo, hon. Koluo, hon. Okupa, hon. Lucy Akello, hon. Kamateeka, hon. Kabagyenyi and hon. Tusiime. 

(Motion seconded.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, would you like to speak to your motion?


MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, unlike in the previous three Bills that we have passed, we intend to amend the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2019 to reduce the threshold required for tax exemption for investors, to provide for the withholding tax by sale of a business or business asset, to provide for an offence and penalty for failure to obtain a tax identification number from a licence and for other related matters. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have already proposed the question. The motion that I propose for your debate is that the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2019 be read the second time. To start off our debate, chairperson, please, report.

5.36
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to report that the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development considered the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2019” and made the following observations:

1.	The Bill seeks to introduce the definition of “a beneficial owner” to provide for limitation of benefits in regard to international agreements and where exemptions or reduced rates would apply on payments made to non-resident persons with respect to income sourced in Uganda. To benefit from the international agreements, persons incorporate companies in tax jurisdictions where Uganda signed agreements that offer tax benefits. This will ensure that the benefits of international agreements are limited to rightful owners. This is a relevant measure for purposes of section 88 which incorporates international treaties into the Ugandan law, as international agreements themselves do not give such clarity in an attempt to restrict treaty shopping. Government should revisit all the double taxation agreements it signed with various countries to avoid loss of revenue occasioned through the loopholes in the treaties. 

2.	The Bill proposes to reduce the minimum investment requirement for investors in industrial parks in order to benefit from the tax incentives provided for in the Income Tax (Amendment) Act, 2018. The $50 mi11ion threshold is high for citizens to partake of the opportunities that keep emerging in the economy. Therefore, citizens require a window through a special $10 million threshold to be able to develop small industrial parks for especially small and medium enterprises (SMEs) that are the mass employers in agro-processing that is milling, fruits and juice packing, furniture and wood works, concrete products making and metal works. Once SMEs operate in a hub created through industrial clustering, it will be cheaper for Government to provide services like water, electricity and roads to reduce on the cost of doing business. 

3.	A person who earns rental income from more than one rental property shall account for the income and expenses of the property and sha11 pay tax for each of the properties separately. The property owners will no longer be able to offset tax losses of one property against the profits of another property.

This is intended to streamline the collection of rental tax and reduce on the loss of revenue to Government. However, this measure may increase the compliance burden on the property owners. 

It will be costly and complicated for companies or corporations like National Housing and construction Company Ltd, National Social Security Fund, among others, that own several properties to file separate returns for each property.

4) 	The Bill seeks to introduce the income tax requirement for a tax payer who has carried forward assessed losses for a consecutive period of seven years of income, at a rate of 0.5 per cent of gross turnover for every year of income in which the loss continues after the seventh year.

The amendment will limit revenue loss that occurs when a business that is making profits takes advantage of unassessed losses to avoid paying revenue for years.

In addition, this amendment will enhance progressivity and productivity of the income tax regime and limit abuse of the indefinite carry-forward of losses.

5) 	Section 118 of the Income Tax Act introduced a withholding tax of 1 per cent on agricultural supplies. This has caused distortions in the markets between agents and non-agents for withholding tax. Withholding tax is said to encourage compliance and formalisation of the economy.

Since the significant number of businesses do not have TINs and several of them are unregistered agents in the sector, this makes the registered ones uncompetitive.

Farmers prefer to supply businesses that are not designated as withholding tax agents, which has affected competiveness in the agro-processing sector. This provision should be amended to exempt agricultural supplies from withholding tax. 

The committee recommends thus;

1. 	Section 118 of the Income Tax Act be amended to exempt agricultural supplies from withholding tax of 1 per cent.

2. 	The committee recommends that property owners who own more than one property should not be subjected to filing separate returns for each individual property.

3. 	The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2019 be passed into law subject to proposed amendments. I was notified that the main report is accompanied by the minority report. 

With your indulgence, I beg that the Member who moved the minority report, be given an opportunity to present it.

As he comes, I beg to lay on the Table, the original committee report together with other documents, which we used in scrutinising the Bill.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record capture the minutes and the report. I see the names of hon. Nandala-Mafabi and hon. Amos Lugoloobi.

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Speaker, for clarity, hon. Nandala-Mafabi tried to persuade hon. Lugoloobi. Unfortunately,  hon. Lugoloobi had already signed the main report. Therefore, he is alone. (Laughter)

5.45
MR NANDALA MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When I was looking for people to sign, I got hon. Odonga-Otto and one other colleague;. They signed this minority report.

I would like to request your indulgence about Bugisu Cooperative Union. Government took over Bugisu Cooperative Union in 2010 and ran it up to 2014. When they left, those were the tax liabilities they went with. I wanted to make that clear so that people do not assume that I have a conflict of interest. 

Having said that, hon. Odonga-Otto and I have a minority report, I will not read everything in it since it was uploaded. The point of dissent is about illegal taxing on carry-forward losses.

This proposal was brought last year and now, the Bill seeks to amend Section 38 of the Income Tax Act to provide for a requirement for a taxpayer who has a carry-forward loss for a consecutive period seven years of taxes; to pay 0.5 per cent of the gross turnover every year of income, which the taxpayer continues to carry forward the assessed loss after the seventh year.

Mr Speaker, this proposal was brought last year and if you look at the Hansard of 24 May 2018, you will notice that it was properly rejected and we have attached it.

Section 38 states thus: “Carry-forward losses: Subject to this section and Section 75, where for any year of income, the total amount of income included in the gross income of a taxpayer is exceeded by the total amount of deduction allowed on a tax payer, the amount of the excess in this Act referred to as assessed loss, shall be carried and allowed as a deduction in determining the tax payers’ chargeable income in the following year of income.”

If this provision is passed, persons that are genuinely making assessed losses will be taxed. Companies that are making losses should not be penalised for making losses.

I would like to state it clear that there is a trading loss and assessed loss and there is a trading profit. Companies incur losses as a result business costs as well as investment allowances provided by Government in the tax law.

To allow a business expense as well as a tax deduction and later seek to tax a person or a business to which the allowance was given is definitely contradictory and a disincentive for investment promotion.

The proposal will create a problem with other provisions of the law, for example, Section 4 of the Income Tax Act, which states thus: “Income tax is imposed on every person who has chargeable income for the year of income.” Section 15 defines chargeable income, which means income formed after deducting all expenses under section 22. Section 17 talks about gross income, which is the total income before removing expenses.

Mr Speaker, section 38 is being used as a charging section and this would be a major distortion of the law. I would like to make an illustration. 

Assume company A invests Shs 20 million in the first and year and is earning profits, which are called trading profits. In first year, it makes a trading profit of Shs 1 million. However, if you did capital deductions, that trading loss would be turned into a loss carry forward. Which means a company is making profits as I have illustrated on page 4, made a profit of Shs 1 million but if you remove the capital allowance of Shs 10 million it will make a chargeable loss of Shs 9 million and this Shs 9 million is allowed to be carried the following year.

Therefore, a company is making trading profits but when it is being assessed because of the capital investments, it is turned into a loss. Therefore, you cannot say this company is making losses; it is making profits but because of the laws you have passed of capital allowances, they lead this company to make an assessed loss.

Trading profit is after expenses and taxable profit is after adjusting trading profit for capital allowances and other taxable allowances.

Mr Speaker, section 27 is very clear. It talks about initial allowance. It has the meaning in section 27 of the income tax which says; “a person who places an item for an item for an illegible property into service for the first time outside the radius of 50 kilometers from the boundaries of Kampala during the year of income, is allowed a deduction for that year of an amount equal to 50 per cent of the cost base.” The moment you go after Kireka and invest Shs 20 million, in the first year, you will be allowed initial allowance of 50 per cent of that - you could make a profit and you have a problem.

Mr Speaker, I have demonstrated that even after seven years, because I have been making a trading profit, I can again buy another capital asset, invest and continue to benefit from this.

Despite the carry forward losses, these companies employ Ugandans and these Ugandans who get salary pay Pay As You Earn (PAYE). In addition, these campaniles are paying indirect taxes such as value added tax. Therefore, if you impose the 0.5 per cent of turnover, some of these companies may be forced out of business. This would discourage further investment and loss of employment.

World over, an average gross profit is between 1.5 - 2 per cent of turnover before other expenses. I would like to ask colleagues here who are dealing in fuel. If you deal in fuel and buy from Total or Shell, they give you Shs 60 as a margin and you are selling that fuel at Shs 4100. Get Shs 60 over Shs 4100, you will see that the margin about 1.4 per cent. Therefore, if you take 0.5 per cent before other expenses, then eventually, you will know what I mean.

In short, 0.5 per cent is even so much that these companies will immediately get into losses and instead they will close.

Mr Speaker, this does not qualify to become income tax since there is no taxable income. If you are taxing a loss, now it will become loss tax. What it means, we should change from Income Tax Act and make it Loss Tax Act because this is no longer income tax.

Tax evasion can be done by anybody, even those who are making profits. I would like to make this recommendation. Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) has come here and we have built its capacity. It has a department called Tax Audit and Investigations. Therefore, what do we do?

URA should intensify audits and tax investigations. (Applause) In addition, it should not only be to those who have losses carry forward but even those who are making profits.

If URA, which is mandated to investigate and it is failing, the proposal I would make is that we close URA and say everybody pays 0.5 per cent of the gross tax.

However, under the Company Act, it says every company must employ an auditor and this auditor according to our laws is a qualified auditor.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, if we passed this into law, then we would have changed the law of income tax and this is wrong. Therefore, I would like to ask Members to support the minority report and say we cannot tax losses. Thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much hon. Mafabi for that presentation. Honourable members, we will not be able to start debate on this Bill also because I think it is a more involving discussion given that there is a minority report. It is already late.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I would like to lay the Hansard-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You cannot lay the Hansard; it is a record of Parliament –(Laughter) All you would have done is to quote that, “on the records of Parliament of this date, this is what was discussed” but we will be able to sort that out.

Honourable members, we have deferred two Bills- The Tax Procedure Code (Amendment) Bill, 2019 where we had issues of that list. Honourable minister, we want it properly categorised. We will be starting with it and then open debate on this next one on income tax.

Honourable members, given that tomorrow is a public holiday, we will not be able to sit but we will sit on Thursday at 2.00p.m House adjourned to Thursday 2 o’clock.

(House rose at 5.57 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 2 May 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 
