


Thursday, 16 April 2020

Parliament met at 2.36 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I just have a few issues to communicate.

This morning, we had a team from the World Health Organisation (WHO) visiting Parliament to follow up on our measures to mitigate the spread of COVID-19. They haveinstructed that everyone accessing the tent must wash their hands at the water tent. I think there is a point on this side. Is there another one? There is a water point there, which you can use.

Secondly, on the issue of the microphones, before a Member accesses the microphone, they will be given a windshield, which they will place on the microphone before they speak. After speaking, the member can remove it and drop it in the facility that has been provided. 

Our sitting arrangement may be reviewed from time to time to ensure that we comply with the measures. As you can see, they have advised how we are going to work at the Table. I now have to sit on this side and the Clerk has to sit on the otherside. So, a lot of things are happening.

Thirdly, I would like to remind the Government that although Parliamentwas not considered as an essential service, we are sitting here doing work for the country; we are working on the budget and the revenue Bills, we have just given them a supplementary but members do not have car stickers. We had agreed that if you can display your identity card, you should be allowed to proceed. 

Unfortunately, yesterday, hon. Mark Dulu’s car was impounded because it had no sticker, despite him showing his card. I am therefore, directing the Minister of Internal Affairs to ensure that hon. Mark Dulu’s car is released immediately and ensure that instructions are issued to all the police points to allow Members of Parliament to come. They are coming to work; they are not going to dance in the town. They are here doing a national duty. (Applause)

Fourthly, I would like to appeal to Members of the House; the issue of the Shs 10 billion is an issue of the Parliamentary Commission, so do not continue talking about it because you do not know about it. Allow the Speaker and the commissioners to speak on your behalf. (Applause) It is not your business; just go on with your lives.

Fifth, I have received reports that while we keep here, obeying the presidential directives by quarantining ourselves in Kampala, there are people moving around inourconstituencies not only conducting meetings butalso distributing food items. Our political opponents are in the constituencies distributing food to the voters and telling them thatMembers of Parliament have abandoned them; it is them who care about the voters. This is a matter, I think, the Government must take seriously. If the President said there are no political or religious meetings but some few people in the country arecontinuing to do it against our interests, this must stop.

Honourable members, there are just a few matters of national concern. Let us start with the honourable Byekwaso, but you have only two minutes.

2.41
BRIG. GEN. FLAVIA BYEKWASO (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, I rise on matter of national concern regarding attacks on security personnel who are deployed to implement the directives issued by His Excellency the President and catered for under the Statutory Instrument that was issued under the Public Health Act in the fight against COVID-19.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, you have read in both print and electronic media that security personnel have come under attack on several occasions while on duty in the fight against the current COVID-19 pandemic.

The occasions are several andthey include the following, among others:

    1. On 12 April, there was an attack on a Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF) soldier, No. RA/236807 Private Niwanyine Alex, escort to the Amuru Resident District Commissioner (RDC). His eye has since been removed and he is hospitalised at the GeneralMilitary Hospital in Bombo.

    2. On 8 April in Mutolore,in Kisoro District, a group of youth hurled stones at a UPDF patrol vehicle,Registration No. DO2DF103.  

    3. On 5 April at Kiranga Trading Centre in Kalungu District, a UPDF vehicle waspelted with stones and a one Willy was severely injured in the left eye.

    4. On 27 March at Babukwangain Bundibugyo District, Police Constable Bagonza Nelson was hit while on patrol andgot severelyinjured.

    5. On 12 April, again in Kisoro, a local government vehicle carrying soldiers on patrol was attacked, still by the youth.

    6. On 6 April at KamusonsoVillage in Malaba, Busialocals poured hot water on a joint security force. 

    7. On 5 April at Lumumba Road in Arua Town, a group of soldiers were attacked and some of them were injured in that attack. 

    8. On 4 March in Namayire, Matheniko and Turkana warriors attacked security personnel, killing one soldier and injured five.

Madam Speaker, asUPDF, we condemn these acts in the strongest terms and request honourable members to sensitise theirconstituents about the dangers ofattacking andprovoking security personnel deployed to perform their duties.

We also request the Ministry of Health to take interest in the lives of the injured soldiers and make sure treatment and any other things neededare given to them.

Lastly, I would like to extend my appreciation tothe men and women in uniform who are enforcing the presidential directives. They usuallydo so every day putting their lives in the line of fire.

I would like to also request the public to support them. There are things which should be noted. When we go for operations like these, other than war, we have rules of engagement and one of the principles is self-defence. In the event that soldiers decide to defend themselves, no one would want to see what would come out. We, therefore, request the public to instead support us as we do our work.

Madam Speaker, we shall continue to do our work with no fear. Whether we are attacked or not, we shall still do our work.  The UPDF is a disciplined force but we request that it should not be taken for granted. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, General Byekwaso. Honourable members, on your behalf, I would also like to add our voices to thank the forces who have been working hard under difficult conditions. In our campaigns, in addition to telling the people to wash hands, not to sneeze and keep distance, we should add the need to obey the law and not to attack the armed forces.

We also reiterate the need for the armed forces to handle our people properly but certainly, no one can accept or condone attacks on people who are doing their duty. So please, honourable members, sensitise our people about this important work that is being done.  

2.47
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of very urgent importance in relation to COVID-19 and the events that took place yesterday in Malaba and Kamdini. 

Yesterday, two truck drivers who were tested in Malaba were found to be positive for COVID-19. One of them was a Kenyan driver who was eventually taken back to Nairobi. The other one was a Ugandan but driving a Kenyan company truck. He decided to switch off his phone and then drove all the way up to Kamdini yet he was positive and asymptomatic. 

On realising that the truck driver had disappeared, a search was sent through Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) until he was eventually found in Kamdini. Worst of all, without fear of social distancing, he was carrying along a lady colleague. These were the challenges that the medical team found.

Along the way, he was supposed to be referred back to Mbale but later on, it was decided that he should be taken to Gulu. However, the people in Gulu rose up in arms to stop the ambulance from taking the driver to Gulu. The Minister of Health intervened through the Permanent Secretary, Dr Atwine, to get him to Kampala and he was brought to Mulago by around 4.00 a.m. 

I would like to –(Interruption)

MS JOY ATIM: Madam Speaker, we must get to understand that these truck drivers from Malaba on their way maybe to Juba – because nowadays there is no public transport - pick passengers along the road and go with them from Malaba to Busia, Tororo, Mbale, Soroti, Dokolo and Lira.

Honourable members, this is a matter of life and death. This particular man picked a lady from Lira and slept with her. He left her there and picked another lady from Lira and dropped her in Loro. This lady went as far as Apac in Teboke. This man picked another lady from Loro and went with her up to Kamdini where he was intercepted. So, Lira is in chaos. It is good they have identified the lady and she is now mentioning the people she got into contact with.

Madam Speaker, Lira is a hotspot. Truck drivers park there, sex workers are there, and nothing has been done to contain them. This Parliament has got to prevail over that situation. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR KOMAKECH: Madam Speaker, my prayer is that the national taskforce should review the guidelines in terms of movement of trucks. It was said that trucks could continue plying their routes but in terms of what is emerging, it is actually going to be a very serious threat. This is because right from Elegu, where honourable Lucy raised the issue last week, it is intensifying. We may be having the eastern corridor as the first frontline where we may have a very serious attack. 

I pray that the taskforce takes this up immediately and if possible, Government should review the border of Elegu for the time being. Can we have a stopover of 48 hours and we review how movement of trucks should be conducted, because it looks like it is going to generate a lot of challenges to us in northern Uganda and the whole of Uganda? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Can I also instruct the members of the House who are on the taskforce to follow up on this issue so that it is handled to its logical conclusion? Members were laughing but this business of taking women from one point to another could be deliberate to infect the community as they go; it is not a joke.

2.53
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue raised by hon. Komakech regarding the truck driver was very contentious yesterday. Right now, the people of Gulu are being labelled as tribalistic, which is not the case. 

Madam Speaker, this is the second time that they are rejecting somebody from being brought to Gulu. There are very many reasons behind that and one of the reasons is that the regional referral hospital is not well prepared. Secondly, we also have the memory of Ebola still fresh in peoples’ minds. As such, if anything contagious happens in Gulu, they will have to try and contain it from there.

The resistance was very strong to the extent that I had to call the Minister for Health, hon. Ruth Aceng, who did not pick the call. I also sent a message but she did not reply. I wanted to consult her on this because people of Gulu were on fire. I then talked with the minister of state, hon. Kaducu, who is our daughter in-law. She thought we were very unfair as the people of Gulu and that we were saying the regional referral hospital is for Acholi only. 

I said, “No”; it was about the nature of the disease, which is too contagious. If it is found in Gulu, the people of Gulu will not segregate because we have people of all tribes in Gulu District. We are one Uganda but when we want to contain a situation, we should not say that the people of Gulu are tribalistic. It is important that this is taken seriously. It should be taken seriously –(Interruption)

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give is that the situation is not only about Gulu but it has a lot to do with the lack of capacity and preparedness at the regional referral centres.

We were told here that regional referral centres were going to be fully equipped and personal protective equipment would be given to the health workers. When this situation emerged, the medical workers in both Lira Regional Referral Hospital and Gulu Regional Referral Hospital were not prepared. They did not have equipment. As a result, they started reaching out to the public, saying they cannot accept these people because they are not yet protected. It had nothing to do with regionalising the case of COVID-19. That is the information I want to give.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that matter is not on the Order Paper. Leader of the Opposition, please move to something else. 

MS BETTY AOL: I would like to conclude by saying that we should not think that this is tribal or political. We should know that first, it was the President who gave guidelines which should have allowed a truck driver who has been tested to wait for the results from that point where he or she was tested. When somebody is tested, you should bring a certificate. Why do we allow these truck drivers to travel even when they are not supposed to – (Interruption)

MS AMONGIN: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. With due respect, I am aware that what happens in Gulu, Mbarara and Masaka or Soroti is a concern for all Ugandans. However, having heard the story on how this truck driver was got and how they ended up in Gulu, I think at that particular moment, the nearest health centre was the one that was contacted and that was Gulu. (Applause)

Therefore, is the Leader of the Opposition in order to come here to really support this habit? I watched how the people ganged up against the ambulance that was supposed to take the patient there. This can happen in Kamuli. This can happen in Ngora and anywhere in the country. Madam Speaker, is the Leader of Opposition in order to continue supporting this barbaric act before Parliament, which is supposed to be very neutral?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I appreciate that these are not normal times; there is fear, tension, excitement, anxiety. However, that notwithstanding, I think we should treat our people properly. The ministry should also set in place the right guidelines so that matters are handled appropriately. 

Let us go to the next item. [Ms Betty Aol: Can I conclude?] No, no, not on that one. We have finished that, please.

3.00
MR LAWRENCE BIYIKA (NRM, Ora County, Zombo): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of urgent importance concerning the war in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) and its impact on West Nile and Uganda.

Sometimes, problems come in twos, even in threes. We have coronavirus, there is already Ebola in eastern DRC and now there is war, plus locusts. Currently, there is war in eastern Democratic Republic of Congo. The militia forces have overran the DRC army bases in Fataki, Katanga, Njugu, Jalasiga, Pamone, Simbi and other areas. These areas are also affected by coronavirus and Ebola. 

The DRC army is now running towards Bunia. This war has caused a big influx of people running towards Uganda. Some have already entered West Nile. Today, the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) of Zombo reported that eight of the people who were running were arrested inside Uganda. There are many silent entries happening at night at un-gazetted border points. The only monitored border points are at Goli and Padea; the rest are not monitored.

The war is also coming at a time when vulnerable people in West Nile have not got any support, especially food. So, people are desperate and living in fear. This is going to have a serious effect on West Nile and Uganda.

My prayers are: One, Government should give direction on the way forward to the security forces in West Nile and how they can handle this. Government should also send more troops to the border areas, especially the districts of Pakwach, Nebbi and Zombo. 

Government should also send some investigators to eastern DRC. One obstacle in getting information is lack of knowledge of the languages. So, we need to send investigators inside Congo who can speak Kebu, Lendu, Lingala, Swahili and Alur, so that they can get information.

Government should also aid operations with cash, food and means of transport for these agencies so that they can manage the situation.

Finally, let the vulnerable people who are listed under the COVID-19 situation be helped in terms of food support in West Nile. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, you have listened to the requests by the Member who comes from the border about the situation there. So, let us hear from the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs on Tuesday next week about arrangements made to protect our border and people.

Honourable members, we had informed you that 80 Members would sit in the House on each day, the idea being that at least one Member should be able to sit each week; if you are not there on Tuesday, you sit on Wednesday or Thursday. However, it seems there are more Members than we catered for. Please, check your lists. If you are supposed to be here today, you should be here. If you are not, let us find a way of reorganising ourselves. (Laughter)

3.04
MR STEPHEN KISA (NRM, Luuka County South, Luuka): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the rising cases of domestic violence, murder and theft in rural areas.

As a result of people staying together in one place for a long time under restrictions, coupled with not engaging in any productive activity and in some cases starvation, violence has escalated in families. It is not only between husbands and wives but also among other family members. 

Yesterday, in Luuka Town Council, a young man beat up his biological father to death for refusing him to cut a tree in the compound for sale. He boxed him once, the man collapsed and he died. On Monday this week, a 25-year-old man was stabbed to death when he attempted to break up a fight between his brother and his wife. Also, yesterday, while I was watching news, I saw similar incidents in Kyotera. 

My fear is that before people die of COVID-19 and starvation, we may register other unrelated deaths. My prayers are:

1. 	The Ministry of Information, Communications Technology and National Guidance must include a message against domestic violence during the COVID-19 campaign.

2. 	The Ministry of Internal Affairs must scale up village-to-village intelligence and surveillance to crack down on these crimes.

3. 	Finally, the district taskforce should set up a village security desk where victims can urgently report cases of domestic violence. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Kisa. You have raised a very important point. It is true that tension is rising in families. Therefore, the Minister of Information, Communications Technology and National Guidance is directed to urgently prepare messages that will be sent to the population, in their capacity as the ministry in charge of national guidance. The Clerk will write to the chairperson of the taskforce on the proposals made by the honourable member to improve management in the villages.

3.07
MS FLORENCE NAMBOZO (NRM, Woman Representative, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance as the chairperson of the Committee on HIV/AIDS. 

In 2014, the HIV and AIDS Prevention and Control Act came into place and in July 2018, the President assented to the regulations. However, as I speak, we do not have the HIV/AIDS Trust Fund. If I can give you a few statistics from Uganda AIDS Commission, 50,000 are infected annually with HIV, 1000 per week, 140 per day, and 6 per hour, and an estimated 23,000 deaths annually. 

As I speak, we are all talking about COVID-19 and we know what is happening in the other countries that have been helping us. Our partners that had come to help us are pulling out of our activities, partners like the Department for International Development(DFID), the Swedish International Development Agency, DANIDA and the US President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR). We are only remaining with Irish Aid that which will end its contract in December and they may not renew it.

Madam Speaker, right now, we all know the measures that have been put in place especially concerning public transport. The HIV/AIDS clients or patients cannot move for long distances. Our clients move from district to district to get their refills or have their viral load testing because of the stigma discrimination that they face.

Madam Speaker, PEPFAR is pulling out. They have be funding us with commodities but we have our own Cipla that has got very high prices of ARVs compared to the other countries, and they are not certified by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA).

My prayers: 

1. 	I am asking this Government, especially the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, to give us a sustainability plan for this nation, especially after these partners have all pulled out.

2. 	Can the Government give us their status on the HIV/AIDS Trust Fund because at the end of COVID-19, we have a time bomb awaiting Ugandans? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: We really need answers from Government. Why is the trust fund not available? We have talked about this matter on the Floor of Parliament very many times. What is the problem, honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development?

3.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we would like to thank the Chairperson of the Committee on HIV/AIDS and also say that we do appreciate the gravity of the matter. 

We know that for the fund now that is helping us buy the medicine for HIV/AIDS, Government coffers are only contributing only 10 per cent to 15 per cent. We are discussing internally in Government to see how we can start building that fund beginning with next financial year.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have been discussing since 2014 and you want us to believe that!

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, as you recall, because of the Public Finance Management Act and other arrangements within Government, we were a bit hesitant in putting up different funds. However, this fund was established by an Act of Parliament and therefore, we must have it in place but the resources have been a constraint on our side. However, it seems now we have no option but to start building this fund progressively because if the donors pull out, we will have a problem. 

At this stage, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, we want you to bear with us so that we can start building the fund next financial year. This financial year is ending in the next two months and we cannot say that we are going to have it now.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, sometimes you confuse us. Why are you not afraid of levying taxes every year? You do not want to tax people on this fund but every year you are levying taxes; does it make sense?

MS NAMBOZO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The honourable minister is aware that Uganda won the bid to host the International Conference on AIDS and Sexually Transmitted Infections in Africa (ICASA) 2021. When he comes here and says the Government was a little reluctant very well knowing that there are so many infections in Uganda besides COVID-19, I beg that the minister clarifies. How reluctant are you after I gave you a bit of the statistics from Uganda AIDS Commission? I thank you.

MS WINNIE KIIZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to seek clarification from the honourable minister. The honourable minister is aware that we are in the budget process and he is still telling the House that the issue can only be dealt with in the next financial year. 

We are already working on the budget. I would like the minister to clearly indicate whether in the next financial year’s budget, which is before Parliament, they have provided for the fund, and how much they have provided in the budget which is supposed to be implemented next financial year. He is aware he has brought this budget to Parliament.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, this fund was supposed to be built using the resources from taxes from soft drinks, beers and spirits. Effective 1st of July - that is why I said that we will start next financial year - that portion of the taxes which was supposed to go to the fund will be implemented by Government.

It is a percentage of the taxes that we were supposed to collect from the soft drinks, beers and spirits - I think it was one per cent. Therefore, effective July, we shall implement it. It is a matter of implementation, honourable colleagues. That is why we are saying next financial year.

THE SPEAKER: Is it reflected in any of these revenue Bills?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, it is a law that has already been passed, so it is an implementation issue. We have already passed that law and that one per cent will go to the trust fund for HIV/AIDS. It does not have to be reflected again in any other Bill because Parliament has already passed the law.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, we passed this law in the 2018/2019 financial year. Therefore, that means it is a law which is in operation and the money is being deducted every year. I think the issue is: Why has that money not been allocated to address this matter? It is now two years down the road. I think that is what the minister needs to clarify. 

If that money was specific to addressing the matter, why has it taken these two financial years without you providing money to address that matter? That is what the chairperson of the committee is talking about. We passed this tax long ago. Maybe the minister is telling us that it takes two years to implement it. The day of commencement is the next financial year yet we passed this law two years ago.

MS JESCA ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to first apologise to this House for debating this as we are in the process of budgeting. However, I would like to inform this House that the problem is bigger than this. 

Uganda AIDS Commission falls under the presidential affairs committee. Therefore, I would like to inform this House that even the money for ICASA is not there. Uganda AIDS Commission needed Shs 7 billion for it and the preparation commences next year but there is no single provision made. 

I would prefer that the minister makes a commitment that apart from operationalising the fund we worked on as Parliament, he also commits Government to supporting the activities of Uganda AIDS Commission and any other activity related to HIV/AIDS. 

The situation is bad. Young people are getting infected and those who got infected before are now mature, so there is a high level of the spread of HIV. I, therefore, pray that Government commits itself so that we do not fail our country. We bid to host ICASA but there is no coin provided for it. Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, as I said a few minutes ago, the fund is already established but we have not been deducting money as we were supposed to do. We are now committing that beginning with July next financial year, the deductions for fund will commence.

As you may recall, we also had to bring the regulations to the House at some stage. Therefore, beginning with July - that is a commitment that we can give you, and July is not far away from now. 

Regarding other activities of Uganda AIDS Commission, Madam Speaker, I think we shall discuss those as we debate the budget report in a few days from now.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, the Committee on Government Assurances is instructed to follow up on that issue to make sure that implementation is done from the 1st of July and give us an update before the end of July 2020. I think that is enough for now.

Honourable members, yesterday we had done quite a bit on the Income Tax Bill but there are a number of amendments. I want to just give four Members – Honourable members, I know someone has been murdered; have you reported to police? Have you told the Minister of Internal Affairs? Hon. Kiiza.

3.22
MS WINFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a matter of national importance in regard to the Government’s commitment and gesture of giving out food to Ugandans.

First, I would like to thank the Government of Uganda, through the Office of the Prime Minister, and of course thank all people of goodwill who have contributed food to Ugandans to ensure that the lockdown does not kill people due to hunger before COVID-19 even kills them. However, Madam Speaker, you are also aware that we requested that this gesture is equally extended to everybody in Uganda and all the districts apart from Kampala and Wakiso.

That notwithstanding, Madam Speaker, I am speaking on behalf of those who have so far received the food - the few people of Kampala and Wakiso. They are complaining that even when they received the food, the beans were rotten and with a lot of stones. In some areas, people were given only charcoal that was enough for one sigiri and they were not given food thereafter.

Their issue is that, yes, they accept and thank Government for the gesture, but they should not go an extra mile to put them in a situation where they shall not appreciate the good gesture - (Interruption)

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand on a point of order. We have heard so much about food being distributed and they have included Wakiso. You are making all our lives very difficult. Government of Uganda has so far not distributed any grain of food to Wakiso District. Therefore, when you impute that they have given rotten food to the people of Wakiso, there has not been even a grain of food given to the people of Wakiso.

Therefore, please stop the allegations. If you want food for all the people in Uganda, let us tell that to Government. Is the Member standing right to say that they have distributed rotten food to the people of Wakiso? Is she in order to say that when there is nothing that has been given to anybody in Wakiso?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the Government was here before the food distribution started and they said they would distribute in Kampala and Wakiso districts first. Yes, that is what the Government said. So, let them tell us why they have not distributed food to those places.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, I live in Wakiso. For purposes of record, I live in Kyaliwajjala and I stay closer to people who received some of these food items. There are some people who received charcoal on Thursday last week but to date, they have never received food, which they are supposed to. (Interjections) I saw people in Kireka sitting at their food distribution point the whole day, waiting for food, which was never delivered.

Therefore, while the Member stays in Nansana, he should know that I am a resident of Wakiso as well and I know what takes place there. However, what we are saying is that the food should reach everywhere. If the food goes everywhere, then you who is in Nansana, whose people have not yet received it, will receive it just like I who is in Kasese, my sister from Ngora and just like our colleagues from Kamuli and the rest of the people in other parts of the country. 

My prayer– (Interruption)

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Kiiza for giving me way. The information that I would like to give the House is that whereas – (interjections)- Madam Speaker, may be, I should lay my certificate on the Table to show that I was cleared officially by the Ministry of Health. I now speak confidently and you can rely on that.

Can I lay that certificate on the Table? The Speaker’s Office has cleared me; why are you questioning my -

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, my prayer is that while Government continues with the food distribution, it should roll out to the entire country. 

Secondly, when you choose to show a good gesture, it must indeed be a good gesture. When you choose to give me food, it should be food that you can equally eat. If you have chosen to give people beans, give them the beans that are edible. Otherwise, this practice of giving people rotten beans; you give them three kilograms and one and a half kilograms are stones or dust.

I would like to pray that the Office of the Prime Minister, together with the President, should find it within their hearts to rollout food distribution to the whole country. 

In addition, give food that is edible; food that will help Ugandans to appreciate the good gesture. Once again, I would like to conclude by thanking all the people of goodwill that have supported Government of Uganda and the people of Uganda during this crisis. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I hope by now, you know why Parliament was insisting that we move together with the Government and with clear guidelines and a plan of action. Those stones in the beans - You can see.

Let hon. Amongin lay that certificate.

MS AMONGIN: Madam Speaker, I would like to report that all Members of the Pan African Parliament Delegation undertook a self-quarantine of actually more than 14-days immediately we returned to the country. I am here on behalf of the five of us. We already submitted the clearance certificates of hon. James Kakooza, hon. Okot-Ogong, hon. Morris Ogenga-Latigo and hon. Anifa Kawooya to the Office of the Speaker. 

These certificates are not given at once, the reason my certificate was issued four days ago. Honourable members, you should be happy that we all tested negative and I think that is a positive thing for all of us.

THE SPEAKER: Just lay the certificate.

MS AMONGIN: Madam Speaker, I do not want to be intimidated by the member of Parliament for the Budadiri. I would like to take this opportunity, as a representative of the people of Uganda in the Pan African Parliament, to lay on Table, on behalf of all the other Members, a certificate of clearance from the Ministry of Health.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are cleared individually. You lay your certificate, hon. James Kakooza has laid his and I am waiting for the others. 

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The certificate reads; “COVID-19 test results from the Ministry of Health, given to hon. Jacquiline Amongin for having completed self-isolation.” The date of issue of the certificate is 3 April 2020. I beg to lay, Madam Speaker. 

3.33
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS(Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I stand to inform Parliament that Government is very happy for the action taken by Parliament to approve the supplementary expenditure. 

On behalf of the Office of the Prime Minister, I would like to also say that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has given some money and this money - because of the process, up to now, is being received.

It was a Government plan after announcing the – it realised that some people are going to suffer because most of them live on daily income. A plan was announced and in this plan, we found out that most people going to be affected are here in Kampala and Wakiso. That is why we had to start it from here. We regret to say that the plan did not work out the way we wanted.

I have already said that the action you undertook is the money we are going to receive very soon. We are going to resume and it is going to be very difficult for Government to provide food all over the country simultaneously. It is not going to be possible because one, acquiring this food is going to be very difficult. Secondly, getting to everybody in the country is very difficult. That is why we are going systematically. 

Therefore, for a member of Parliament to stand here and say that the beans are rotten is a lie. (Laughter) Before we supply any food, Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS) must clear it. Therefore, the beans you are claiming are rotten are your own beans. (Laughter) We are not aware of that. I beg to inform. 

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, the Minister for Kampala was on television showing the rotten beans. She paraded the rotten beans to the whole world. (Interjections) Let us go to the Income Tax Bill. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I am not aware of that but I am talking about what the honourable member has just said. (Laughter) In the write up, before food is bought, the UNBS must approve it. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us go to our other business. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill had a number of proposals for amendment. I wanted to hear a few views before we go to Committee Stage. 

3.38
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, you guided that Members needed to add value to the committee report in regard to agricultural inputs and another item. 

I would like to add value to the committee report by rising to support them on a very important issue that they raised, which is the reintroduction of withholding tax on agricultural supplies. 

Madam Speaker, yesterday, that matter was not touched and we are aware that the country is battling COVID-19 right now. We have been informed that there is a likelihood of the economy going down after this pandemic. Therefore, this particular reintroduction of withholding tax, which was attempted by the committee and the House – I think in 2018 – is going to be a disservice to this nation. 

We know that the agricultural sector is one of the sectors, which is going to act as a buffer zone as we recover from the pandemic. It is not good for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to even attempt to introduce such a tax onto a sector that we believe is going to save our nation as we recover from this pandemic. 

The sector of agriculture in this country is largely dominated by middlemen. Therefore, if we put this withholding tax, it is going to perhaps affect the lowest person by these middlemen evading this tax and putting it on to the farmers. 

As part of our work, as members of Parliament, we are encouraging people that as they are in the lockdown, they should participate actively in agriculture. Therefore, the reintroduction of withholding tax is going to be a very big disservice to this country. 

I beg to support the committee report that this House rejects this particular proposal by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in an effort to support our nation in its recovery post COVID-19. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.40
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee, which has consistently brought this matter on board; the issue of the threshold for Pay As You Earn. 

I would like to call upon colleagues to support the committee’s position that we need to increase the threshold for Pay As You Earn from Shs 235,000 to Shs 335,000. As the chairman stated, this is going to increase disposable income and the purchasing power of Ugandans who earn will be increased. Through indirect taxes, Government will be able to raise more revenue. 

Madam Speaker, there is a proposal in the recommendations of the committee that URA may have to think outside the box in trying to get out and apply the PPP. Issues of revenue collection cannot be given out in this arrangement. What URA needs to do is to continue professionalising its staff. 

The challenge that URA is facing today is, because of the arrangement that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development brought of contracts, most of the professional and experienced senior people – When many young people become assistant commissioner, they can only serve for six years and then go away. This policy has churned out very many professional people who should have continued and provided guidance. In the end, URA has been relying on very few people who come in, possibly with less experience, because they are recruited at very low levels. 

I would like to call upon the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to review that policy because most young people are leaving URA when they reach the level of assistant commissioner because of that policy. 

I would like to agree with the committee on the proposal of the ministry that property managers should account for a building separately even if the buildings are on the same plot. You cannot increase the expenses of the taxpayer – (Interruption)

MR SEBUNYA: Thank you, hon. Okupa, for raising that issue. In the manual of URA - I do not know what the excitement was - they instituted a policy that whoever reaches the level of assistant commissioner or commissioner and serves two terms must exit URA. These are people that Government has spent colossal sums of money to train. They start their jobs young, they start by training, acquire Masters’ degrees and professional papers and when they reach that level, they are exited just because they have served as assistant commissioners. I think this is very erroneous. 

We talked to Commissioner Kagina, when she was there and she refused to change it. We talked to the most recent who has exited and she refused to change it and yet, the Board was willing to change it because they are losing highly trained officers. When they leave URA, they go and work with the private sector and do creative accounting for them so as not to pay taxes. Hon. Okupa is very right that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development must work to change that policy. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, honourable colleague. Those of us who went through there – Hon. Musumba yesterday said that he is a student of taxation. I do not know when he is graduating. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, myself and others who went there – If you are to go there, you would undergo a two-year training course, which only URA was giving. Most of the people who went through that profession have exited in this type of arrangement. Therefore, Government is losing and the private sector is gaining. No wonder, they are now struggling to find creative ways to raise taxes. You cannot increase taxes by saying you should account for taxes per building, yet, you are in an estate arrangement. 

Madam Speaker, taxpayers even use the money they get from banks as loans in order to build other structures. Here is a situation where the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is saying you should not claim those expenses on all the property that you own. This is where they are getting it wrong and I agree with the committee.

Finally, my concern is on the issue of taxing losses, if you make losses consistently for five years. I do not know where this accounting is coming from. Taxation is on income, not losses. If URA – because they have lost professionals – has failed to capture those taxpayers who have consistently declared losses yet, they are making profits, the onus should be on URA to use investigators. They used to have an investigation department to dig deeper into those issues and find out if truly that taxpayers have been making losses throughout for the last five years.

Supposing you have reached a breakeven point – when you start a business, you may not start making business. You reach the breakeven point before you start making profit. Why do you start to disadvantage that taxpayer or company – because he has reached a breakeven point, by taxing them? I think this is very unfair and I thank the committee for rejecting it. I call upon Members to support the recommendations that have been put forward by the committee.

3.47
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am more interested in the issue of taxing private education institutions and schools. It is not fair and it should not even have appeared on the report. When you read the letter of the President to these institutions, you see that these schools are giving a hand in what should have been done by Government. I would like to put this on record. I do not know why some Members think that schools make profits. They do not make any profits.

What we need to look at in this country, Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member, we dealt with that issue extensively yesterday. I said I wanted to hear about the other amendments.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I was not around.

THE SPEAKER: No, we had it in detail and that is why I said I want to give time to the other proposals.

MR SSEWUNGU: Most obliged, Madam Speaker.

3.48
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Madam Speaker, I would like to join honourable colleagues who have supported the committee’s report, particularly on clauses 5 and 8. I will begin with clause 8. The only asset, which the minority of Ugandans own, is land. Most of our people own land in customary form. When you look at the implication of clause 8 – Government wants to make every Ugandan who owns land to become, indirectly, a withholding tax agent for purposes of taxation. 

People who own these pieces of land, especially in the countryside, sell them normally at the time of paying school fees. We are saying to Ugandans, who are selling these pieces of land to pay school fees, that the person paying the purchase price must retain part of it for purposes of withholding tax. 

This is very dangerous. It is going to make our people perpetually poor and it will even increase domestic violence. Actually, for Ugandans to beat this particular law, instead of making agreements for sale of land, they would rather say “we have donated land” and later, you will have more litigation and the like. 
Therefore, I support the committee that this provision should be rejected as it does not help this country. As a matter of fact, Government has started the process of registering land and giving people customary certificates of tenure. Government would collect a lot of money if land is registered and people pay stamp duty when they transfer ownership. Let us maintain the position where Government collects stamp duty when people are transferring registered land.

I also support the committee’s report in respect of clause 3. The clause tends to look at buildings as if buildings own themselves. The taxpayer is the individual, not the building. Therefore, why do you want to delink the taxpayer from what he owns? Still, URA can aggregate the tax for the person who owns one, two or three buildings other than making them separate buildings as if buildings are taxpayers on their own. With those few comments, I support the report and I invite Members to support them and we move forward. Thank you.

3.51
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWDs Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is on the small business, where we intend to introduce a tax regime. I think Government should first record all these small businesses and categorise them depending on how much they earn before we introduce the tax.

Madam Speaker, my understanding of a small business is that I will buy from a wholesaler who is already paying tax somewhere and I will come and pay an indirect tax as I sell my goods. You will be giving a big load to this small businessperson. We also know that there are people like the jua kali. I would think that the best thing is for us to know these small businesses, record them, know their categories and rate them according to their earnings. I beg that this tax be exempted for now and it remains the way it has been.

3.53
MR JOHN TWESIGYE (NRM, Bunyaruguru County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for their report. My contribution is on two issues and the first one is just an additional comment on what one of the Members brought forward about paying the withholding tax on land. 

Before withholding tax is imposed on a land transaction, we need to understand that people sell land for different reasons. As you are aware, most of our land in this country is not titled. If you take the example of land in rural areas, people usually sell their land to pay school fees. However, if a title is to be obtained, someone will have to pay a stamp duty and other taxes. 

Imposition of another tax on this transaction is double taxation. Madam Speaker, I propose that Members should support us on this cause so that this is deleted from the report.

Allow me to also make a brief comment. I know Members have talked much about it but I would like to draw the attention of Members that whereas some of us are proposing that private schools be taxed, remember that materials that are utilised in the training of those students are already taxed with Value Added Tax. I would like, therefore, to propose that in case the tax is to be imposed on the schools, the training materials tax should be exempted. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.56 
MR MUYANJA MBABAALI (NRM, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Regarding the amendment on the tax, I have got two points. One, as I was going through, I think something was not included; the tax holiday of five years for investors. Madam Speaker, you are aware that Government has invested heavily on industrial parks without reducing the time of an investor erecting his or her factory. I am, therefore, of the opinion that as we try to widen the tax base, the tax holiday of five years should be reduced to three years, because already, the infrastructure of the industry is already done by Government of Uganda. That way, I think the Government of Uganda can expand the tax base.

We have over 5,000 industries today. If we reduced the time, a lot of taxation would be taking place and URA would be collecting much more money.

Another point is regarding the tax on land. Some people buy land as a saving; they save their money in land. If we start taxing land, would you in the same way, tax someone’s savings in the bank? In Buganda, people buy land and keep as part of their savings. Already, there is enough taxation on the land. If you start levying someone’s land because he or she is selling, will you do the same to someone who has saved his money on his account? I feel the withholding tax should not be there. I rest my case.


3.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERALS) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg for your indulgence because what I am going to say is in relation to the issue of the schools and it has not been touched. We are all aware that apart from the faith-based institutions and a few other organisations, the others that go to invest in schools do so, looking at it as a business and a source of income.

Secondly, I would like to request that we look at the leakages. I have said this before and allow me to say it here, Madam Speaker. If you look at the leakages, we can actually cut-out those leakages and put this money elsewhere.

If you look at Government schools - a private person will put up a school, pay the teachers and meet all the operating costs in that school. Some get profits and some may not. However, look at Government schools, where Government pays the teachers and gives capitation grant. On top of that, Government puts up buildings for them yet, they charge fees highly. For example, look at Gayaza, Budo, Kisubi - how much do these people charge? They are more expensive than even the private schools that I know. Hon. Muyingo is here; he owns a chain of schools.

I have been paying fees for someone in his school but he is a private person without any money from the Government. The fees he was charging was much lower; half what the other Government schools were charging.

Madam Speaker, I think it is high time we interested ourselves - rather than saying let us remove taxes from the private schools, I think let us interest ourselves in these leakages. Why should a school that Government pays for its teachers, gives capitation grants, constructs buildings and sometimes even maintenance, charge over Shs 2 million -(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Fortunately, the minister is around. What the Committee on Education and Sports did was to give schools like Namagunga, Nabbingo and St Mary’s College Kisubi money to rehabilitate their schools at the cost of money paid by parents in the same schools.

A parent pays Shs 1.5 million, yet, there is a Universal Secondary Education (USE) school in Kalungu, which is not even given Shs 50,000 and they cannot fund them. The established schools, which are raising over Shs 2 billion per term get capitation grant as well and they are given more money to rehabilitate their buildings. Madam Speaker, there is no equity there. This is the information I wanted to give to the honourable minister. 

We cannot sit here and allow such. Otherwise, at the end of the day, it means that we must tax St Mary’s College, Kisubi, Kibuli Secondary School and all those institutions, the moment we introduce that tax. Please, bear in mind that the biggest number of schools are in rural areas and most of them do not earn anything throughout the year. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MS OPENDI: Thank you very much for that information. Madam Speaker, it would have been okay if this money was going to the Consolidated Fund. I am reliably informed that this money does not even go to the Consolidated Fund. 

We may not look at this now because it may be a little late but for the next financial year, I think we better critically look at this issue. Otherwise, it is a lot of money; it is not small money.

Secondly, I would like to request colleagues that as we reject some of these taxes that had been proposed by Government, it would be good, if we came up with other areas, where we can fill in the gaps. Otherwise, as you reject, know that there is no revenue that Government is going to earn from what it had proposed and therefore, already that is a shortfall. It would, therefore, be good if you reject one, look elsewhere to get revenue to fund our budget. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Opendi has reminded me that Government withdrew funding from USE schools. They stopped funding the community schools but they were funding the already existing Government schools, building for them yet, some community schools in Mukono have been withdrawn.

4.04
MS SARAH BABIRYE (NRM, Youth Representative, Central): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my honourable colleagues. I would like to suggest that the Government waives taxes from fishing gears and also finds a way of controlling the illegal fishing nets. 

The fisheries sector is part of agriculture and most of the agricultural equipment is tax-free but when it comes to fisheries, there are very many young people who have died in the lake as a result of illegal fishing.

The seniors or bosses buy illegal fishing nets and give them to these jobless young people and they end up dying in the water as a result of being chased by the authorities.

I, therefore, request the Government to solve this issue. Let them waive taxes from the nets because we are not losing anything. When these people go fishing, they will come and pay taxes and Government will still benefit - (Interruption)

MS EGUNYU: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I think it was an omission last year because the fisheries sector is under the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. The nets and motorised engines that we use are all agricultural products.

It was an omission and would have been in the Bill that we define agricultural products as fishing gear and taxes be waived. Thank you. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Income tax is after you have fished, sold and made profit.  The tax we are talking about has nothing completely to do with exempting a fishnet. If you had wanted may be like customs, VAT, you missed yesterday. We are now on income.

Is it procedurally right for our colleagues who are talking about a product called fish - which God feeds; they go and catch without putting an investment - and tell us to exempt it from income tax. Are they procedurally right?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are dealing with withholding tax on agricultural supplies and it includes the equipment. The case of the honourable member is that we have dealt with the tractors, arrows and slashers - as you recalled yesterday but the fishing gear is not considered as part of agricultural inputs, for purposes of these Bills; that is their case. 

MS KITYO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the guidance. Therefore, my humble request to Government is that they should waive the taxes from the fishing gear and it will help us if the real nets that are required are not expensive; it will eliminate or stop the usage of illegal nets and save the lives of people, most especially the youth. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Honourable members, we have spent a bit of time on this. I will see others on the Excise Duty Bill. I have seen your faces.

4.09
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM,	Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to render my support to the committee report and most especially comment on clause 16, which was proposing to increase rental tax for an individual from 20 to 30 per cent. 

The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is aware of the conducive or attractive tax holidays that we give to investors. Overtaxing Ugandans would be unfair.

We should look to expanding the tax-base and wanting as many people as possible to pay reasonable tax. To say that it should rise from 20 to 30 per cent was unfair and so, I would like to support the committee report.

We would want that as many Ugandans as possible engage in business and expand their businesses rather than stifle them with heavy taxes. Thank you.

4.11
MR MOSES NAGWOMU (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The principle behind all these income tax amendments is to widen the tax-base. As Uganda, that is one of our sources of income, to finance all the public programmes.

However, I have always had issues with the honourable colleagues in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. In their urge to raise revenue, there are some areas, which they have not looked into.

As I support the increment on the income tax threshold and the removal of any tax on agricultural implements, I suggest that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development addresses the issue of leakages.

We have been on system migration and there are certain audits that you need to do. I am responding to hon. Opendi’s request that we should be suggesting other avenues of getting revenue. The systems, which URA has been moving from one area to another, left a lot of money, which has never been collected in terms of audit. 

There are customs procedure codes, which need to be addressed in terms of carrying out forensic audits. There is one on VAT deferment and another 450 they know and I have told the Director, Tax Policy about these issues. We need to address some of them so that we close the leakages in the tax system.

Otherwise, if we continue like this, we shall be overburdening the poor. I would like to look at the withholding tax on the sale of land.  We are all aware that most of the land in Uganda is customarily owned. We do not have titles for most of the land. It is at a time like this that Government should come out to address the issue of land titles. In so doing, we shall be operationalising the Stamp Duty Tax whereby for anybody to legally own that land, they should pay Stamp Duty Tax. That way, we shall be able collect meaningful tax and that will be better other than going to a peasant who is selling land somewhere to take his child to school and we begin asking for taxes.

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: I will ask the Clerk to put an extra chair in front of those tables so that the next person speaking comes and sits there or on this side because the walking takes a bit of time.

4.15
MR CHARLES BAKKABULINDI (NRM, Workers MP): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to, first, thank the committee for having thought it wise to make some amendments on the threshold on PAYE, where most of the categories of workers suffer a lot. I would like to thank hon. Okupa for initiating that debate.

In the committee’s recommendations – I have read the report – they are talking about increasing the threshold but the figure is not clear. We moved from Shs 130,000 in 2012, to Shs 235,000 and up to now, we have not increased it. You are aware that we even do not have a minimum wage.

When we increase the threshold, let the Shs 350,000 be properly captured so that we can save majority of the workers, including the casual workers so that they are exempted from that burden of paying such taxes. We know it very well that since 2012, there has been a lot of inflation and increase in prices for commodities.

Therefore, I beg the members to support that instead of recommending to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development the increase of the threshold. Let us make it clear that the threshold should be increased to Shs 350,000.

Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: So, do you want us to do it here?

MR BAKKABULINDI: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Okay; at committee stage.

4.17
MAJ. GUMA GUMISIRIZA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda:) Madam Speaker, a tax is a tool that economists use to attain certain objectives. It is not simply taxing bila mupango; taxing without any plan. (Laughter) “Bila mpango” is a Swahili phrase. Swahili is in our Constitution, so nobody should say I am using this other language; it has only not been operationalised.

There are two types of taxes; regressive and progressive. If you want to achieve a certain set of objectives in the economy, you use a tax. For example, I have heard that they are increasing the tax on rentals to 30 per cent. We all know there is a deficit of accommodation in Kampala and I think in other regional towns in this country too.

Therefore, if you exaggerate or become obsessed by simply raising the tax – yes, you need the income but you have to balance all these interests. You may need a raised Government income but the tax to raise that income should not prohibit the expansion of the economy. If, therefore, we want to encourage people to build more structures for accommodation in Kampala and in the country at large but then we hike the tax, I do not comprehend it. 

In response to this increased tax, some people might choose to invest for example, half a billion shillings or a billion shillings either in bonds or the treasury bills from the Central Bank. So, you must balance all these interests.

Madam Speaker, the finance ministry is packed with all the economists in this country. I am sure they will have looked at every side and aspect of this proposal. The committee of Parliament is also chaired by a qualified person. I think they should bring us a report that is already fine-tuned and agreed upon, taking care of all these interests but not simply introducing a tax.

On the point of closing loopholes, Government needs to do two things. It has to raise taxes but also look at the expenditure side. The Government has a deficit of money; we do not have money to spend. However, when you look at the behavior of people in the public sector, it is as if we are a first-class country in Europe.

For example, I have always talked about vehicles. Why would Government buy these extremely expensive cars in the world for the Republic of Uganda, a country at our level? There is also the expenditure side - because you can continue raising taxes but how are you spending them? That point should also be put on record for people to understand.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members. There is another area where the Government has not taken interest. When we register companies, we are supposed to file annual returns. For a long time, the Government has not bothered to collect the money for the annual returns, including arrears; and they are huge. I really want Government to take an interest in that.

Honourable members, I put the question that the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill be read for a second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL 2020

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 – yes, hon. Odur – is it on commencement?

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Chairperson, clause 1 is on commencement and they have provided two commencement dates. The first, which I believe is right, is 1 July 2020 but they have also created an exception for 1 July 2019.

What they are asking us is to legislate retrospectively yet the principle governing legislation is that we cannot legislate retrospectively unless the facts are put to us. What it means is that some companies have already filed and they are supposed to pay tax to Government. However, because they want to avoid to pay, they went to the ministry and asked to be exempted retrospectively.

So, without the facts of who these companies are and how much they are seeking, we should not accept to exempt them because we are going to be unfair to other companies. 

Madam Chairperson, I do not accept a retrospective commencement date of 1 July 2019. We only go by the one of 2020 because Section 6(b) and (c) that they are seeking to exempt means that they had already filed the returns, either in the month of December, if the financial year is July to June or in March if the financial year is from January to December. Therefore, who are these that want us to exempt them?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, hon. Odur. Can the mover explain to us why you want us to retrospectively deem certain parts of this Act to have come into force? No, let us first hear why you want us to have section 2.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chairperson, I think the intent was to preserve the incentives regime, which had already been introduced last year. The new proposal is basically a clarification of the incentives regime that was already passed last year by Parliament.

THE CHAIRPERSON: If they were enforced last year, why do you want to talk about them now?

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chairperson, we concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 1, sub-clause (2) be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to delete clause 2. The justification is

i) 	This proposal has hitherto been rejected by Parliament for the last two financial years and 
ii) 	The 0.5 per cent is tax on turnover of companies that may be in a loss or near loss income position and therefore, goes against the best principles that income tax is charged on income and not turnover.

I beg to submit.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chairperson, notwithstanding what the chairman has said, this alternative minimum tax is not only here in Uganda. There are a number of jurisdictions that use that as a method to generate revenue for Government. In our calculations, we estimate that if we delete this particular clause, we are probably going to lose about Shs 178 billion, which was already factored in the Budget.

Madam Chairperson, I can give you a number of jurisdictions where this law is applicable; Australia, India, South Korea, Taiwan and other countries.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, according to the chairman, you have brought this three times and we have rejected it. What is the new reason?

MR AJEDRA: The justification of an alternative tax at this particular time, Madam Chairperson, is as follows: as Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we did a comprehensive analysis. If you look at the SMEs in terms of the overall percentage of tax they pay, it is far higher than the other corporations that file income tax.

I have data here from URA, which indicates that most of these big corporations - because of a number of deductions, which my colleague talked about - are paying almost nothing in terms of corporation tax.

Madam Chairperson, the purpose was to redress that disparity between what the SMEs are paying as a percentage of the revenue vis-a-vis what other companies were paying.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Chairperson, the deductions that the minister speaks about are embedded in the law that this Parliament passed. Under the Tax Procedures Code, Capital allowances and other tax exemptions that are allowable are in the system of URA. When you file returns, it is clear that for these, you are allowed to deduct and recover.

Would the minister of finance be in order to come here and make excuses of deductions that are provided for in the law? URA has a Tax Investigations Department, which is allowed to move and follow particular companies that they suspect are avoiding or defrauding the entity. Is the minister in order?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, are these already provided for in the Tax Procedures Code?

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chairperson, yes, it is true and I take note that most of these decisions are actually enshrined in the law passed by Parliament and we take note of that. Taxes are dynamic and every jurisdiction across the world reviews taxes every year. As I said before, we did an analysis, as the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and realised that in terms of proportions of the tax that SMEs pay, it is higher than the big corporations. That is the reason we introduced this proposal so that we can actually lower their tax burden. 

In addition, as I said before, we are going to lose revenue of about Shs 178 billion that must somehow be filled up –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I am at great pains to raise a procedural point to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Before I raise the procedure, if I go and borrow money from the Bank, say Shs 100 million at 25 per cent interest, the 25 per cent of Shs 100 million will be Shs 25 million.

To me who borrowed, it will be an expense but to the bank, it will be income. Therefore, I will make a loss of Shs 25 million but the bank will make a profit of Shs 25 million. All expenses of one company are incomes of another company.

Madam Chairperson, what the minister is saying is that he wants to tax gross turnover and yet the law we are dealing with is income tax, which talks about income after removing expenses. Now this law of gross turnover, what tax will it be to begin with?

In India, it is said that they have very funny tax laws and it has been recommended that they should not participate in the Commonwealth. They have agreed that they have to amend them. 

Therefore, Madam Chairperson, is the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, who is supposed to direct the economy better, procedurally right to come and bring gross tax instead of bringing income tax? Is he proceeding well?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, what tax are you talking about? Is it income or turnover?

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We had debate on this same issue in the last financial year. The problem, honourable minister, is not to use the weakness of administration of Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) not to have the capacity to audit and investigate these companies and use the law to target those people for not filing returns.

In accounting, there is no way I can deduct all my expenses. The target you need is the income I have made and that is where you go and tax. You cannot tax the gross I have before I have even made profit. This is a weakness in the administration of URA.

Therefore, empower the human resources within URA – and I think hon. Okupa has mentioned it. These people are losing a lot of human resource who are trained to have the capacity in URA because of serving two terms. They have the best experienced people but because they have a weakness, they want to use the law to target those people who are obedient in paying taxes. We cannot use the law because of your weakness in administration to target people who file good returns.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 2 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, deleted.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, if you are still keen, I think you should try early next year, take time and explain because for these three financial years, it has been rejected.

Clause 3

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to delete clause 3 and the justification is that limiting the amount of deductible expenses and losses denies corporate persons deductions of legitimate capital and operational expenses incurred on deriving rental income, thus contravening principles of taxation and unfairly disadvantages the taxpayer.

Under the Act, income tax is chargeable on the gross income of each taxpayer, which allows for accounting for income tax on the aggregated income of a single taxpayer. 

Therefore, accounting for rental income separately for each building may work against this principle, that for purposes, allows a taxpayer offset the tax payer to offset the losses incurred from one income stream from the profits in other income streams of the same taxpayer.

Additionally, Madam Chairperson, this same proposal was rejected by this same House last financial year.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members -

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chairperson, I take note of the Chairperson’s report. However, given the analysis of what we are proposing, if you recall, in the current law, the deduction was 20 per cent and hence you had to pay rental income on the balance, which was 80 per cent. 

Therefore, if you take 20 per cent of 80 per cent, it gives you 16 per cent net overall. In this case, we have pushed up the deductions up to 50 per cent but increased the tax rate to 30 per cent.

Therefore, if you apply mathematics, 30 or 50 will give you 15 per cent. Therefore, Madam Chairperson, I think there is a net reduction in what we are proposing but not an increase. I would like to implore my colleagues to really support our position as a Ministry.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam chairperson, I think the minister wants to tell a big lie here. You are not changing anything; you want to assume that you are helping the taxpayer but in short, you are making it worse. If you look at the law, a partnership to begin with, you know how it operates -people who are partners or individuals or companies coming together.

Therefore, if you are an individual, you will be taxed at an individual rate without any problem. What you want to do now is that you want to turn a partnership into a company. The moment we register a partnership and we do not register a company; it means we have reasons - that we need to maintain our liabilities and incomes in our own way.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, for rental income of an individual, the reason they gave only 20 per cent is because he is not going to claim 100 percent of the expenses, it is the reason they said we shall only allow you 20 per cent of the income to cater for your expenses but we shall tax the remaining 80 per cent. That is the law because of rental income and the justification was that you have not allowed this person to deal with 100 percent. The reason here, again, is that the individuals would basically claim all the income and expenses and at the end of it, you would have no money to tax.

Therefore, if you want to tax, you should agree with the committee. We delete this, you maintain the status quo. You will get more money than if you are planning like that.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chairperson, this deduction for 20 per cent was for individuals who do not keep records. If you are a company in the law, you are allowed to have normal deductions and you pay your tax on the net income.

However, for individuals who do not keep records, the proposal was that we allow you to have a cap of 50 per cent deduction and apply the rate of 30 per cent which, as I said, comes to overall 15 per cent, which is even lower than what is in the current Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now, honourable members, I did not hear support for this proposal during the debate. So, honourable minister, I think you need to do more convincing. Therefore, I put the question that clause 3 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, deleted.

Clause 4

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose that clause 4 be deleted. The justification is that it is a consequential amendment arising out of deletion of clauses 3, 7 and 16 thereby maintaining the status quo. There is no change in the rate of rental income for a company as proposed under clause 7(a)(i).

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 4 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, deleted.

Clause 5

MR MUSASIZI: We propose to delete clause 5. The justification is that it is a consequential amendment arising out of deletion of clause 3, 7 and 16 thereby maintaining the status quo. There is no change in the rate of rental income for a Trust or Retirement Fund as proposed under clause 7(a)(i)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 5 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 5, deleted.)

Clause 6

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose an amendment of section 21 of the principle Act.
    1. Insert a new paragraph immediately after paragraph (a) as follows;
“(b) By inserting immediately after paragraph (z)(a) the following; 
“(a) (a) Business income derived by a person from managing or running an educational institution. 

The justification is to allow private educational institutions to grow and supplement a few government institutions. 

2. Under paragraph (b), in the proposed paragraph (a)(f); 
    • Substitute for “one million” the words “three hundred thousand”
    • Insert the following immediately after the words, “in the case of a citizen” the words, “or US $150,000 for a citizen whose investment is placed up country”;
    • Substitute for “uses at least 50 per cent of locally sourced raw materials and employs at least 100 citizens”, the words “uses at least 70 per cent of locally sourced raw materials and at least 70 per cent of its employees being citizens earning an aggregate wage of at least 70 per cent of the total Wage Bill.”

The justification is that the number 100 million may not be viable for some companies, which work smart and do not need a total number of 100 employees. However, this can be expressed as a percentage as is the case under the Value Added Tax Act, to ensure that this benefits a larger proportion of the local economy. 

This can also be instrumental in enhancing and strengthening forward and background linkages between the free zones and or industrial parks and Uganda’s farmers, who comprise 80 per cent of the local economy and to encourage development and investment in the rural areas, as opposed to concentration of investments in the towns. 

Madam Chairperson, I beg to submit. 

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chairperson, the ministry opposes that proposal from the committee. I would like to give you information.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, which one?

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chairperson, I am giving my justification.

THE CHAIRPERSON: There are three proposals.

MR AJEDRA: No, I am talking about this particular one, where educational institutions are included. Last year, Kampala Parents’ School made a net profit of Shs 6.2 billion. St. Mary’s Kitende made a net profit of Shs 9.6 billion, Galaxy International School made a net profit of Shs 2.8 billion and Seeta High School made a net profit of Shs 4.2 billion. 

Just from the three institutions alone, Madam Chairperson, it is about Shs 10 billion. We cannot as a Government, afford to lose that amount of revenue. We would be opening a Pandora box. Next year, may be health will be next. I do not think that the ministry supports that and I will urge my mappers to propose that. Thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What do you say about the rest? Honourable minister, there are three proposals, what do you say about the others?

MR AJEDRA: As I said, that is the first amendment that we don’t support as a ministry. The second is what I alluded to yesterday, where you try to define the number of employees –(Interjection)- After consultations, I concede on that one because it was consistent with what we had passed in the previous Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, the question is that clause 6 be amended as proposed under paragraph (2).

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we have no problem with all the other proposals apart from educational institutions. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: The question I have put was on the rest.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: What about education?

THE CHAIRPERSON: I did not that is why I said paragraph (2). Don’t you have paragraph (2)?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we would like to also make another amendment on educational institutions. When Government took over the collection of university fees, the collection tripled from what the universities were collecting by themselves. We would like to also make a proposal because we are interested in education; that Government also takes up the collection of school fees of secondary schools because this is non-tax revenue, and when it collects then it means it would be controlling the schools so that they can give better services –(Interjections)- wherever there is a balance, that would be tax to the Consolidated Fund. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, first, we did debate about that issue and we have not given it – no, but did we discuss it or agree on it? Why don’t we also look at it next year? Yes, it is important but let us process it better. 

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 6, as amended, do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to delete paragraph (a).

The justification:
(1) 	Consequential amendment arising out of deletion of clause 3.

(2) 	The 50 per cent limit on allowable deductions may not cover for all the expenses and losses incurred in generating the rental income being subjected to rental tax. The expenses may include interest on borrowed loans used to construct the buildings and regular maintenance costs, among others. 

(3) 	It is also unfair and discriminatory against landlords who will not be allowed all qualifying deductions for rental tax purposes and yet all the other businesses enjoy all qualifying deductions. 

I beg to submit, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, paragraph (b) remains and you are deleting paragraph (a)?

MR MUSASIZI: We are deleting (a).

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 7 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chair, we propose to delete clause 8. The justification is that the income in form of capital gains made on sale of land - which is not a business asset - is already exempt from income tax under section 21(k). It is, therefore, contradictory to impose a withholding tax as a tax collection mechanism where the law has exempted the income from tax. 

Furthermore, there is the stamp duty of 1.5 per cent on the transfer of land, which is borne by the purchaser upon the title transfer. Adding an additional withholding tax of 0.5 per cent on top of the price inflates the land price. The seller will obviously negotiate a net price which leaves the purchaser to incur a total of around two per cent on the whole transaction. 

Most times, the purchaser is either buying land from their savings or using a bank loan. In the normal scenario, savings have already been taxed while the interest paid is not even an allowable deduction for an individual purchaser. This is on top of other costs such as brokerage fees, legal fees, land transfer fees and others. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 8 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, deleted.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10

MR MUSASIZI: We propose to delete clause 10. The justification is that there were practical challenges when one per cent withholding tax was introduced on payments for agricultural supplies in 2018. The proposed rate of six per cent withholding tax is even higher than one per cent which failed to be implemented in 2018 and was dropped. 

The current exemption should be maintained until a clear equitable and practical mechanism is developed to tax the small and medium enterprises in the agricultural sector. I beg to submit. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 10 be deleted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, deleted.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chair, we propose to amend clause 16 by deleting paragraph (a). 
The justification is that it is a consequential amendment arising out of deletion of clause 3 and clause 7.

To effect that the current rate of rental income should be maintained. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 16 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 17

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chair, we propose to delete clause 17. 

The justification is that part four provides for rental tax rate of individuals at 20 per cent which has been maintained through deletion of clause 3 and 7(b) to effect that the current rate for rental income should be maintained. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 17 be deleted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, deleted.

The Title

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the title do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Before the House resumes, Madam Chairperson – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where is the 250? Where was it? Is it in the schedule –

MR AJEDRA: We are very concerned, Madam Chair, with all these deletions because there is going to be a revenue loss of about Shs 276 billion. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: By killing clause 17?

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2020 and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

5.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2020” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2020 be read the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

“A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2020.”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and the Bill passes. Honourable members, it is 5 o’clock but I think we can receive the report for the next Bill and we complete it later.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE EXCISE DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

5.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2020” be read the second time.

THE SPEAKER: It has a number of seconders. Give the justification.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, the object of the Bill is to amend the Excise Duty Act, 2014 to vary duty on excisable goods as listed in the Bill.

THE SPEAKER: I invite the committee chairperson to present the report.

5.06
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Speaker, the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development considered the Bill entitled, “The Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2020” and made the following observations:

The first is that the Bill seeks to increase the excise duty on soft cap cigarettes, from Shs 55,000 to Shs 75,000 per 1,000 sticks and on hinge-lid cigarettes, from Shs 80,000 to Shs 120,000 per 1,000 sticks. 

The committee’s observation is that this may force manufacturers to lower the price of tobacco bought from the farmers, hence reducing their earnings. It will also affect the operations of the tobacco factories as the economy recovers from the COVID-19 pandemic. The current rates on cigarettes should be maintained to enable recovery of the sector.

Leaf Tobacco & Commodities Uganda Ltd has been negatively affected by the East African Court of Justice’s ruling, where operating in Uganda has been penalised by the flattening of the excise duty rates for both cigarette importers and local manufacturers. Yet, in the other East African countries like Burundi and Tanzania, the rates continue to be differentiated. 

This has slowly reduced the excise duty paid by the local manufacturers because the local cigarette has to compete with imported cigarettes that are manufactured from low-tariff countries.

There is, therefore, the need to differentiate the excise duty for cigarettes manufactured from here and those imported. Other non-tariff barriers should be considered. 

It is proposed in the Bill to increase excise duty on: Malt Beer by 60 per cent or Shs 2,050 per litre, whichever is higher; beer whose local raw material content, excluding water, is at least 75 per cent by weight of its constituent, by 30 per cent or Shs 790 per litre, whichever is higher; and beer produced from barley grown and malted in Uganda by 30 per cent or Shs 1,115 per litre, whichever is higher. 

However, increase in excise duty on beers has always led to increase in beer prices, which negatively impacts the volume of consumption as well as tax contribution from the sector. An increase on excise duty on the various beer categories does not guarantee additional tax revenue for the Government. The current excise duty rates should, therefore, be maintained. 

The Bill also proposes to increase excise duty on beer made from local raw materials. However, it should be noted that an increase in excise duty will generally result in higher prices of beer for the consumers. The reduction in volume of beer consumed will result in reduction of tax collected by Government. 

The major objective of introducing affordable local raw material beers was to provide a product to the low-income consumers that is hygienic and affordable. It was also to act as an alternative to illicit and informal alcoholic beverages that do not only contribute to tax revenue but are also not a health hazard to the people. 

If prices for beer or alcohol are out of reach, the sector will revert to a worse situation with people opting to drink harmful illicit brew that can result in death. This will have a negative effect on the locally-produced raw materials like sorghum, barley, maize and cassava with decreased demand that will in turn affect household incomes negatively.

Parliament reduced excise duty on soft drinks in financial year 2018/2019, which was the highest in the region. This was encouraging smuggling of soft drinks from the neighbouring countries, which had lower excise duty rates. Government had committed to reducing excise duty on soft drinks to make them competitive in the region and reduce smuggling, which leads to loss of revenue. 

However, Government is proposing to increase excise duty on non-alcoholic beverages not including fruits or vegetable juice, from 11 per cent or Shs 185, to 12 per cent of Shs 250 per litre, whichever is higher. 

The committee observes that this will encourage smuggling from the neighbouring countries and lead to revenue loss. The current rates on soft drinks and juices should be maintained to avoid loss of revenue through smuggling and reduced consumption as increase in excise duty would lead to increase in prices.

Madam Speaker, when I talk about current rates, I mean the rates for financial year 2019/2020.

Our observation number six is that the Bill seeks to increase excise duty on wines made from locally-produced raw materials, from Shs 2,000, to Shs 2,300 or 20 per cent, whichever is higher. However, this will discourage domestic production, especially the small and medium enterprises; it will discourage agro-processing in the fruit and vegetable sectors and specifically, the processing of wine, which is one sure way of fruit preservation and value addition. 

The new proposed excise duty will reduce the number of those engaged in processing fruits and vegetables, hence reducing returns to farmers and exposing them to a few processors who will pay low prices because of reduced demand and lack of competition. This sector is still growing and needs to be protected as Uganda is still exporting raw fruits, especially pineapples. 

There is need to maintain the current excise duty rates to encourage more investment in the sector, boost production and generate more revenue.

The Bill seeks to increase excise duty on petrol by Shs l50 per litre from Shs l,200 per litre to Shs 1,350 per litre and diesel by Shs l50 per litre from Shs 880 per litre to Shs 1,030 per litre. It is also proposed that excise duty on kerosene be increased by Shs l00 per litre from Shs 200 per litre to Shs 300 per litre. 

An increase in excise duty on petrol and diesel will result in an increase of prices of various commodities since most of them are transported from the producers to the markets as well as services, as service providers will experience an increase in overhead costs.

Similarly, salaried earners will have their disposable income reduced as they have to pay more to buy the same products. This will reduce excise duty from other products as a result of reduced spending. 

Kerosene is mainly used by the poor in Uganda and is an essential commodity used by a large majority of Ugandans as many homes are not yet connected to the national grid or electricity. Therefore, an increase in excise duty will render it expensive and hard to access. With many homes not yet connected to the national grid and considering the current electricity prices, increasing excise duty on kerosene will affect the poor negatively. The current excise duty rates should be maintained on fuel and kerosene to avoid an increase in the price of essential commodities.

Excise duty on lubricants is proposed to be increased from 10 per cent to 15 per cent of the value. The increase will have a direct impact on the cost of maintaining vehicles and other industrial machines that require lubrication in the production process. This will, in turn, lead to increase in transport costs and factory production prices, which will affect consumption as transporters and manufacturers seek to transfer the increased cost to the customers. The current rate of 10 per cent should be maintained to avoid distortion in market prices.

The Bill also proposes to reduce the rate of excise duty on the following:

(a) 	Paragraph (c) seeks to reduce the rate of under nurtured spirits made from locally produced raw materials from Shs 2,000 to Shs 1,500 per litre.

(b) 	Paragraph (f) item 5(b) seeks to reduce the rate of excise duty on fruit juice and vegetable juice made from of least 30 per cent of pulp from fruit and vegetables grown in Uganda has been reduced from 13 per cent or Shs 300 per litre, whichever is higher, to l2 per cent or Shs 250 per litre, whichever is higher. Although Government indicates that this measure is expected to lead to a loss of Shs 0.15 billion, it is a welcome measure since it will directly support fruit and vegetables farmers in Uganda.

The Bill further exempts the following from excise duty:

    (a) Under paragraph (h), sacks and bags for direct use in the manufacture of sanitary pads are exempted. This is meant to reduce the cost of sanitary pads in Uganda and is a welcome relief to many girls, especially in rural Ugandan schools, who miss school and some eventually drop out because they cannot afford sanitary pads that would save them from the embarrassing leaks during their menstruation periods.

(b)	Under paragraph (m); inputs and raw materials for the manufacture of tyres, footwear, mattresses or toothpaste for a person who meets the capital threshold of investing US$ 1 million in case of a citizen and US$ l0 million for the case of a foreigner. This is to extend incentives already under the tax laws to the above category as part of a drive to industrialise the country and replace imports.

The committee recommends as follows:

    i. Considering the current situation caused by COVID-19 where the whole country is on lockdown with all major production sectors of the economy closed, the current excise duty rates should be maintained so as to stimulate the economy and enable it to recover.

    ii. Given the certainty of a ripple effect on the increase in fuel costs on other sectors of the economy, the proposed increase in excise duty under cigarettes, beer, spirits, wines, non-alcoholic beverages, fuel, lubricants, motorcycle registration should be dropped.

    iii. Exemptions under paragraph (f) on fruit juice and vegetable juice made from at least 30 per cent of pulp from fruit and vegetables grown in Uganda should be upheld and passed into law.

    iv. Exemptions under paragraph (h) on sanitary bags should be upheld and passed into law.

    v. Exemptions on inputs and raw materials for the manufacture of tyres, footwear, mattresses or toothpaste for a person who meets the capital threshold of investing US$ 300,000 in Kampala Metropolitan Area and US$ l50,000 upcountry, in case of a citizen, and US$ l0 million for the case of a foreigner should be upheld and passed into law. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, we recommend that the Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2020 be passed into law subject to proposed amendments. I beg to move. I beg to lay on the Table the original committee report together with other documents we used in processing the Bill. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairman and the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for the comprehensive report on the Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill. Again, I take this opportunity to thank the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Budget Committee for having given up their Easter to work on these Bills.

Honourable members, it is coming to 5.30 p.m. and as usual we would like to allow the staff to walk home and the members to reach home before 7.00 p.m. The House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.30 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 21 April 2020 at 2.00 p.m.)
