


Tuesday, 3 April 2018

Parliament met at 2.14 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. By now, you already know that Winnie Madikizela Mandela died. She died yesterday at the age of 81. We have requested that a condolence book be brought to this House so that Members who understand the cause for which she stood can sign the book.

Honourable members, I will ask you to observe a moment of silence.

(Members rose observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have been informed that His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda will visit Parliament on Thursday, 5 April 2018 at 10.00 a.m. to launch the Uganda Parliamentary Forum on Malaria and mass action against Malaria.

You are all invited to attend and you should be seated by 9.00.a.m. at the South Wing parking yard. That will be on Thursday. You are requested to come and participate in this.

There is a meeting of Chief Executive Officers (CEOs) and some of you are. Please, monitor closely, see when it is taking place and be part of it. The discussion that will be held will help you in the management of your various businesses and enterprises because I understand many of you are CEOs; you run schools, companies and other investments. 

Therefore, it might be a good thing for you to participate in this particular meeting and see how things can be improved. Thank you very much.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE FINANCE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There were Members who wanted to raise matters but I do not see them here. Please proceed.

2.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I request for five minutes as I come in-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what is it with the Bill?

MR BAHATI: I apologise; there is some confusion which I am correcting right now.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 25/01/10 TO THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

2.20
MR DENIS HAMSON OBUA (NRM, AJURI COUNTY, ALEBTONG): “Can the Minister explain to the House why more resources are allocated to the centre (MDAs) than Local Governments and why percentage allocations to the Local Governments are dwindling year after year yet MDAs are majorly for policy design, quality assurance and technical support supervision?”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not see the minister here. Oh! Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Honourable member, you know here you just rise and the question will be answered. Hon. Hamson Obua just rise; you do not need to restate the question.

Honourable minister –(Laughter)– can I have the shadow Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development? Both the Government and shadow finance ministers are absent.

MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION OF THE NATIONAL BIO-TECHNOLOGY AND BIO-SAFETY BILL, 2012 AS RETURNED BY H.E. THE PRESIDENT IN ACCORDANCE TO RULE 142 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is the minister to move the motion? Was the motion already moved? However, it has to be moved formally now that we can – (Members rose_) - you are not the minister.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO JOIN THE REST OF THE COMMONWEALTH COUNTRIES IN COMMEMORATING THE COMMONWEALTH DAY 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you recall that this day is supposed to be 12 March 2018; I read the Queen’s message to the entire Commonwealth and particularly to this Parliament and country. 

I communicated that two weeks back, on that day, we were supposed to handle this motion but we did not have time to deal with it. It is coming up today; it is supposed to be presented by hon. Franca Akello but I do not see her here. 

Is there anyone who can move this motion? It is a straight forward motion so that we can formally adopt it; anybody from the CPA or Commonwealth issues with a copy of this motion?

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO IMPLEMENT THE BILATERAL AGREEMENT WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF SOUTH SUDAN TO PAY MONIES OWED TO UGANDAN TRADERS WITH SOUTH SUDAN AMOUNTING TO $41,623,513.99

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you remember that this motion was presented by the minister and the matter was forwarded to the Committee on National Economy. The committee got ready and came back here last week and presented this report.

I propose the question for debate and debate should start now with each Member taking - we will have a limited debate on this matter. Each Member will take three minutes. I will start with hon. Wamanga-Wamai.

2.23
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When I saw a list of 10 companies, which were going to be awarded money by Government, I got shocked. This issue came to the Floor of Parliament, I understand, in 2003.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you a member of the committee?

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: No I am not.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Committee on National Economy.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Yes. I am a member of the Committee on National economy.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: UPDF, Col Kulayigye.

2.24
COL FELIX KULAYIGYE (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Government has pursued a policy of a free economy, which gives encouragement to the private sector to invest in the hope of gaining profit.

The UPDF has not only ensured peace and stability within the country, which is the bedrock for good business but has also participated in efforts to enable our neighbours live peacefully. 
When the Republic of South Sudan gained independence, Ugandans indeed exploited the opportunity to do business there. As we all know, the peace soon got endangered; still your army participated in rescuing some of our Ugandans and non-Ugandans. However, we were not able to rescue the money that Ugandans had spent in doing business with the Government of South Sudan. It would be unfortunate if these Ugandans lost money completely like an orphan loses because there is no parent that cares. 

It is my humble and concerted opinion that this Parliament supports the motion that we help our Ugandans recover this money. On a Government to Government understanding, at an appropriate time, I am sure we shall be able to regain this money. 

As of now, people are dying with loans some of whom have lost their properties to banks. As Parliament of Uganda, we need to rescue these people and support Government to compensate them. Thank you.

2.26
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Supporting the motion for Government to pay these traders is not a problem. However, there is a problem in the method of selection of those who are supposed to benefit. (Applause)

All the traders who went to South Sudan were Ugandans. Looking at this agreement, of which I have a copy-some of the traders who know me as a Member of Parliament approached me. The agreement talks about payment of all the Ugandan traders who had gone to South Sudan but the list of people to be paid has only 10 companies. What are we going to do to other Ugandans? 

If somebody who has Shs 100 billion loses Shs 10 billion; in terms of ratio it is the same amount for someone who has Shs 100 million and loses Shs 10 million. People have different capacities, which must all be taken care of rather than signalling only 10 people to be compensated.

The method of selection and verification, which is being considered as the major issue here, depends on whom you are approaching and who is verifying. 

If we want to pay Ugandans who lost property in South Sudan, we should pay all of them because they all lost money. Treating only 10 as an emergency issue is not okay to me.

The idea of only siding with the rich and then we step on those at the lower level should stop. We must pay attention to all Ugandans without being selective. Government should get prepared to get more money to pay all these Ugandans.

If we are to pay all the 85 traders, it will only require around $15 million to clear all of them. It is unfair to ignore those who need little money, and only pay attention to those who have big monies. This is injustice.

I support this motion to pay Ugandan traders who lost money in South Sudan. However, the payment must take into consideration all the traders who were affected. If it is only these 10, I will not support it.

2.30
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County East, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Some years back, Uganda’s business sector was booming because our traders were doing very good business with South Sudan.

Investment is normally guided by risk and returns but there are risks, which are under the control of the investor and those which are outside the control of the investor. The risk that the traders in South Sudan met were largely outside their control. 

Therefore, basing on this argument, I rise to support the motion that the traders who lost goods and business in South Sudan, be paid by the Government of Uganda with the view of South Sudan refunding the money in the long run. The issue of paying South Sudan traders has been pending for over three years.

Maybe the minister will confirm that the verification process has been ongoing; and will continue to take place even when the first ones who have been cleared have been paid. 

I would like to appeal to Parliament to adopt the principle of paying the South Sudan traders who lost money with an understanding that it is the beginning and the new list will keep being updated as the verification exercise continues. (Interjections) Thank you. 

2.33
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to agree with the motion. However, the main thing for me is to make sure that we balance our citizens. 

Are the first 10 that are named in the list the big fish? If you are a family head and you find bigger people eating and leaving out the children to watch; you can cause tears in the eyes of the children and that would be disgraceful. Even God may not be happy.

I am of the view that by principle, since it is the Government of South Sudan which is supposed to pay the money; we are giving it as a loan to the Government of South Sudan.

I do not see anything wrong with us paying our people who have suffered loss. If we do not, it will be a big injury to the heart of our economy.


It is important for us to allow the first 10 companies to be paid. However, let the Government commit herself to paying the remaining number of traders. It is important to ensure that these people get their money. 

Mr Speaker, I heard someone protest. We are talking about $41 million. I wonder if that figure covers the entire paper as a full list. If it does not, as a House, we can return to this matter and include the rest of the figures as Government works out the administrative matters in order to manage these payments. 

Therefore, my position is that we support the motion provided that every complainant is paid. Let us not leave out those who are suffering because their figures are small. All of them are pleading. Thank you.

2.35
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI SEMAKULA (DP, Nakaseke County South, Nakaseke): Mr Speaker, I support the motion. However, in trade, fairness has to be considered. We should apply the law of “equity” because even these other smaller companies, which have not been verified also pay taxes. As much as I do not have any problem with the consideration of the first 10 companies, the rest of the companies should be verified too and paid. 

Secondly, in trade, if companies incur losses, they incur them equally depending on the basis of the capital they have. Therefore, for the Government to come up with only 10 companies is unfair. Let it first reconsider the rest of the smaller companies which have not been considered yet. Thank you.

2.36
MR ALIONI ODRIA (Independent, Aringa County South,Yumbe): Thank you, Mr speaker. I stand to support the motion that Ugandan traders should be paid. I am here to ensure that we initiate payments. It will be very unfortunate if some colleagues in this House stand to challenge payment of our traders. My prayer is that we join hands to initiate the payment process for everybody. 

I strongly believe that those with evidence that they traded in South Sudan should be verified and also be paid. In my constituency, I have serious businessmen such as Hajji Gule, Ozu Brothers and Swali Kalifah who are not on the list. 

I request that we initiate the payment process because these are Ugandans who are suffering; people who started the supply business in South Sudan in 2008. They have incurred huge loans and we even have evidence that some of the traders’ property is already attached; they are losing houses and other property. Why should we block the initiation process of payment? 

Let us initiate the process as we move on, step by step, collecting information regarding those who have been in business to get evidence. It is our role as Parliament to ensure payment of all the affected people. We shall give all our support regardless of the region you come from. Therefore, I beg to submit that we initiate the process of payment irrespective of the number. Thank you.

2.39
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have been grappling with this issue of South Sudan traders in the Committee on Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. We went through a laborious process to ensure that Government takes action. 

There has been a difficulty in the verification exercise involving very many companies, which need to be compensated. Therefore, the task was put before the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to ensure that a fully verified list of traders to be compensated is provided. I hope that is what has been done and we hope that the process is on-going. 

Mr Speaker, the Government of Kenya had to negotiate with the Government of South Sudan and the Kenyan traders did not lose. Their Government looked for money, loaned the Government of South Sudan and their business people are expanding their businesses. 

However, when it comes to Uganda - I wonder why we lack a strategy – when a Ugandan is going to make money, it is such a big problem; yet it is different with Chinese or Indian. We must out-grow this. In Kenya, they have serious solidarity. 

I thank the minister; he responded by bringing a motion when I raised this matter. This motion can be amended and improved. If we realise that there is something that needs to be added, let it be. However, I do not know why we should block a process that has just been started to solve a bigger problem. 

I, therefore, support this motion. We can add whatever is needed but we should go ahead and initiate the process of paying our South Sudan traders. I beg to submit.

2.42
MS JULIET KYINYAMATAMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to support this motion but I would like to amend it. We understand that it is not only the 10 companies that were presented in the committee report that were verified but 33. There are other Ugandan traders that are not on this list. 

We should agree that it is we to raise this economy by supporting our traders. When you look at the agreement and the cabinet extracts, they talked about 33 companies rather than the 10 that have been presented. 

The cabinet extract goes ahead to explain that there are other Ugandan traders that were not verified. These should also be verified by various ministries; the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Ministry of Trade and the rest. I, therefore, urge Government to also allow verification of companies that were not included. 

Secondly, allow me to present these other companies so that they are included in the pay-out. We are equal; it is Uganda and they are our Ugandan traders so we cannot only pay 10 companies, and yet these other companies were also verified. I beg to lay. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was that list of companies sent to the committee? 

MS KYINYAMATAMA: These companies were sent to the committee and verified but only 10 were included in the report. That is why I am submitting the rest of the 23, inclusive of the 10.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are those names in the committee report? Let us first see because if it is already laid on the Table, then you do not have to lay it a second time. Let us see if they are in the committee report and if they are not there, then we can receive it.  

MS KYINYAMATAMA: They are not in the committee report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you a member of the committee?

MR TAYEBWA: I am the acting chairperson of the committee, Mr Speaker. These company names were brought to the committee and as a committee, we agreed that they be included so that they can be considered for the pay-out. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are the names of the companies in the report? 

MR TAYEBWA: Yes, we laid on the Table a report from the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives in which they were included so they are there, Mr Speaker.   

MS KYINYAMATAMA: I beg to lay. 

MR OKUPA: Can we have them read?

MS KYINYAMATAMA: Mr Speaker, I think the honourable minister can read the names so that we are all clear. The first 10 names – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am looking at a copy of the report and there is a list of only 10 companies. The next list in the report is a list of Members of Parliament that signed the report. Please proceed with the names. 

MS KYINYAMATAMA: Mr Speaker, as I was submitting, I mentioned that the committee only included 10 companies in their report. That is why I am asking to lay on the Table the 23 companies that are not in the report but were verified. (Applause) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed. Read the list.  

MS KYINYAMATAMA: The companies are:
    1. Rubya Investment Limited 
    2. Kibungo Enterprises
    3. Aponye (U) Limited
    4. Afro Kai Limited
    5. Swift Commodities Establishment Limited
    6. Sunrise Commodities

I am reading the 10 and the 23 – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The 10 are already on the report. 

MS KYINYAMATAMA: Okay, I will read the 23, different from the 10. They are: 
    a) Roko Construction Limited 
    b) Premier Commodities – (Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of procedure.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is it proper for the honourable member to read the names of the companies to be included on the list without specifying the amount? Without the amount, there can be a challenge. 

I am in possession of a letter and the document attached, which was sent to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister on 7 November 2017. It has the names and the amounts to be paid to the traders. Hence, it is not proper for the honourable member to read the names of the companies without bringing to the knowledge of the House the figures. If she is short of the figures, I am here to help such that we have the correct companies and amount. This is because if we leave it at that, there is a grey area in this. 

I know there are statements and motions on these issued companies because I know we all do business but I would be comfortable if the amount was included. Otherwise, we risk this being left out. 

Therefore, is the honourable member proceeding well to read names without including the amounts to be paid out and yet these figures were sent to the Prime Minister? 

These companies were even categorised into different groups; that is A, B and C. Groups A and B had 10 companies while group C had 13 companies. Could the honourable member read all these companies with the amounts to be paid out?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, the member is not proceeding properly on two accounts; one, reading the 10 companies that are already in the report. Two, you said that you wanted to add the additional 23 companies. Then why are you reading the 10 again? Please proceed with the 23 with the amount, if you have them, and then we will see how to proceed. 

MS KYINYAMATAMA: Thank you so much for the pledge of help, honourable member. The amount below is in US dollars and the companies are: 

    1. Roko Construction Limited – 3,795,094.52 
    2. Premier Commodities (U) Ltd – 9,954,600
    3. Aponye (U) Limited and Afro Kai Limited – 6,879,222
    4. MFK Corporation Limited – 330,000 
    5. Ake-Jo General Enterprises Limited – 2,590,417
    6. Dott Services Limited – 12,821,805
    7. Tamosi’s Farm – 10,000,000
    8. Adroit Consult International – 293,920
    9. M/s Makpaco – 407 –

I think the honourable minister should come and help me because he is used to these figures. 

MR OKUPA: The honourable minister is a beneficiary so can we read this thing properly? I can see a provision – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just crosscheck if it is correct with your list, honourable. Let the minister own this thing up. In fact, it is proper that he reads it himself. 

MR BAHATI: Thank you, hon. Elijah Okupa. She had reached company no. 8;
8. Adroit Consult International – 293,920 
9. M/s Makpaco – 407,791
10. T.A Gunya Company Limited – 135,000
11. M/s Trust South Centre Company Limited – 1,543,698
12. Speedways Services Company - 208,480
13. Speedways Services Company - 445,350
14. Chant Agencies (supply of food stuff) - 4,936,600
15. JB Trading Agency - 2,078,000
16. Madut Cham Company Ltd- 3,934,440
17. M/s Wang Logistics Ltd - 2,411,818
18. M/s Edsa Supplies Ltd - 6,652,592
19. Menelco Stores (Maiwat Company, Ltd) - 1,100,000
20. Ahomos Investment Ltd (Ifo Bangasu Star) - 3,320,800
21. Mr Makpaco - 6,214,559
22. Benico (Ifo Bangasu Star) - 3,147,800
23. Atmos Uganda Ltd - 1,743,379

Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are those the 23 companies you were talking about?

MR BAHATI: Yes, these are the 23 companies.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Speaker, I rise with a heavy heart to seek clarification from the honourable minister. I have a document in my possession from the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives that categorised traders who lost their goods. 

Category 1 is the one that has appeared in the report. Category 2 is for those with support documents/collaborated evidence and it has a list of almost 37 people. 

Category 3 has people who lost their lives and I am more interested in those whose vehicles were impounded and one of them is my former constituent who passed away as a result of this stress. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister who was even the chief mourner, promised on his burial that he would ensure that his claims are settled - the late George Tugumisirize trading as Gotco Transporters Ltd under category 3. 

The list you have read does not include people who genuinely lost money and property including those ones. Can we be equitable and fair and agree since it is public money we are going to lend South Sudan that all those genuine traders who lost their goods and lives be paid. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, for that matter, I will be seeking leave to amend this motion and have the list as submitted by the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives dated 31 October 2012 to include all those companies and individuals who have been properly verified. If we consider only 10 and leave the rest- the 10 who are known to belong to one particular group, this will not be fair.

Therefore, I would like to seek clarification from you, honourable minister - (Interjections) - whoever, has a motion can bring it. You knew the late George Tugumisirize, his name appears among the category of those who lost vehicles, why isn’t his name included on this list?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, the Prime Minister will add on this matter. Our approach was that we sign an undertaking with the Government of South Sudan and this undertaking had two parts - if you read section 10 of the agreement, Shadow Attorney-General. It provides that those companies that have not been verified be verified through a mechanism that we are putting into place because beyond the 23 that have been read, there are quite a number of people who were affected in South Sudan but we must have a framework to help each and everybody.

We have a framework. The one that we had was –(Interjection)–wait a second. This is a framework by first ratifying the agreement that we made. When we submitted this agreement to the Committee on National Economy, they recommended to this House and it is within the report that Government implements this bilateral agreement which gives us a framework to handle those that have been verified and even those that have not been verified and do it within six months. This was presented on the Floor of the House.

However, today, we are receiving another amendment. All we are interested in is to have a framework that helps all our traders despite where they are coming from (Interruption)- 

MR GODFREY ONZIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The procedural issue I am trying to raise is that if the honourable minister is saying all these lists are supposed to undergo various verifications and that they are still dealing with 10 while the others will be verified and handled later; why don’t they as a Government finish with verification such that we know the number of Ugandans who are supposed to be paid and we pay them at once? Why do we deal with it in piece meals? 

Just like my colleague who raised the problem, I have among this list of people who lost their vehicles a Rtd. Col. John Ona whose trailer was taken to go and ferry food but he lost it. He complained up to the President who also wrote a letter to the finance ministry that he should be paid but his name is not even here.

Therefore, this list has many problems. If they are not fully verified, then let us do away with verification then pay all Ugandans. But to pick 10 of them because they are the ones we have verified and pay them while the others await verification, then I do not know whether we are really proceeding correctly.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are you responding to this one first then we continue with our debate?

MR BAHATI: The procedure the honourable colleague is suggesting has advantages and disadvantages. We have come this far for the last almost 10 years on this process. If we provide a framework and give ourselves a time line and start the process of moving, that works better. 
However, if you say that we wait for whoever comes, it might never happen. If we really want to help our traders, we should in my opinion, have a process that helps them.

There must be a framework if we want to help them. That is my appeal to this House and this is the appeal that approved this and set a deadline including the amendment that has been done by hon. Kinyamatama and then we move. However, if we want to start the whole process afresh - Oh my God!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, we are going to debate. You can raise that clarification through the debate. The member for Kampala Central can proceed.

3.04
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Mr Speaker, it is very clear on both sides of this House, that all of us are for bailing out Ugandans. 

We all accept that we are in tough economic times partly due to the unforeseen circumstances from our neighbours and also our misgivings in management of this economy. 

The question that arises right now is not whether we all agree to guarantee compensation of these people but the principle of equity. (Applause) Every Ugandan here represents certain people. Every Ugandan here represents traders. 

I am on record for rising three times on this Floor of Parliament to urge Government to complete its commitment on this matter. But the issue of equity and fairness shall not be given a blind eye today. We all say yes, we shall agree to guarantee the bailout of these companies through a compensation agreed upon by a framework that has been agreed upon by the two nations; Uganda and South Sudan. 

However, this economy does not work for only 10 or 23 companies but for all of us. (Applause)

At the moment, we are saying that even if we sought a week and all Members of Parliament from the different areas sat and apportioned this guarantee for a bailout of these companies equitably, the whole country shall put thumbs up for the legislators. 

We cannot shy away from our responsibility of apportioning and guaranteeing. The time is now to apportion and if it is agreed upon by all members – yes, whereas we support this motion, we need to amend it to seek equity and fairness for all Ugandans so that a comprehensive bailout from the smallest trader to the big fish that traded in the supply of grains and stationery in South Sudan are catered for. I beg to move, Mr Speaker. Thank you.

3.07
MS ANITA AMONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I agree with what hon. Muhammad Nsereko is saying - that if we are to pay these traders, then all of them must be verified. We must do due diligence to all of them. We cannot select only 10 traders and pay them. It should be agreed between the two States; South Sudan and Uganda. 

We only now need to agree on the principle that we shall lend the money to South Sudan and the modalities will come later. Thank you.

3.08
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Mr Speaker, in the committee report, it is indicated that there were two major categories of claimants. The first category known as South Sudan Grain Traders and Suppliers Association Limited consisted of 10 companies. 

We also noted in this report that the amount of money involved was $56.43 million of which five instalments were agreed. We further noted that the first instalment of $15 million was paid to the verified companies.

Mr Speaker, what I am trying to submit here is that it would appear that the process of payment has been initiated and we can only support the Government to continue paying if what is written here is correct. 

However, we need to confirm the companies that are affected - like the submission that has been made on the Floor of this House and we progressively continue to pay all these companies.

I do not see the Ugandan Government in a position where we are going to pay the entire lump sum or the sum involved at a go - it will always be in instalments. Since the payments will be made in instalments and we now have the 10 companies, let us have the full list and continue paying even if it means paying in 10 instalments –(Interjections)- because we have to address our minds to the capacity to pay. 

We are talking about million dollars not million shillings. Where is the capacity to pay all this money at a go? That capacity does not exist at all. If we really want our people to be paid, let us agree on an arrangement where money will be paid in instalments. If we do not do that, then they will never be paid. That is the only option that is available. Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

3.10
MR MOSES BALYEKU (NRM, Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As Parliament, with due respect to my colleagues who have spoken, it is very unfair to sit here and plan for the few. 

The issue of the G-10 should not exist in our Parliament. We are all pro-people and elected Members. We have to represent the interests of everybody. There is no way the minister can come to the House and say that he is making a framework because it is our work as Parliament to appropriate, scrutinise and see that all these people are legible. 

Once we allow this thing to go, the others will never come –(Applause)- Why are they in a rush for the 10? Why are these 10 so special above the others? Can’t we for once be just because these traders have lost money? They went to do business in South Sudan because of the nature of the businesses which are not moving on well here. 

If we do not support all the 23 which is a very small number for the Government of Uganda - when we hold elections and spend so much. These are people with businesses and we cannot come back to the House and ask for another loan over the South Sudan issue. Let us do this once and for all. 

Mr Speaker, I sit on the Committee of Tourism, Trade and Industry and we have been dealing with the whole lot. We have never dealt with the G-10. These are not elections that require voting for the President and Members of Parliament first before going down to the local councils. Here, we are talking about business. If we are helping Ugandans to do business, let us be just and fair to our people. 

No Member should stand on the Floor of Parliament and say that we should pay the 10 companies. Look deep into your heart and ask yourself; are you pro-Ugandan and do you love the people who elected you in this country? Some of the people who elected us are here in the gallery and are looking at us saying that we should not pay them. This is not fair.

Mr Speaker, I beg that we halt the payment of the 10 companies, the minister goes back and makes a comprehensive list such that we make one loan and sort this issue once and for all. (Applause)

3.13
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to know from the minister that since the 10 companies were selected by the committee, what criteria they used to select the 23 companies. 

I would like to add on what my brother, hon. Wilfred Niwagaba, has said. I was also part of the mourners who buried the late George Tugumisirize. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister remembers my words - your hot words today. I would like to thank you because yesterday I called you and you answered my call. (Laughter). I would like to thank you because most of the leaders usually do not pick phone calls, especially when it is a holiday.

The late George Tugumisirize’s wife is hidden somewhere and I cannot reveal her whereabouts right now because most of her trailers were confiscated in South Sudan. The man was among the richest people in this country - but today his wife is hidden somewhere because Stanbic Bank has sold off all her property. 

I have all these documents and would like to lay them on the Table. We are therefore asking which criteria were used. I thought Tugumisirize’s company at least – I agree with you hon. Balyeku, for the first time. Thank you very much for that submission. (Laughter) That submission is 100 per cent correct. Let us consider all these people because most of these traders are somewhere. Some are dead and some are in exile because of the loans. You know our 10 per cent in this country. 

I support the 10 who have been verified - I have no problem with them. However, let us consider even these people. In addition, let the Government come out to help these members who are suffering. At least, let them get the document to support them so that they can reunite with their families. They are in hiding, Mr Speaker. I can tell you of Madam Lorna – let me reveal because she told me there is no problem – she is not my relative but a Ugandan. 

I know there are so many companies on the list that I have here. The good thing is that now we have a document. Let all these people be considered. 

Mr Speaker, I am suggesting that we constitute a committee of about five or 10 members to sit and come up with a procedure of paying from the 10 up to the last one. If the money is ready, a committee can be put into place and those ones get paid and then we consider others.

The problem is that most of these traders do not have information. You are aware they petitioned this august House but their petition was not heard. I believe what they want is to get information of what is going on in this House.

This is the time for us to establish a process of how the remaining traders can be paid. 
Mr Speaker, allow me to lay these – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is not entirely true that the petitions were not handled. That is not correct. 

There was only one petition and I handled it. It was brought to my office and the honourable member for Dokolo South, hon. Felix Okot Ogong was selected to present the petition. The petition was brought to this House, presented quite eloquently; but given the nature of business at that time, I referred this petition to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The rules allow me to do that. 

This petition did not go to the committee. The committee on National Economy handled this petition together with this agreement which is now being debated. 

Therefore, the information is that any petition that was brought to this House has been handled. There is none which has not been handled by Parliament. That is the information I wanted to give you.

3.18
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It would take a heartless person to say that the traders should not get their money. These are Ugandans who were involved in business and in a way, we would get the trickle-down effects as Ugandans. 

What the House is concerned about is the selection criteria. Who decided who should be number one and who should be the last? 

The other concern is that as a country, we are managing to borrow to relieve other countries when we are not meeting our own obligations with the people we have given contracts.

Many people have been talking about Tugumisirize who died out of stress. I can tell you there is another woman trader who is about to die because of stress in Kasese, called Mary Bumenze.

She was contracted by the Government of Uganda to supply food to the crime preventers during their training and she has never received her money. I am certain there are so many traders in that category who were contracted by the Government of Uganda and they have never received their money. 

How I wish that as we borrow money to relieve our traders who traded with South Sudan, we would also be in position to look for money and settle our own bills here at home.

Mr Speaker, indeed the traders are many, including those who petitioned Parliament. We do not want to be caught up in a situation where people will accuse this House of conniving with certain people. They will now think that Parliament connived with the fake people. 

The issue is that there are those who are probably highly connected and they are the ones who are being treated as first category. Those who have no god-fathers in positions of influence are the ones that will be treated as second or third category. 

What we would want to know is: Who came up with the categorisation? When we are going to pay the second category, shall we come back here or by passing the first category we have passed everyone?

Hon. Amos Lugoloobi was talking about a payment process that had started – I do not know under whose guidance that payment was made since the ministry is now coming to Parliament to ask for authorisation to borrow so that they can start the process of payment. Under whose authorisation did the ministry initiate the payment? There are many questions whose answers Ugandans would like to know as we go into this debt:

Who decided who should get paid first and who should get paid last? What is the payment plan? I have not seen the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU). I do not know if any of you has received the MoU. I would be very glad to read the contents of this MoU. You recall, we witnessed a sad scenario here when we gave money to Mr Sudhir Ruparelia during CHOGM and when the Public Accounts Committee went to look into his books, he said, “I did not ask for your money, therefore, you have no right to look into my books”. We would like to know what the agreements made with the Government of South Sudan are.

If it was a matter of saying that whoever has been verified qualifies to get the money, then we would possibly say, “Let everybody go” because the categorisation would in essence indicate that everybody’s documents have been looked at and have been found correct. 

However, in a situation where we do not even know how the categorisation started, I would like the minister to come and make it clear. What is the meaning of this categorisation? Do they simply say, “We are paying these first, and then these second and those third” and why that categorisation? Everybody would like to know, why the first 10 and then the next 35, then the next 10?  People would like to know. 

As I wind up, let the Government of Uganda also pay its own debts. As we relieve our brothers from South Sudan, let us also commit to paying our own debt because even those who have traded with the Government of Uganda are selling their properties – domestic arrears.

Hon. Prime Minister, I therefore, would like to propose an amendment to the motion that in addition to the money borrowed to help our traders from South Sudan, even our traders should be paid for the arrears that we always include in the budget but we do not cover them. These arrears include some of the traders who have been trading with Government. We do not pay them and they end up selling their property. 

Mr Speaker, let everybody be scrutinised and let everybody be treated equally – whether they have small or big monies – because that was their capacity. The issue is that we are redeeming our people. Many people have lost lives in the process of waiting for their money. Others have died without any of us getting to know that these are deaths emanating from the stress that these traders encountered while trading with South Sudan. Let us be fair to our people. We need our traders to be paid. 

In addition, the hesitation within this House is that we know that even when we have said that the traders be paid, they may end up even including those who are not eligible. Even fictitious trading companies may come in and say they are beneficiaries. They will form companies to eat the money. 

I actually concur with the Member who said that let us look at the committee that will be verifying those who are eligible so that we know that the money is going to the right people. Information is everywhere that when they say Government is going to borrow on behalf of South Sudan, many people here came up with unknown companies, looking for money from the Government of Uganda.

Therefore, as we think of saving our traders and relieving them from the stress, let us also come clean as a people. Let us look at our ways of spending and helping others. We are in the same ditch and I know that there is no one to cry to, to help our traders. Let us also wash our house clean. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there seems to be two memoranda of understanding. There was the one that was signed on 21 November 2010 and that is when hon. Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kahinda Otafiire was the Minister of Trade, Tourism and Industries. 

There was another memorandum – I do not know whether it was an agreement or memorandum – which was signed last year; I am waiting for a copy. Was it last year or 2016? – (Interjections) - there was the one that was signed in 2016 and that is the one they seek to - Yes, this one. Can I have a complete copy of this? This is incomplete. 

This one was signed on 22 September 2016. In the Memorandum of Understanding of 2010, the Government of South Sudan then agreed to pay $15 million as the first instalment and it was paid by the Government of South Sudan, not the Government of Uganda. This one is now a bilateral agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Sudan and the Government of Uganda. There is a difference. The other one was a memorandum of understanding in 2010 and this one is a bilateral agreement between the two countries. 

Therefore, there is no issue of any payment that was made by this Government before. The other $15 million was paid by the Government of South Sudan by that time. What is before us is this agreement of 2016 and that is what the minister brought a motion asking Parliament to authorise the Government to implement – the terms of the agreement. The way the debate is going – if I can guide – is we agree to the principle of Government paying all verified traders to the Government of South Sudan. 

However, let us remember one thing: it is a bilateral arrangement. It is on the understanding that the Government of South Sudan will pay back the Government of Uganda. That means there will have to be a concurrence between the groups that are verified. We agree on that. It cannot be like I have heard people suggest that this Parliament can sit and verify. That cannot work because it has to be government-to-government to do the verification. Okay?

So far they have verified, from the records, 33 and not 10 as presented by this bilateral agreement. The discussion is that the principle of payment of our citizens who supplied things is agreed upon. Would we agree on the principle? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, would you like to tell the House how the actual implementation is going to take place so that we can help? The principle has been agreed on and that is the important thing. Would you now like to tell the House how the actual implementation is going to take place so that we can help you with it? I will see how to handle this matter when you guide me. Would the Prime Minister like to address the House at this moment?

3.31
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you and colleagues for paying attention to this very important matter which affects not just that list of 30 companies but the whole country and the economy because the amount of money involved is substantial. 

As you have heard from a number of colleagues, some of our business people have lost their lives. Others have lost their businesses and others have lost their personalities. It is true, as you heard from hon. Kaginda and Niwagaba, that I attended the send-off of one of the colleagues whose new trucks were just impounded and when he attempted to get them back he literally lost his life. Therefore, this is a major issue. 

Does Government care about this? Government cares a great deal and indeed the agreements and memoranda of understanding that you have made reference to are clear evidence to that. It is true President Museveni in December 2016 specifically went to discuss this matter with his colleague, President Salva Kiir Mayardit and they have done this on several occasions. 

The principle of catering for all is indisputable. It is only right that anybody who supplied the Government or the people of South Sudan from Uganda should be appropriately paid. (Applause) There is no debate about that. The Government is fully committed to this exercise. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, you have made a major point that this is between the Government of Uganda and the Government of South Sudan. Therefore, there has to be concurrence between the two governments. Indeed, this is why the minister and a number of us are saying we must deal with this matter but deal with it comprehensively and in a phased manner. 

Verification is a key element in this.  Therefore, all those who have been verified by both Uganda and the Government of South Sudan – irrespective of the number – should be included and properly paid for the services they rendered. The Government, therefore, has been working on this in a phased manner but committed to payment of all those who supplied. 

In that respect, I think there is concurrence between my colleagues in Parliament and Government on the general framework and strategy of payment. The actual cash payment will depend on the Government of Uganda and the Government of South Sudan saying, “Yes, X supplied, pay.” The Government of Uganda will then pay on the understanding that the Government of South Sudan will eventually reimburse the money paid by the Government of Uganda. (Applause)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Prime Minister because I think he has given us the way to handle this. However, I did not get something from him well hence the procedural matter that I am raising. 

As a principle, you said that every Ugandan that did trade with South Sudan should be paid. However, there are people who petitioned Parliament - the 33 companies. Can we procedurally say that the first 33, and not only the 10, be paid but also those who have claims take their claims to be verified and then they are paid? This would bring us to an amount of US$ 123,906,907.03. 

What we have in the table are the 33 companies. This morning, very many traders came to us saying they have claims. There is a company called BIHA International Limited but they were not part of the petitioners. I told them that they are not part of this and that they had to go through the process so that they are verified. What we are handling is the 33. Would it be right for us to proceed with those 33 and then for all other claims that come in, we clear them now that we have agreed on the principle?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the bilateral agreement puts a figure of US$ 41,623,513.99 and this is in relation to a number of people. Hon. Prime Minister, the question being asked is: is the $41 million only for the 10 companies or is it something that this House can say should apply to the others as well? I need your guidance on that because from your own statement, 33 companies have been verified already by both governments. How would it be handled since it is clear as to what this figure is supposed to do? Would you help us with that?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, when this agreement was signed by the Government of Uganda and that of South Sudan, at that material time 10 companies had been verified and hence referenced in the agreement of the $41 million. This was in reference to paying the verified companies at that very time. Since then, verification has been going on and the report we have received in the House today indicates that an additional 23 companies have been verified and the process of verification must continue. 

I talked of phasing this, in the sense that those who have been verified and the agreement was signed should be cleared. It reduces the load while we focus on those who have been verified. Subsequently, we will deal with them and we will continue until the verification process is complete and we deal with everybody. That is really my view.

MR NIWAGABA: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, unfortunately I have not had the benefit of reading your bilateral agreement. Do you mean that for every verified trader after this particular motion, Government will be bringing another motion to ratify another bilateral agreement or did you make one agreement that will cover all Ugandan traders who lost their property, businesses and lives?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, this motion brought by the minister should be a motion to cover the whole process, except that in the course of implementation Government will go in phases.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, phase one?

DR RUGUNDA: The matter is clear and the fact that President Museveni and President Salva Kiir in 2016 authorised their ministers to sign in relation to the 10 companies, in my view that should be the first phase of the implementation of clearing Ugandans.

Secondly, we have 23 companies that have now been cleared and that should be the next focus by Government. Number three is that there are those who are still in the process of being cleared. We should clear them and that would be phase three and we conclude the matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you taking some clarifications?

MR OLANYA: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to seek clarification from you. His list has a number of categories of people. All these are people who have been –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which list is that?

MR OLANYA: This is the list of traders who lost their property in South Sudan, including the 10 on top. From Prime Minister’s emphasis, he is talking about people who supplied goods. The traders who traded in South Sudan did not only supply goods. Secondly, those who supplied goods did not only supply goods to the central Government. South Sudan had regional governments. Somebody called Waiga Mohammad, who supplied his goods to one of the regions, approached me in my office. All these complaints are here. 

Why don’t we as a Government verify everything and handle this thing once and for all? Why are these 10 people being treated as an issue of emergency and the rest are left out yet this category of people was also given the first $15 million? Why don’t we as Government verify all these, we come here and get money for all these people once and for all? Why do we only deal in a selective way? I am seeking clarification.

MR NIWAGABA: I have had the courtesy and privilege of looking at the agreement for the first time. This agreement is specific on the amount and the companies. However, there is clause 10 of the agreement which stressed thus: “The parties agree that any eligible but unverified claims by Ugandan traders shall be verified by a joint verification team, to be constituted within 30 days from the date of this agreement”. 

The agreement was signed on 22 December 2016. This means if Government is serious on assisting all our traders, it should get the records from this joint verification team, assuming it was passed, and a comprehensive agreement is made with the Government of South Sudan for all the verified claims so that this Parliament passes one comprehensive motion for all of them. (Applause) If we are to proceed with this motion as it is, then we are only concentrating on the 10 companies which are a subject of this bilateral agreement. 

Mr Speaker, we agreed on the principle that Government of Uganda pays, on behalf of the Government of South Sudan, the Ugandan traders who lost their properties, businesses and lives. However, let us give the Government of Uganda a timeframe to come up with a comprehensive list of those that have been verified and an agreement, again executed with the Government of South Sudan, so that we do not come back to debate another agreement for other traders.

In my view, I would say that we approve the motion in part on the principle, but as far as the traders to be paid is concerned, we wait for a comprehensive list that has been brought and verified. (Mr Olanya rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought it was a procedural matter raised by the Member. Our names are the same; would you like to help me with the ruling? (Laughter)

Honourable members, sometimes procedural points are really difficult. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you could help this House because the documents that are being circulated indicate that by 3 August 2016, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development had already been authorised by Cabinet to deal with the second category of people because they had been verified. That was as of 3 August 2016.

This particular agreement was signed in December of the same year and we had already been authorised to look for US$ 33.6 million to deal with the second category bilaterally. What became of that process? As we debate, what we need to bear in mind is that there is a bilateral agreement. This motion is seeking to activate the process of implementing the bilateral agreement. 

There is an agreement signed by two governments and it has terms and conditions. The Government of Uganda will not act ultra vires, or act outside what is provided in the agreement. I think the Shadow Attorney-General could help me with this. This is what has been signed by the two governments, the Government of Uganda and the Government of South Sudan. This is what was signed. 

The question I am asking is: By the time they were signing this, Cabinet had already authorised $33 million for category 2; what happened? Are you in the process of activating the same processes because you also agreed on joint committees? Where are the joint committees to do the verification so that you help this House take a decision because we cannot amend this agreement? 

We are not parties to the agreement, so let us handle it in that way. Find a way forward which is beneficial to all people who supplied. That is what we are doing here and that is why I am asking these questions, honourable minister.

3.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As you have said, these are two governments working together to help a situation initiated by the Government of Uganda to help our citizens. We are committed to helping everybody and that is very important to note. 

As we do this, we work with the Government of South Sudan and you know the situation the Government is in. South Sudan is a neighbour in trouble that we are trying to work with to help. I would like people to understand this so that it is not like you go there tomorrow and say, “We signed this”, and it is a normal situation. It is not a normal situation that we are in. It is not normal that Government can come in to do this. We are helping in this difficult situation; it is a difficult situation. 

When we came from South Sudan, we were supposed to implement clause 10 of the agreement, which said we should institute a joint committee to verify those that are not part of the agreement. By the way, this agreement includes the 10 companies and the provision to verify all other companies. Verification of all other companies is part and parcel of the agreement that we would like to rectify – (Interjections) – Just a second. Please, we would like to move systematically as the Speaker said if we want to solve the problem. It is not a normal situation. It is not like a business transaction in normal circumstances.

The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives has been receiving documents from different companies and doing some work on them. The 23 companies have been looked at. We have written to South Sudan to bring us a team to work with and we are continuing to pursue them.

The issue is that we will continue to verify as we implement the agreement. The 23 companies, as hon. Kyinyamatama has said, can be part and parcel of this and we set ourselves a date when we can also finish the others. However, we cannot say that if you do not handle anything, then everything else should fail. You will have killed the entire framework. 

Let us agree on the framework and have the 33, and then also set ourselves a deadline to handle the rest. After all, there is no money that has been appropriated to pay these people now. We are just working on the framework. Therefore, the earlier we resolve the framework on how to move forward, the better, and it is to solve the problem of everybody. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now you are bringing the debate to me by standing on points of procedure after procedure. Let me deal with the procedure after the debate because you are now making me a debater on this matter with these procedural points.

3.55
MR GERALD KARUHANGA (Independent, Ntungamo Municipality, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. If I heard you and the finance minister right, what we all want is, in emphatic clear terms, the commitment of Government to clear all those who have claims from this venture between the two governments. What we are seeing - (Interjection)- 

Mr Speaker, I was emphasising that the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business needs to make it clear to all Ugandans that there is not going to be any selective way of treating some business companies in a rather unfair way. He needs to make it clear to Ugandans that it is going to be comprehensive treatment. The moment we begin sowing seeds of selective application, or categorising in a special manner, one group from the other, then we will lose the confidence and notion that all the traders who were affected are equal.

Mr Speaker, the beauty with Parliament is that there is the Hansard. We should get it in emphatic terms so that somebody in future can pick the Hansard and say the Prime Minister committed on 3 April 2018 that all the affected traders will be equally treated. That would be a commitment that we can always refer to and probably, it would bring some confidence to what we are hearing today.

Mr Speaker, that is what I seek from the Prime Minister.

3.58
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County South, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, the matter we are debating here today is not whether we should pay the traders. The principle is agreed that they should be paid. 

This matter started way back around 2010 when Government of Uganda signed a memorandum of understanding that was being handled by the Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry. All the companies were listed and they were brought before our Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry and we debated this. They brought their petition to this Parliament and we passed a resolution that the traders who supplied goods to the Government of South Sudan should be paid. 

Mr Speaker, what I do not understand in this agreement, especially the one of 2016, is why it was very selective. It ignored the memorandum of understanding of 2010 completely, and they only restricted themselves to 10 companies. To my surprise, and I do not know whether it is God’s will, the companies all come from one area; companies from other parts of Uganda were ignored. 

Mr Speaker, I support a government that is a mass movement; a government that deals with all sectors. Now, I wonder why this agreement is very selective in paying only 10 companies and yet, clause 10 of the bilateral agreement stipulates clearly that having considered the 10 companies, Government of Uganda and Government of South Sudan were supposed to put up a verification committee to verify all claims that are being made by Ugandans. We would like a report from that committee. 

However, I have been informed they have added another 23 companies. I think this is movement towards progress; we are not only now considering 10 companies but 33 companies. We now need to have a position that will not conflict with the bilateral agreement, because there is already an agreement between the Government of Uganda and the Government of South Sudan. As Parliament, we need to align with this agreement and have the ministry come and amend the verified list. If it is verified by Government, we can amend this list here today. 

The traders have suffered a lot for a long time. Personally, I suffered in 2011; I lost over 100 containers of sugar, which is equivalent to over US$ 5 million. My Government ignored me up to today. When I appeal to them, they say, “Okot Ogong, you are stubborn”. You can imagine being mistreated by your own Government. Now you would like to mistreat other Ugandans. 

As Parliament, it is high time we did not refer this matter back to Cabinet. It will never come back. Let us handle this matter here today. We have the power to do it; we can amend, vary the list and also approve the resolution for Government to pay not only US$ 41 million but US$ 126 million. Let us pass the resolution for all the companies. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.03
MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, I thank you. I would like to start from page 1; it raises the legal foundation over which Parliament is moving. I would like to draw the attention of Members to the dictates of the Constitution because my understanding is that Government proceeded wrongly, and I think we are debating something very -

First of all, Article 159 says, “Parliament may, by a resolution…” (Power interruption) – Who is sabotaging? I cannot see.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know, there is also a video recording, so the lights have to be on.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I would like to draw the attention of Members to the dictates of Article 159 (5) and (6) which say, “(5) Parliament may, by resolution, authorise the Government to enter into an agreement for the giving of a loan or a grant out of any public fund or public account”. The Government did not come to this Parliament to seek permission to enter this agreement. 

Clause (6) says, “An agreement entered into under clause (5) of this Article shall be laid before Parliament and shall not come into operation unless it has been approved by Parliament by resolution.” That is the premise of my submission. 

First, Government did not come to this Parliament to seek authorisation to enter this agreement. That is a dictate of the law. Secondly, we are saying that the terms of the agreement they are quoting should be laid before this Parliament for approval by resolution –(Interruption)

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, is it in order for a senior legislator to divert this House by saying that Government did not come here to seek the permission of the House to implement an agreement with another country when actually we are here debating the same resolution? 

Have we –(Interjection)– We have not implemented any agreement. We have come here to seek the resolution of Parliament to implement the agreement. This does not become an agreement unless it is ratified and certified by Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, not once but a few times, this House has told the Government to do something about the debt that is owed to the people of Uganda who dealt with the Government of South Sudan. Therefore, there has been that authorisation to do something about this. It was done in 2010 - negotiations were done and a memorandum of understanding was reached. Our own committee handled this matter, it was brought here and we debated it. We told Government to go and do something with the Government of South Sudan and get a solution to this problem. 

They acted on the basis of what Parliament had told them, to go ahead and do this thing. Now they have come back to Parliament to say that they have entered this agreement based on previous discussions; can Parliament now authorise them to implement the terms of the agreement? I think that is what they are doing right now. 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, be that as it may, it means if we are not satisfied with this agreement before us, it is not binding to this country and it is within the powers of this Parliament to adjust the agreement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why we are having this debate.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Therefore, having agreed to that, which solves the problem, in fairness and equity we cannot come here and partially legislate for some privileged Ugandans and leave out others - (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, hon. Muwanga Kivumbi. Mr Speaker, I would like to give information. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, both of your ministers, hon. Bahati and hon. Matia Kasaija, went to the extent of writing letters to banks, standing surety for the people - (Interjection) – No, not for the 10, although the 10 are among them. However, this included others as well. They wrote letters asking banks not to sell these people’s property until they are all paid. However, in the list they are presenting here, some of those they stood surety for are not there. 

Mr Speaker, the mere fact that a Government minister writes to a bank means that he has confirmed that this person supplied goods. How do you now come back with a list that leaves out those people you stood surety for and their property is going to be taken? That is the information I wanted to give.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now you are debating.

MR SSEWUNGU: It was information.

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Speaker, when you are reconciling figures with your suppliers, it is the person you supplied to tell you the correct figures they got. If by the time the bilateral agreement was signed, the Government of South Sudan authenticated and said, “These are the 10 people we have on the list at the moment, go ahead and pay”, a third person cannot now come and say, “Please, there are some others.” You would have to go back to the same agreement and say that you have another list, which is here and is authenticated by the other Government. 

The most important thing is for Government to start the process of paying. If the agreement is for the 10, the 23 must come on board and they should be paid. Mr Speaker, we have a background of business. All of these people never supplied at same time; it was at different times. Therefore, as they go out -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you now debating?

MR KAKOOZA: Yes. As the time goes on, these people may demand for their money but if Government does not start the process, they will never get that money.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, my bone of contention is that we are in a fair country called Uganda and there are matters we have been constrained on. One of them was to ask Members who have interests to declare them. We have not done that and yet there are Members in this Parliament who may have interests in these companies. 

For us to serve this country fairly, and knowing that sometimes the privileged few may succeed, let us pass a resolution, which is all encompassing. It will not stop Government from paying the 10; it will simply commit this Government to pay all the people who –(Interjection)– Not only the 53. We urge Government to pay every Ugandan that is owed money.

Regarding the implementation, Parliagment is not an implementing agency; it is Government. Government will find a modality that can implement that resolution. Therefore, let us pass a resolution that caters for all Ugandans and we will put Parliament in good light. The process of implementation is for the Government.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is the motion. Please, let me restate the motion for you. The motion is for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to implement the bilateral agreement with the Government of South Sudan to pay monies owed to Ugandan traders with South Sudan amounting to US$ 41,623,513.99.

The framework for payment for all is captured in the agreement. The framework for paying anybody who supplied the Government of South Sudan and has been verified is in this agreement. The framework is there. Therefore, the contestation is whether Parliament should pronounce itself on a figure. Honourable minister, would you like to amend your motion to remove the figure so that we adopt the agreement and you begin the implementation process? You can deal with the verification.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I know that procedurally, it is not fair to seek guidance from the Chair. However, I would like to take exception and seek your guidance because when we remove any figure or any process in that agreement, which has not been agreed upon by the other party, it will now mean that it is going to be compensation without any expectation that Government of South Sudan will refund. Therefore, it will mean that the Government of Uganda has wholly -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is seeking guidance from the Speaker.

MR BAHATI: I am seeking guidance. It will mean that the Government of Uganda has wholly accepted to compensate everybody who lost. Therefore, can you guide me on whether that is not the case?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this is what the motion will be saying: “Motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to implement the bilateral agreement with the Government of South Sudan to pay monies owed to Ugandan traders with South Sudan.” This is the agreement we are asking you to implement. The whole process, including verification, is in the agreement and Parliament is authorising you to implement it.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, as agreed by the House, I would like to amend the motion to read as follows: “A motion for the resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to implement the bilateral agreement with the Government of South Sudan to pay monies owed to Ugandan traders with South Sudan.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, is the amendment acceptable?

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, in this bilateral agreement, there is a list of only 10 companies in schedule 1. We need to amend that list and improve on it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think what has been amended captures the spirit of this whole thing because we already have a Cabinet position on the next 23 companies, which is part of what should now go into that agreement. Can we proceed with it the way it is?

Honourable members, I now put the question on the motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to implement the bilateral agreement with the Government of South Sudan to pay monies owed to Ugandan traders in South Sudan.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS BETTY NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, I beg for your indulgence. I am not in very good health but I have a matter of national importance that I would like to raise. I would beg that you allow me to present it so that I can go and attend to my health.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a complete exception to the rules. The rules say that after communication from the Chair, if you have an urgent matter, you raise it after giving notice to the Speaker. The honourable member has written and I have communicated to the Prime Minister what the subject of her issue is. I would like her to use two minutes to raise the matter.

4.17
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We, the Catholics, and most probably our brothers and sisters in the Anglican Church, had a very bad Easter because of claims linking our Archbishop of Kampala, Cyprian Kizito Lwanga, and therefore the entire church, to a plot to overthrow Government. This came out in his statement on Good Friday and in the homily at Rubaga on Easter Sunday. 

Similar allegations have been raised against several priests in the church. It has also been revealed that the President has believed these claims and that he has talked to the Archbishop. This was revealed by his press secretary, Mr Don Wanyama.

Mr Speaker, the matter of public importance I would like to raise is to do with the relationship between the church and the state, more so because the country has a history where we even lost an Archbishop because of the acrimony between the church and the Government then. Anything that points to that direction leaves Ugandans very worried and they would like to hear from the Government in particular on what they are doing about these allegations as made by the Archbishop of Kampala Archdiocese in the Catholic Church. 

We are also particularly interested in knowing how the Government is handling the matter concerning a person who invaded Namirembe Cathedral on Easter Sunday and tried to attack the Bishop of Namirembe, the Rt Rev. Luwalira Kityo.

Mr Speaker, I would like to request the Leader of Government Business to throw more light on the allegation that recently, a priest died and security organs went to the parish to claim gadgets and a gun given to him by security organs as he had pursued work on their behalf. We would like to know if Government is now recruiting priests into security organisations. The trust between priests and lay Catholics makes the foundation of our church, because confidentiality, which is required, depends on the holy sacrament -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you have raised the matter.

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, I am very grateful for this opportunity and the country waits to hear from the Government. I beg to move.

4.22
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, the matter raised is obviously important. It is true that the media was awash with some of the statements made over Easter. Suffice it to say that the Easter season was essentially good in spite of those isolated incidents.
	
Secondly, the President of Uganda and leaders of different religions are in regular contact. Government is in regular contact with them and some of the issues that my sister, hon. Nambooze, has raised are always discussed and sorted out.

Thirdly, the incident at Namirembe Cathedral was nasty. However, it is clear that security is dealing with this matter and we will wait for the results of their investigations.

We would like to ensure that churches and other religious groups are at liberty to do their work and church leaders are indeed protected by the law. If hon. Nambooze has any additional information that would help the state in its investigations to ensure that all these incidents are cleanly sorted out, that information will be very welcome by Government. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we go back to the beginning of the Order Paper since the Bills are ready? 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE FINANCE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I would like you to move your motion and present the attendant requirements of the certificate so that we do not waste time. Proceed.

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, the first Bill is not ready with us but we have the rest.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE EXCISE DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018

4.26
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “the Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2018” be read for the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that Bill is now referred to the appropriate committee to handle expeditiously within the timeframe of the budget. Is the financial certificate there? Would you like to lay a copy of the Bill and the certificate on the Table?

Honourable members, can we receive the Bills and get the certificates tomorrow? They will bring the certificates for the respective Bills tomorrow. Would that be okay? We have done this before. Can we deal with this tomorrow? Please, prepare properly, hon. Bahati.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 25/01/10 TO THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

4.28
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): “Can the minister explain to the House why more resources are allocated to the centre (ministries, departments and agencies) than local governments and why percentage allocations to the local governments are dwindling year after year yet Ministries, Departments And Agencies (MDAs) are majorly for policy design, quality assurance and technical support supervision?”

4.28
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, this is a statement regarding the share of local government funding as posed by the hon. Denis Obua. 

There is a concern regarding the share of the local government funding compared to allocations to the central Government vote. I wish to clarify that there are items of expenditure at national level in our budget such as debt service, interest payment, security and power generation projects that cannot be separated across levels of Government. In the same measure, there are also funds appropriated to line ministries but transferred to local governments like Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF), Operation Wealth Creation (OWC), road maintenance, Uganda Women’s Entrepreneurship Programme, Youth Livelihood Programme and drugs from National Medical Stores. 

There are also funds under projects such as secondary school construction under the Ministry of Education and Sports and Gavi funding under the Ministry of Health that are utilised at local government level. When all these are discounted, local governments get about 32 per cent of the national budget. 

Second was the issue of the need for additional funding for local governments. The above notwithstanding, I recognise the need to increase funding for decentralised services. Consequently, we are in negotiations with development partners under education and health, with a focus on the following areas:

    1. Education

We will concentrate on construction of secondary schools in sub-counties that have none, construction of science laboratories in secondary schools that have none, construction of primary schools in parishes that have none, infrastructure in existing primary schools to attract more pupils, and outstanding presidential pledges for secondary and primary education.

    2. Health 

We shall concentrate on district hospitals, health centres in sub-counties that have none, and equipping and staffing of existing health centres to improve functionality.

    3. Energy

We will also be coming to this House to borrow an additional over US$ 200 million to ensure that we extend electricity to the remaining 287 sub-counties. 

Therefore, when you look at the funding of local governments and include the things that impact on the local governments but are not part of local funding, the proportion of funding to local governments is not as the honourable member puts it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there any supplementary question from the honourable member for Ajuri? Let us go to the next question.

QUESTION 26/01/10 TO THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

4.30
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): “Can the minister explain to the House why the National Planning Authority (NPA) has delayed to give feedback to MDAs and local governments on the consistence of their Sector Strategic Plans and District Development Plans with the National Development Plan II ever since the MDAs/local governments made submissions two years ago?”

4.31
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to respond to that question tomorrow. 

QUESTION 39/01/10 TO MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable Member for Bunya County East is not here to receive the answer to his question. Has he delegated any Member to receive the answer to this question? Okay, next item.

MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION OF THE NATIONAL BIOTECHNOLOGY AND BIOSAFETY BILL, 2012 AS RETURNED BY H.E. THE PRESIDENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 142

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you want to briefly restate your motion so that we can get a report?

4.32
THE MINISTER OF SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION (Mr Elioda Tumwesigye): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the National Biotechnology and Biosafety Bill, 2012, as returned by H.E. the President in accordance with rule 142, be reconsidered by this House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this motion was seconded and forwarded to the committee responsible for science and technology. They have examined the request by the President for reconsideration. The details of the President’s letter were read before all of you and the committee is now ready to report. 

However, let me propose the question before the committee responds. Honourable members, the motion that I propose for your debate is for the consideration of the National Biotechnology and Biosafety Bill, 2012 as returned by H.E the President in accordance with rule 142 of our Rules of Procedure. To kick off the debate, I will ask the chairperson to report. 

4.34
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION (Mr Robert Kafeero): This is a report of the Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation on the Bill for an Act of Parliament entitled, “The National Bio-safety Act, 2017”. 

Mr Speaker, on 4 October 2017, Parliament passed a Bill for an Act of Parliament entitled, “The National Biosafety Act, 2017” and transmitted an assent copy to H.E the President in accordance with Article 91(2) of the Constitution. The President, in accordance with Article 91, returned the Bill to Parliament and it was received on 2 January 2018. 

On Thursday, 11 January 2018, the Minister of Science, Technology and Innovation laid on the Table a copy of the assent Bill in accordance with rule 142(2) of the Rules of Procedure. It was subsequently referred to the Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation for consideration. 

The committee embarked on the assessment but was not able to complete within the time stipulated due to other parliamentary programmes. On Tuesday, 13 March 2018, the committee was granted two more weeks within which to accomplish the assignment and report back to the House. 

Mr Speaker, I hereby lay on the Table a hard copy of the report and the minutes of the committee meetings that took place and generated the report. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the report and the minutes of the meetings of the committee. 

MR KAFEERO: Mr Speaker, H.E the President, in his letter dated 21 December 2017, raised several concerns about the Bill for an Act entitled, “The National Biosafety Act, 2017”. The concerns were considered and the committee reports as follows: 

On the title of the Bill, the committee reconsidered this concern and found it necessary to align the title to the content of the Bill. 

Mr Speaker, on the extinction of indigenous crops, it should be noted that it is already evident that with or without the use of biotechnology products, our biodiversity is already under threat due to causes other than biotechnology. As a result, Government has established several gene banks and seed banks across the country to preserve the biodiversity. Some of them have been stated in the report of the committee. However, the committee is in agreement with H.E the President’s directive that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should work out modalities where all indigenous plants and animal varieties should be kept uncontaminated with any genetically engineered organism. 

On allegations of a plan to have genetically modified materials in the irrigated areas of Mubuku, the committee assures this House that such a plan has never been submitted to it. It is however important to note that while genetically modified crops were try tested in confined sealed trials in Mubuku, such crops were also tested and seen by the committee in confined sealed trials in other areas of this country.

Mr Speaker, on the fear of cloning humans, for avoidance of doubt, an amendment has been proposed to specifically exclude human cloning for purposes of this Bill. 

The President advised that genetically modified seeds should never be randomly mixed with indigenous ones, just in case they turn out to have a problem. The committee has provided for containment of confined field trials in green houses in our proposals, as you will see. 

The committee also learnt that not all plants cross pollinate. For those that are predominantly self-pollinated like bananas, rice, finger millet and soya beans, they cannot be cross-pollinated even if they coexisted with the Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs). Nevertheless, the committee has proposed amendments to cater for isolation distances. You will see the proposed amendment.

On the issue of labelling, the committee noted that the President had a crucial concern. That explains why it was provided for and catered for under clause 26 of the assent copy of the Bill. Nevertheless, further consideration of the clause was done to provide for conspicuously labelling products containing genetically modified material.

On the home of genetic engineering, the committee has proposed that the Genetic Engineering and Biosafety Council should be domiciled in the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation or any other ministry, department or agency as may be decided by H.E the President. 

On the protection of consumers against GMOs, a new provision of strict liability has been proposed to cater for liability of body corporates in addition to the protection accorded under clause 35 of the assent copy. 

The President expressed fear that manipulation of the ancient crops and livestock would give monopoly –(Interruption) 

DR NSABA BUTURO: Mr Speaker, the honourable member keeps making reference to the President’s views, which I suspect many of us do not have. Does this make much sense that he should continuously refer to something that is not in our possession? It is essential that we have the President’s views in our possession so that we can adequately respond to his contribution. Is it procedurally right, Mr Speaker, for him to continually refer to information that is not available to us? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The only reason we are discussing this matter is because the President referred it to Parliament and I personally read the details of the letter to Members. I do not know whether a copy of the letter was uploaded on the iPads. Is it there? 

MR KAFEERO: Mr Speaker, the report was uploaded on the iPads. I am just reading an abridged version, not word for word. I am reading the report itself.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that the report? 

MR KAFEERO: This is the report but I am not reading paragraph by paragraph. I was reading 2.11, for example - monopoly of the adders. That is where I had reached. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed. 

MR KAFEERO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am reading 2.11, which is on monopoly of adders. The President expressed fear that the manipulation of ancient crops and livestock would give monopoly of patent rights to the adders and would lead to the forgetting of the original preservers, developers and multipliers of the original material. Of course, there is a lot of text that follows there. However, the committee has proposed amendments to cater for agreements between adders and the community in which the activities are taking place.

On the release of genetically engineered material to the public, the committee was informed that the National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO) had not released genetically modified crops to the public. There is a lot of text for you to read. 

The committee further reconsidered the specific clauses identified by His Excellency the President as specified above. It is, however, pertinent to note that consideration of some of those clauses has caused consequential amendments to the Bill. The committee, therefore, recommends that the ministry responsible for agriculture, animal industry and fisheries should establish a national indigenous gene bank where indigenous material would be kept uncontaminated with any GMOs for future use if there were any crisis within modernisation efforts. Mr Speaker, I beg to move that this report be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the motion for your debate. It is not a motion to adopt a report of the committee; it is a motion to reconsider the Bill as returned by the President. That is the motion you are debating. The report of the committee guides us in that debate from what they have been able to do as they interacted with members of the public and specialised people in this area. That is what the committee has reported. 

The motion we are debating is for reconsideration of the National Biotechnology and Biosafety Bill, 2012 as returned by His Excellency the President in accordance with rule 102 of our Rules of Procedure. That is the motion. Therefore, if the committee has not advised us properly, that could be part of what we debate. 

4.47
MR GASTER MUGOYA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Mr Speaker, when we interfaced on the 4th of October last year over this same matter, I raised a very important issue of law - (Interjection) - I do not know how you can be educated; I am raising an issue to do with procedure and I am being interrupted by the same issue on procedure. 

Mr Speaker, on 4 October last year, when we had the second and third reading of this Bill, I raised an issue to do with quorum under rule 24. I would like to repeat the same. Perhaps, I may seek your indulgence as to whether we can proceed to debate anything under rule 142 (2) of our Rules of Procedure when actually the Bill that was passed then did not go through the legal tests. We passed the Bill without quorum and I would like to invite you, Mr Speaker and honourable members, to look at the Hansard of 4 October 2017. In other words, what we are debating today is a nullity void ab initio.

Therefore, whatever we are trying now to debate does not exist in the eyes of law. In essence, and as I intimated on 4 October 2017, they should just withdraw whatever they are purporting to do and when the right time comes, Government can reorganise its mind and then come up with a proper Bill that will be able to pass through the legal test. I would like to invite you, Mr Speaker, to look at the Hansard of 4 October 2017.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are procedures that we follow. If you raised the issue of quorum and a vote was taken thereafter and has not been contradicted by anybody else, what it means is that when you raised the issue of quorum, it was looked at and eventually, quorum was established therefore a decision was taken. 

That decision has not been challenged successfully by any institution. Therefore, that means the vote of 4 October remains a valid vote. That means the law passed on that day remains a valid law. That is how the same copy was extracted and forwarded to the President. There has been no challenge to the process of passing that law.

The only challenge has been raised by the President on the content of what has been transmitted to him for assent. That is why he has returned it here. There is nothing void ab initio as you are trying to indicate. Everything is valid up to this point when we deal with it. Therefore, when we handle this, then the process will go back to the President. 

If you were dissatisfied with the issue of what you raised during the process, the procedure would have been to go elsewhere and let those people say that this law is a nullity. You cannot stand in this House and say this law is a nullity. You have no authority neither do you have locus to do that. Therefore, let us leave it there for now.

However, honourable members, I would request that we receive this report, internalise it and handle it later. Is that okay?

MR MUGOYA: Mr Speaker, I want your legal guidance. In the famous case of Lukyamuzi, one of the critical reasons that was advanced by court was that when you realize that the House does not have the necessary quorum to pass a Bill, in order for you to have locus standi in any court, then you, as a Member, must put it to the presiding officer. This is exactly what I did.

Therefore, I would like now to be guided properly as to whether we should continue to open up or to seek the indulgence of the presiding officer where quorum has not been realised in matters of this nature.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, when you quoted the case of John Ken Lukyamuzi, I suppose you were quoting a decision of the court. I do not have a decision of the court on the matter you raise. If upon rising that matter you took it up to go to court and challenge the process of passing that law, I would not be saying what I am saying now. You sat on your hands and your rights and now you want to speak in the House and say you are the court - you cannot be the court! Please, that process should have been nullified by another organ of the state not Parliament because in Parliament, if you raise a matter, its procedure is looked at and eventually passed. 

The Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda says, if a Member raises the issue of quorum, there should be processes of establishing quorum. Once that is done, the voting goes ahead. Right now, we have no way of saying that, that was not done because you did not challenge it in court. If you think it is true, you should have done the right thing such that you would have come here with a decision similar to the case you are quoting and like that, we would be properly handling the matter. 

However, that is not to say that the issue of quorum should never be raised, it should always be raised whenever there is shortage of Members. It should not also be raised in a spirit that does not facilitate – it should be real issue of quorum then we will see. If the presiding officer certifies that there is quorum, they will take the vote and proceed because quorum would have been established. Are we okay now, honourable member? Thank you.

Honourable minister, we will deal with this matter. Let Members internalise this and we see because personally, I have not seen the amendment as proposed by the Chair of the committee. I would like to look at them before I can guide the House on what to do. Thank you.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO JOIN THE REST OF THE COMMONWEALTH COUNTRIES IN COMMEMORATING THE COMMONWEALTH DAY (12 MARCH 2018)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, 12th March is Commonwealth Day. The Queen makes a speech and it is sent to all parliaments to communicate to their countries. I did that when Parliament resumed. On 12 March 2018, we were not in session and so we could not handle it. This motion is supposed to be a supportive motion to that process. It is not time bad because this Parliament has not yet received it. May I, therefore, ask the honourable member to come and state this formal motion that is supposed to help this process of the Commonwealth Day? Honourable member for Agago District, would you like to state your motion?

4.57
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving us this opportunity to move the motion. I move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to urge Government to join the rest of the Commonwealth countries to commemorate the Commonwealth Day (12 March 2018). This is presented under Rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda. The motion reads:  

“WHEREAS the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA) was established in l9ll as an association of Commonwealth Parliamentarians who irrespective of gender, race, religion or culture, are united by community of interest, respect for the rule of law and individual rights and freedoms, and pursuit of the positive ideals of parliamentary democracy;

AND WHEREAS Uganda is an active member of the Commonwealth including its organs as demonstrated through hosting the CPA Conference in 1967, Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) in 2007, and has offered to host the 4th CPA Africa Regional Youth Parliament from 15 April 20l8 and the CPA conference in 2019;

NOTING THAT Commonwealth Day is an annual celebration by the Commonwealth member states which falls on the second Monday of March, and for this year it was held on l2 March 20l8 in London, marked by a multi-faith celebration service in Westminster Abbey, which was attended by Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, Head of the Commonwealth and patron of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association;

AND NOTING THAT in commemorating the Commonwealth day, the Queen delivered a message based on the theme ‘Towards the common future’ wherein she observed that there is a very special value in the insights we gain through the Commonwealth connection; shared inheritances help us overcome difference so that diversity is a cause of celebration rather than division;

FURTHER NOTING THAT the Queen emphasised the necessity for Commonwealth gatherings as a means of building consensus and commitment in order to create a future that is fairer, more secure, more prosperous and sustainable; She further recognised the need to serve the common good in new ways as a means of ensuring continuity of the Commonwealth;

RECOGNISING THAT the Secretary-General of the CPA, Mr Akbar Khan in his message to CPA branches of which Uganda is inclusive said: ‘Commonwealth Day provides us with the opportunity to reflect on what the Commonwealth means to us and our communities. The Commonwealth can play a vital role in ensuring a better future for us all, today and for future generations. The 2018 Commonwealth theme reminds us that only by working together can we secure a more sustainable, prosperous, fairer and secure Commonwealth for everyone’;

FURTHER RECOGNISING THAT Uganda joins the rest of Commonwealth Parliamentary Association to commemorate 12 March 2018 as the Commonwealth day and in supporting this year’s theme pledges to co-operate as a way of securing a more sustainable, prosperous, fairer and secure Commonwealth for everyone;

Now, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this august House that:
 
1. 	Government joins the rest of the Commonwealth countries to commemorate l2 March 20l8 as the Commonwealth Day.
2. 	Government continues to educate its citizens on the principles and values of the Commonwealth.
3. 	Uganda continues to support and participate in the Commonwealth activities.”

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by Member for Kasilo, Member for Kassanda North, Member for Erute North, Member for Adjumani, Member for Gomba West, Member for Ajuri and Member for Kilak South. Would you like to briefly justify your motion?

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The fact that this country participates in the activities of Commonwealth and this Parliament is also delegated and headed by the Speaker, Madam Rebecca Kadaga, a good number of Members of Parliament being delegates – the meeting that took place during the Commonwealth programme discussed quite a number of topical issues that affect our country.

The principles that guide the Commonwealth are the ones that Uganda subscribes to. I, therefore, think that it is important for this country to join the rest of the countries to commemorate this day.

Mr Speaker, I would like to remind Members of the 16 Principles of Commonwealth that will guide the importance for joining the rest of the world. The principles are: Democracy, Human Rights, Sustainable development, international peace and security, tolerance, respect and understanding, freedom of expression, separation of powers, rule of law, good governance, gender equality, importance of young people in the Commonwealth, recognising needs of small states and also recognition of needs of vulnerable states, and the principle of role of civil society.

These principles normally guide the discussions and the engagements that this Parliament is party to in all the meetings that take place in the Commonwealth.

I would really like to request that this Government and this Parliament embraces this motion. I urge Government to join the rest of the world to commemorate this day every year. The one for this year fell on 12 March 2018 and, Mr Speaker, you have guided correctly that it was during the time when Parliament was not sitting. We do appreciate the fact that you have given us ample time to present it on the Floor of Parliament, and therefore, without speaking so much, I thank you and urge this august House to support the motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Do we have a seconder of the motion? 

5.06
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for according me the opportunity to second the motion. As you are well aware, by virtue of being a former colony of the British, we belong to the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association.

On this day, the Commonwealth Day, there should have been a number of activities that exhibit what takes place in the Commonwealth countries or what is expected of the Commonwealth countries. We were expected to liaise with the high commissioners and the British High Commissioner to Uganda but of course this year, as it happened, it fell on a day when we were on recess. 

It is our prayer that on celebrations of this day we get support such that we are able to exhibit a number of activities from which we are able to learn what happens and share experiences.

This year, CHOGM is being held in the United Kingdom.  A number of delegations from Uganda will start to move there by next week. There are issues that I feel must be deliberated upon. 

The challenge that the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association faces today, is the issue of status. It is surprising that up to today, the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association is still a registered charity in the UK and not an international body.

However in 2007, the AGM of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association sitting in Sri Lanka resolved that there is need to change, like Inter Parliamentary Union changed from being just a charity to an international organization because there is no way a body of Members of Parliament can be treated at that level. It was resolved but the challenge was that our colonial master was still very cagey. 

This is not the first time. In 1992, it was the Prime Minister of Britain at the time, Sir John Major, who vetoed the resolution of all the other countries. We have however moved and said that there is need for us to move forward. 

Last year, the foreign affairs minister of UK communicated that in the next two years, we shall be able to change. We need to mount pressure because there is no way we can continue to be treated like that. This restricts even the employment of other citizens from other Commonwealth countries in the UK; leave alone for the Secretary General.

Therefore, there is no way we can continue with such rigid policies in the constitution. There is need for change. That has been resolved. The delegation that will be travelling for CHOGM should be able to raise this issue.

We gain a lot from being a member of the Commonwealth association like the post-election seminars that are always organised. 

The commonwealth is structured in such a way that there is the executive part and within the Commonwealth, we have the Youth Forum, the Commonwealth Women Parliamentary Association, the Society of Clerks, then Sergeant-at-Arms Conferences, there is another part that handles Judiciary. 

Uganda is honoured this year to host the African Commonwealth Youth Conference on 14-19 April 2018. It will be hosted in this Parliament of Uganda. We would like to thank the Parliament of Uganda because this is one way for us to professionalise the Commonwealth and also groom future leaders. Uganda is honoured to do that.

Through your office, Mr Speaker and the Government of Uganda, you have offered to host the Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference next year, 22-29 September 2019. It will be a big conference with over 2,000 delegates that will be coming here because of the good relationship we have enjoyed with the Commonwealth. Those are some of the gains gotten out of being a member of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association. 

We thank you, Mr Speaker, and we appreciate the support that we get from the Government and from Parliament and from Members of Parliament, and a number of them as always are organised, with the support of the UK.

Now that UK is breaking off from the European Union, those going for CHOGM should use this opportunity to start bargaining so that we are able to benefit because the British are now looking for new allies. 

Thank you, for the opportunity and for the Members’ support to this day. I hope next year we shall be able to do much better than just reading the Queen’s message and making a motion here. We hope to have exhibitions for us to exhibit a number of these activities and the benefits that we get from the Commonwealth Association.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. The motion that I now propose for your debate is for a resolution of Parliament to urge Government to join the rest of the Commonwealth countries to observe the Commonwealth Day. To kick off the debate, I will ask the person who should have seconded the motion to now start the debate.  

5.12
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support the motion urging Government to join the rest of the world in commemorating the Commonwealth Day.

I will begin by saying it was a missed opportunity that 12 March 2018, when the rest of the world was commemorating this day, this Parliament was on recess. Nevertheless, thank you for the opportunity that you have given to us to remind this country and the Members of Parliament about the importance of commemorating this day.

The Commonwealth is an association like many other associations that we participate in. The major benefit is for us to gain experiences of the good practices taking place elsewhere. When you meet with the 53 countries, along the way you get to know the good practices that are taking place in those other countries that you can ably implement within your country for the betterment of our nation.

Therefore commemorating that day in this country should always be accorded priority so that we can probably share what is going on elsewhere. 

My colleague has just informed us about the young people’s parliament which is taking place starting on 15 April 2018. Mr Speaker, on that day it would have been an opportunity to tell the rest of the world that such an occasion is going on. Next year, we are hosting the CPA (Commonwealth Parliamentary Association) and the Commonwealth Parliamentary Women Association. It is an opportunity for us to share experiences so that we can improve the governance and democracy of this country. We can improve on very many other issues. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I think from what the Queen was communicating, it is time for us to connect and we are connecting to improve on how we are governing our country and we are improving for a better future. Thank you very much.

5.15
MR PATRICK OPOLOT (NRM, Kachumbala County, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to oppose the motion. (Laughter) Colleagues, celebrating such a day – 12th March – for Commonwealth would contradict the spirit of Independence Day of 9th October. When we celebrate 9th October, we are happy to have got independence. When you come to 12th March, you are celebrating that we were colonised. (Laughter) I believe it is going to demean our independence and it would mean stooping too low to colonialism. I submit, Mr Speaker. (Laughter)

5.16
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Mr Speaker, let me start by saluting the movers and seconders of this motion. When I look back in my 12-year-transitional period as a youth, I have been closely associated with the Commonwealth. First, I was nominated by the Government of the Republic of Uganda to be the regional youth representative in the Commonwealth Africa Region – representing Uganda. 

My second association was in 2007 when I was a Member of Parliament representing the youth. I had the opportunity to be appointed the official spokesperson of the Commonwealth Youth Forum that was held in Entebbe. In that, I made history as the second son of Lango who met the Queen of England at the Buckingham Palace, after the late President Obote. Therefore, when I submit on issues of Commonwealth, I submit with authority. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, in my very honest opinion, this particular motion is a wake-up call to the Government of the Republic of Uganda because Uganda is a member state of the 53 countries that accepted to come together under the Commonwealth umbrella.  

Secondly, we cannot run away from history. History is part of us. Even as we sit in this Parliament, there are practices that we adopted from the Commonwealth. The entire arrangement we are seeing in this House is one of the best practices from the Commonwealth: the Mace; the Speaker being dragged to the Chair; the issue of the Speaker being robed like a justice in the court of judicature are all practices we adopted from the Commonwealth and we cannot run away from that. 

Therefore, commemorating the Commonwealth Day will be granting this member state an opportunity to take stock of the progress we have made jointly as 53 countries and the opportunities that are available both at the regional level and at the Commonwealth headquarters. There are Commonwealth scholarships and there are Ugandans who have benefitted and there are Ugandans who are yet to benefit. There are other opportunities within the African region, the Caribbean and the Commonwealth generally for the youth and women. 

This day will give us opportunity to take stock of these achievements, the opportunities and the challenges we face. This is because much as we are talking about the “commonwealth” within the Commonwealth we are not sharing a wealth that is common. There are still disparities. 

Therefore, commemorating this day will give an opportunity to young nations such as Uganda to challenge the big ones such as the UK that: what kind of wealth are we sharing together? Can you be in a position to lift us from where we are such that the word “commonwealth” can be shared across the 53 member states?

Mr Speaker, I support the motion. I believe this motion is an advisory note to Cabinet to look into and ensure that Uganda joins the rest of the member states to commemorate the Commonwealth Day.

The Member who submitted before me was talking about independence. In fact, in celebrating this day we shall even talk about how the British Union Jack was lowered down. Lowering it was a symbol of independence. That is why we are an independent nation; but we have decided to associate with other nations under this umbrella body. It does not take away our independence. We shall be proud that at one point we were colonised, we attained independence and the Black, Yellow, Red flag was raised up. For now, we are independent but we are associating with other member states under this common arrangement. Mr Speaker, I support the motion and thank you.

5.21
MR JOHN NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to be at odds with the motion. If indeed this association of the Commonwealth, whose focal point is in London and whose leader is Queen Elizabeth whose 90th Birthday celebration was in 2016 when actually they were commemorating the Commonwealth - Mr Speaker, first they enslaved us. Secondly, they colonised us. Thirdly, we are living in pure neo-colonialism. 

Talk of independence - indeed and the real meaning and qualification for this association of the Commonwealth would be to nurture that sense of common identity. However, you wonder if it is the “commonwealth” – as the word itself suggests – for the 53 members of this association. Look at the disparities they are living in. Uganda now has a challenge, for instance, of children with nodding disease as well as the half-baked education they are going through, which is hereditary from the colonial times. The other countries such as the United Kingdom themselves are very far advanced.

Mr Speaker, what I expected in the justification of the motion would be – what have been the outstanding roles and achievements of this Commonwealth association to the member states that are wallowing in abject poverty and are having challenges such as nodding disease in the 21st Century and they are not attended to? 

We would be seeing budget debt reliefs. Uganda is facing serious debt challenges. We would be seeing relief, courtesy of our colleagues in the association and we would be justified to aggrandise the so called “commonwealth association”. It is a “commonwealth” without wealth being common to us all. This is a mere annual jamboree of members who go and meet and enjoy the razzmatazz of the occasion. (Laughter)

5.24
MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba West County, Gomba): Thank you for the opportunity, Mr Speaker. I think we should not condemn the fact that the Commonwealth Day is supposed to be celebrated. Of course it reminds us that we were at one time colonised and we broke free and got our independence in 1962. However, we must realise that being a member of the Commonwealth is important, especially to our youth because we recognise the positive roles and contributions of those young people in promoting development, peace and democracy and in protecting and promoting other Commonwealth values such as tolerance, understanding and respect for other cultures. 

The youth make up about 75 per cent of our population and these are our future leaders. We cannot avoid change; we cannot avoid the trend. The globe is changing and we need to borrow from others. I do not see why we should look at associating with the Commonwealth as if we are going to get a disease or something like that. I want to clearly differ from my neighbour – two people away – I support celebrating the Commonwealth Day because there is a lot that we receive from being a Commonwealth member. Where we find that there are weaknesses, we should come in to condemn. 

Let us not blame the system – that should not stop us from associating with other members of the Commonwealth and picking up the positive things which they still have because many of them are still ahead of us in terms of development and we are not despising our own potential in being able to pick up. I support the motion and pray that colleagues do so too. Thank you.

5.27
MR JACKSON MBAJU (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): I rise to oppose this motion for commemorating the Commonwealth Day in Uganda belatedly. I did hear that one of the achievements of the Commonwealth has been supporting connections among the countries that were formerly colonised by Britain. That is true. However, when I come to its moving out of the European Union, it simply means that Britain – our former coloniser – has lost interest in working with many other countries. If it can move away from countries with which it is at the same level, it means if it is not for purposes of prompting neo-colonialism then it would mean it has lost its relevance.

I have heard my sister here presenting a motion and one of the objectives of the Commonwealth is to promote the rule of law. Of recent, this NRM Government killed around 300 people in my palace in Kasese, but I have not heard a comment from the Commonwealth condemning what happened. What reason do I have to commemorate such as event? (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I heard my brother from Teso mentioning rightly that he has been one of the focal point persons and he was even able to speak for the Commonwealth in 2007. He was even sent to Britain to represent the youth forum: why? These are some of the things that we remember. Those are the good things that the Commonwealth has done for him. There are some bad things that the NRM has done. For example, it committed atrocities in Teso but he is supporting NRM –(Interjection)- he knows himself. (Laughter) 

In other words, I am trying to say it was not a question of remembering what the Commonwealth has done or what he has benefitted, but the issue should be the relevance. It has lost relevance. I beg to oppose. Thank you. 

MR OBUA: Mr Speaker, the Member who was holding the Floor made two pertinent allegations. First, he said the NRM Government killed people in his home district of Kasese. Secondly, he said the NRM killed people in Teso. 

Mr Speaker, I was elected to this Parliament on the NRM ticket. All of us who are seated on the right-hand side of the presiding officer are members of the NRM and I have never killed. Is he in order to make such wild allegations against the NRM, yet I am one and I have never killed either in Kasese or Teso?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, statements that we make must carry the dignity of this House. That is what we all try to uphold. If you have specific references, you make them with evidence but you are not permitted to generalise and make accusations that affect everybody else. Therefore, the Member was not proceeding properly. He was not in order.

5.32
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Mr Speaker, I was surprised when I heard hon. Isiagi opposing the motion yet he has enjoyed a lot from the Commonwealth games. (Laughter) I know him as a man who has been attending Commonwealth games. Before he came to Parliament, he was a leader and if you meet him privately, he will tell you that he loves Britain more than any other country in the world. (Laughter)

However, let me put this on the record in support of the motion. If you have a primary school kid with you and he is going to sit P.7 exams this year, if you give him this kind of information, it means your child is likely to fail at least one of the numbers in Social Studies. This is because Commonwealth is one of the topics taught in P.7. In our Social Studies books – go back and look for Social Studies Book Seven; there it has a full topic. The children are taught that the Commonwealth Day is celebrated in all Commonwealth states. 

Where there is a weakness of Government you cannot apportion blame on the organisation. For example, as I talk now, why are we using English in this House? It is because we are a member of the Commonwealth. Hon. Isiagi and others can neither speak Kiswahili nor Ateso inside here because we were colonised by Britain.

Let me also put this on the record. We have many relatives outside there who are in Britain. Go and look at income in foreign exchange that comes to Uganda through Britain to this country. I want to put this on record as a Member of Parliament. Mr Speaker, you can take me to America and anywhere else but there is no country I enjoy like Britain because at least in Britain you will find Ugandans speaking their mother tongues on the streets and matooke (bananas) are also taken there.

Members who brought the motion, I want to thank you because you have helped the Government to recall. Members of Parliament, you should also learn this if you have forgotten. There are certain things that are done by Commonwealth states. One of those that we teach is the member states. Britain is mandated to find market for our agricultural products, even if they lose market. By that time, they were supposed to find how to buy them and we survive. Because we killed the cooperatives like Lint Marketing Board and Coffee Marketing Board, we are no longer in that kind of situation.

However, if we had them operating, we could be running them. The organisation is meant to steer you to move forward as long as you feel that you are with them. If you do not move with the organisation, you also stay behind. That is why I think Members brought this motion because we are forgetting that we are members of the Commonwealth. This is a fact we cannot run away from. 

Right now, I hear our teams are out. They are still going for Commonwealth games. All these are facts. That is why you are putting on suits and ties in this House because you are affiliated to the former colonial masters. 

Therefore, I support the motion. I cannot be a primary school teacher who is going to teach about Commonwealth and give the advantages and at the same time I come to the House and say “I do not support it”. That means I am giving poison to my children. I beg to move. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.35
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion. I pray that Uganda has tried to put in some legal instruments to ensure that some of the principles that were read in the motion are achieved. 

We need to give a clap to this House because we have tried to look at democracy. We have looked at issues of respect for each other and all these other things. We might not be implementing some of them but the House has done its part to follow the principles of the Commonwealth.

As we commemorate this day of the Commonwealth, the theme should not be for the 12th of March. We should follow the theme until it moves to next year when we get a new theme. We should practise what the theme tells us. I would like to say that the theme be localised and made a Ugandan one so that we can be able to follow it.

On the youth forum which is coming on board, as Members of Parliament, we need more information. It is not only qualified people who go to the Commonwealth Assembly. We need to know what it is about. I remember when we had a youth forum, the category of young people with disabilities was invited into their forum and their issues were heard. That is the time when hon. Denis Obua led the team. Our young people with disabilities came to the forum and their issues were captured. Sometimes they tend to forget about these people.

My brother, hon. Patrick Isiagi said they were independent but there is no man who is an island. We have to relate with each other. You will only live independent when you can really do everything for yourself, which you cannot. Even when you are dead, you have to talk with the soils, the worms and all these other things. (Laughter)

I would like to say that the Commonwealth is a good platform for learning experiences and for sharing information. In Uganda, we have a Cambridge curriculum at the international schools where our children go to. They learn this curriculum and later go out into those countries and are able to compete for United Nations jobs. 

I do not want us to say there is nothing we benefit from the Commonwealth, unless you have not grown in Uganda. What I know is a Member like hon. Isiagi, who was also my counterpart somewhere, has benefited from the Commonwealth on many occasions. I know your father was one of the Members who were in this House benefitting from the Commonwealth procedures. You have also come to benefit from the same Parliament. We need to agree that the Commonwealth has got more advantages than disadvantages. 

Uganda is a sovereign country so other things that Government of Uganda does should not be related to the Commonwealth, as some of us are assuming. They have to wait until a time when Uganda has asked for that help, then they can come on board. I would not like Members to mix issues. 

I support the motion. I know in July we also have a special conference for People with Disabilities in Britain and we are going to discuss our issues as we talk about the Sustainable Development Goals. I think the Commonwealth is looking at everybody and it is only up to the Government of Uganda to implement the resolutions. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.40
MS AGNES AMEEDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Pallisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the motion and I thank the movers. I would so much emphasise the benefits that the Commonwealth has brought to us in terms of knowledge. Knowledge is wealth. There are a lot of Ugandans who have benefitted from the Commonwealth scholarships, both at undergraduate and post-graduate level.

I have been a beneficiary of such scholarships. These Ugandans are doing a lot of work in different sectors in this country. Recently, I attended a workshop on the health sector. All members who are alumni of the Commonwealth universities or scholarships were invited and were reviewing issues of the health sector in the country. It was such a big gathering and a lot of knowledge was disseminated in this area.

Besides that, there are many Ugandans who are employed by both local and international organisations supported by the Commonwealth. All these bring wealth to the country. The values of the Commonwealth stand to give more construction to our country in terms of development. I beg to support this motion.

5.42
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the movers of the motion that we should commemorate the Commonwealth Day.

It is very important that we join the Commonwealth countries to commemorate this day. I would like to thank the founders of the Commonwealth because they have united countries which were nurtured by the British and the countries which have some things in common because of their common background. For example, the Commonwealth countries speak one language. Wherever you go, in Nigeria or Ghana, you speak a common language though the dialect changes, though originally it is English. That is a unifying factor.

The Commonwealth has given us a type of education which we are following up to date and nobody can say our education is wrong, though we need to do some modification. However, it has given us the background. As mentioned earlier, in Parliament, we are practising what all the Commonwealth countries are doing. What we are doing is exactly what they have left for us and we are still continuing to stay with them.

Therefore, it is very important that we commemorate this day, not only by talking in Parliament but by organising bigger events at national level so that people can talk about Commonwealth. This is because in the grassroots, people do not know what Commonwealth is. They think Commonwealth is just a matter of coming to share money equally, which is wrong. They need to be explained to what Commonwealth is and we can benefit more from it.

Commonwealth has got different organisations at ministerial level like the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) which we hosted here and it was very colourful. At parliamentary level, we have various fora for Commonwealth like the youth and women. We also need people with disabilities to form a Commonwealth forum so that we meet as people with disabilities. Also, down the grassroots, people should have these associations of Commonwealth so that they can share ideas. 

I would like to thank the Commonwealth for the scholarships they have offered; even my own son benefitted from it and remained to work in London. Many other people have also benefitted from the Commonwealth scholarships; we need to meet together and enjoy.

However, we also need to take on our challenges like poverty. We can make use of this platform to eradicate our poverty so that we are at the same level; the Commonwealth is for us all, and we need to support it. Thank you very much.

5.45
MR OTHIENO OKOT (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The mere fact that I cannot only be admitted in this House when I am wearing a suit and a necktie, and that I am only allowed to debate in English reminds me of how the British behave when they are debating in the House. While other people are allowed to debate in their national languages like Kiswahili, I am told that for a Member of Parliament to be recognised in Uganda, they must debate in English. This makes it difficult for me to support a motion, which is trying to glorify a day that constantly reminds me that I was once colonised by certain powers – (Interjections) - I would have loved to speak my language anyway. (Laughter) 

Mr Speaker, it is not by mistake that the African Union sits in Addis Ababa. It is because those were the people who successfully resisted these colonialists. Our two heroes - Kabalega and the Mwanga - fought gallantly to safeguard the integrity of this country. 

Mr Speaker, I cherish the day my country got independence. It is the biggest day of my life, 9th October, and so for me to go and tell my electorates that we should start celebrating the day of our colonisers and tormentors, would be a betrayal to our forefathers. I am not ready to be in that group. (Laughter) Therefore -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us listen to the Member for Soroti Municipality.

5.48
MR HERBERT ARIKO (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Mr Speaker, I thank you. How I wish hon. Othieno and hon. Patrick Opolot were dressed in a slightly different manner than the way they are today.

Mr Speaker, it is because there are realities we cannot run away from. I stand to second the motion because the Commonwealth is now part and partial of the history of Uganda. There is something very unique about how the Commonwealth set out, especially the parliamentary system and decorum in the countries where they were. 

Mr Speaker, we happened to be in South Sudan together and you remember how they were struggling between being the model of the Commonwealth or something else or the other. At one moment, they wanted to have a mace, another moment they wanted to sit in a certain format all because they do not have an identity. The Commonwealth provides us with decorum and an identity as a unique system of Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, I happened to represent our Parliament in two seminars of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association on Modern Day Slavery. This is a project where Commonwealth countries are being urged to either review, amend or consolidate legislations in order to curb the current scourge of modern day slavery and commercial sexual exploitation, among other vices. This project, for the next five years, will support Commonwealth parliaments to consolidate and review their laws regarding modern day slavery.

Mr Speaker, as a Commonwealth Parliament, we are part and partial of those who will benefit from such a project. This, in a long way, should go to point out the fact that whereas they were our colonial masters, they have not forgotten us as partners in the path towards progress. 

Mr Speaker, for those reasons, I second the motion. Indeed, it should have been debated earlier for us to have enough time to speak to it. I thank you.

5.51
MR HOOD KATURAMU (Independent, PWD, Western): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I stand to support the motion because the Commonwealth Day is an important day in the history of our country. 

Mr Speaker, it would be wrong to only look at the negative side of colonialism because at the time, colonialism and slave trade were the order of the day and so those who initiated bringing together all countries that were governed by the United Kingdom had a brilliant idea. 

Today, in this country, the British left very important infrastructure in the education, health and road sectors. Indeed, after independence, this was the infrastructure our leaders based on to build this country. They, therefore, deserve a credit because we would not maybe be where we are if we did not have those infrastructures.

Mr Speaker, when we look at the affiliate body of the Commonwealth and that is the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA), we realise that it has enabled many Members of Parliament, across Africa, to share views and issues that are pertinent to the governance of our countries. This is, indeed a very big credit to the Commonwealth. For instance, there was a CPA that was hosted in Swaziland, and I had an opportunity to present a paper on the topic that was relevant to my constituency and the plight of the people with disabilities, “The role of African Parliaments in promoting the plight or welfare of the people with disabilities.” 

From that time, it was like a wild fire because thereafter many Parliaments from Africa took issues of people with disabilities with seriousness that it deserved. 

Therefore, we see that the Commonwealth is becoming a pillar in promoting human rights, particularly for the marginalised people in our country. 

Mr Speaker, the Commonwealth Day is a day we should commemorate to remember the past and to build on the strength, which our former colonial masters made and inspired us to do in our countries.

I know that in this Parliament our Speaker was chosen to be the Chairperson of the Commonwealth Women Parliamentary Association. This is a great achievement for Uganda because if such an affiliate body was not in existence, maybe we would not get that opportunity to have a position of such a nature headed by our own.

Therefore, I wish to allay fears of our colleagues who are skeptical about commemorating this day. Let us look at the positive aspects and attributes that the Commonwealth is doing to bring together people of different races, tribes and religions all over the world to come and forge unity for the common interests of our people. I thank you.

5.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS (Ms Florence Nakiwala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I join the Members of Parliament who have pointed out that the day is worth commemorating. Commemoration is about honour, saluting and celebrating.

The infrastructure created since 1962 is huge that it is very hard to run away from the past. Right from the Parliament as you said, the kingdoms like the Bulange setting in Parliament are all direct replica of what was happening at that time in the United Kingdom.

We all have to take advantage of the common law, language which we should probably resolve to harness because business seems to be lessening between the States in Europe compared to Asia and Arab Emirates. That probably poses a threat on how we shall continue travelling and interacting between the two regions when business is lessening. We thank them for the inter-state collaboration and inter-regional cooperation that they have enhanced to date.

However, all is not well with the commonwealth especially when it comes to the secretariat. It would be unfair for us not to learn and take a strategic direction while we are dealing and enhancing the future cooperation between these regions. 

A case in point is, for example, they have been talking about the forthcoming youth conference from 14th to 18th. They have invited two people from each member state that is to say, a male and female. However, the letters of invitation were very clear that these young people have to sponsor themselves 100 per cent.

You look at someone coming to area Members of Parliament and asking them for support to help the youth member representing a country to do representation in the United Kingdom, which is one of the most expensive countries to live in per night. And whenever we are there; you find the youth commuting from very distant areas such as Liverpool to attend such conferences. That to me is food for thought for us to make an input on how to improve the relationship. It is also important to note, as we take stock, that the visa and travel arrangements between these organs are still a problem.

We are looking at people hardly accessing a visa and paying through the mouth. If we are to have a harmonious relationship that we all strive to build, then we should look at these areas that should be improved.

Finally, we have visa waivers - whenever we are interacting, as they come here, they ask for visa waivers even for the non-diplomatic and non-official passport holders. However, as we go there, that is not the case. The officers right now are grappling with securing visas to go and attend the Commonwealth conference. 

Therefore, I thank the presenter and I agree that we have a relationship and the past that we cannot erase but we need to fix the nail when it comes to these critical areas. I thank you.

5.59
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Franca Akello and the seconders and those who have supported the motion. The mover of the motion was very explicit; she mentioned a few things. One was urging Government to commemorate that day and as Government, we have no problem with that.

Two, she reminded us that Uganda is a member already of the Commonwealth  and of the conferences that have been taking place where Government has committed funds to make ensure those conferences are successful. She talked about CHOGM and the conferences, which are yet to take place.

Other Members of Parliament have also added on their voices to mention the benefits. Therefore, as Government, we regret that probably this year 12th March passed without commemorating this relationship, which we are in.

There are things we have to live with. We are better off if we are in the Commonwealth to fight the challenges than putting our heads under the sand, pretending that Uganda is totally independent and that we have nothing to do with those who colonised us –(Interruption)

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Government Chief Whip is busy advocating for the commemoration of that day yet the same minister in Government celebrates NRM day but has never given UPC day, which was in power before NRM came in place. 

Therefore, when are we starting to celebrate UPC day? Is it in order? (Laughter) 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: I appreciate that it is approaching six -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

MR RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was only justifying the point that hon. Franca Akello raised, urging Government to commemorate this day. She also mentioned the need to sensitize the country and that can be done when we apportion time.

We can commemorate by giving lectures to everybody. She wants us to continue sensitising the communities. And I was saying that we are better off to handle the challenges when we are in the Commonwealth so that at the end of the day we can achieve indeed the real Commonwealth. By walking away, we cannot achieve the objective of having Commonwealth yet we are registering successes, day by day. The principles have been read by hon. Franca Akello - rule of law and the rest. 

As I stand here, I would like to mention that we are registering success in as far as democracy is concerned. We have many countries having their constitutions, observing elections, respecting democracy because they know that there is a check somewhere. And I know that time will come when we achieve what we call the common wealth. By going away, we will not achieve this objective. 

So, Mr Speaker, Government accepts this motion and we shall make sure that we work with Parliament and I thank Parliament so much for the support. Next year we will see better arrangements to ensure that the day is commemorated. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. The Commonwealth is a coalition of nations; a coalition based on free will. It is already beginning to change shape. Founded by history but is beginning to admit countries that were not even initially colonized by the British including Rwanda, Mozambique and others that were colonized by other powers. So, it is a growing trend of cooperation amongst countries that are willing to stay together, share problems, solutions and work together for the betterment of humanity. That is what the commonwealth of nations is all about; it is not colonial things that members are trying to talk about.

Honourable members, the motion that I now propose for your debate - the speech was already read to the House, so we do not have to lay a copy here.

I now put the question that the Motion for the Resolution of Parliament urging Government to join the rest of the Commonwealth countries in commemorating the Commonwealth Day be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, may I correct some information on the youth conference because it has already gone on the Hansard? It will not be good if we do not correct it. You will recall that the honourable minister stated that the youth who are - I would not like us to confuse the two; the youth conference that is going to take place in Uganda is for the youth from the African Commonwealth countries and they are coming to Uganda not London.

Two, is about the cost. The cost is fully covered -(Interjection) - we are receiving a contribution from the Commonwealth member states for the youth who are coming here from the constituencies to join others who are coming from other countries. Their transport will be refunded and they will be fully accommodated because they have engaged the youth representatives in this House to pick from their regions – because you talked about 14th to 19th –(Interruption)

MS NAKIWALA: No! From the 14th to 18th of this month we are having a conference in the UK and I am the chairperson of that conference. It is the one I have been talking about as the Minister for Youth and Children’s Affairs. 

MR OKUPA: Then you are confusing the two because the one taking place in Uganda is also from 14th to 19th and it is for the African region and that is why I wanted to make that correction.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know that is why I did not want you to come in because I listened to the minister clearly - she talked about a different youth event, which is going to take place in the UK and so there was no conflict except that the arrangements here are different from the arrangements in the UK. She talked about the issue of visa, which people are struggling to secure, which was not the case in the past where Ugandans never required visas to go to the UK. What changed? That is what the minister is asking. You people, who are attending the Commonwealth meeting, kindly raise this matter to the British Government to see that some of these things are eased for our people. Thank you. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE EXCISE DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018

6.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2018” be read for the first time. It is accompanied by a certificate of financial implications. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that, and it stands referred to the appropriate Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to handle expeditiously within the framework of the budget. 

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE STAMP DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018

6.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Stamp Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2018” be read the first time. It is also accompanied by a certificate of financial implications.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: let the records capture that and it stands referred to appropriate Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to handle. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018

6.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2018” be read the first time. It is accompanied by a certificate of financial implications. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER; It stands referred to the committee responsible for finance to handle.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018

6.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2018” be read the first time. It is accompanied by a certificate of financial implications.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that; it stands referred to the committee to handle expeditiously.
BILLS
FIRST READING
THE TAX PROCEDURES CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
6.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill, 2018” be read for the first time and it is accompanied by a certificate of financial implications. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that; it stands referred to the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to handle within the framework of the budget.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE TAX APPEALS TRIBUNAL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018

6.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION AND INVESTMENT) (Ms Evelyn Anite): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Tax Appeals Tribunal (Amendment) Bill, 2018, be read for the first time. It is accompanied by the certificate of financial implications.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It stands referred to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE TRAFFIC AND ROAD SAFETY ACT 1998 (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018

6.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION AND INVESTMENT) (Ms Evelyn Anite): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Traffic and Road Safety Act 1998 (Amendment) Bill, 2018, be read for the first time. It is accompanied by the certificate of financial implications. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It stands referred to the appropriate Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to handle within the framework of the budget. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE LOTTERIES AND GAMING (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018

6.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION AND INVESTMENT) (Ms Evelyn Anite): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Lotteries and Gamming (Amendment) Bill, 2018, be read for the first time. It is also accompanied by a certificate of financial implications.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that; it stands referred to the appropriate Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to handle expeditiously within the framework of the budget. 

Honourable members, business that is pending will be handled tomorrow. We have questions that should be answered. The honourable minister of finance has a pending question; ensure to provide an answer tomorrow. The minister for transport also still has a pending question; come and deal with that question tomorrow.

Honourable members, we deferred the reconsideration of the National Biotechnology and Biosafety Bill; we will appoint a proper date to come back to it for debate. This House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 o’clock. 

(The House rose at 6.16 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 4 April 2018 at 2.00 p.m.)
