

Wednesday, 26 April 2017

Parliament met at 2.45 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The oaths were administered to:

1. Lucy Achiro
2. Stella Atyang
3. Rehema Watongola

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, members of the Cabinet, members of the Opposition, independent Members, UPDF representatives and all the other members of the House, I welcome you back for this piece of work. I have disrupted your activities on the budget process for two important reasons: 

First, the three constituencies, whose Members have just been sworn in, have not been represented for over two months. Therefore, it was necessary to get the new Members of Parliament to swear in so that they can deliberate on behalf of those constituencies. We welcome them and wish them well. Secondly, there is a serious hunger situation in the country. Considering that the plenary has not been sitting, it is important that the Government updates the country on the interventions that are taking place. 

That is why I called you. I hope that we shall keep you only for today so that you return to the budget work in your committees, so as to fulfil the requirements of the Public Finance Management Act. 

Honourable members, I think you can see that on the boards there are some numbers. There has been a lot of loose talk that Shs 28 billion was spent on this system. I would like to tell you that this system was free. It was a gift to Parliament from ZTE and not a single shilling was spent on it. (Applause) The voting system was entirely a gift. The security system is in this building and it is the one taking care of the security of Kampala. Therefore, the loose talk must end because the system is in place, it is working very well and it is serving the whole country.

Honourable members, I also wish to draw your attention to two issues that occurred during the period you were busy with the budget. Our colleague, hon. Herbert Kabafunzaki, has written to me to the effect that as a result of an ongoing court process, he has withdrawn from his ministerial duties. However, he will remain a Member of Parliament. Therefore, we expect the senior minister to inform us of any other minister who will take up that docket of labour, employment and industrial relations for purposes of liaison within this House. 

Honourable members, today I met the Deputy Vice Chancellor of Makerere University together with the Chairman of the University Council. He had come to invite Members to participate in the Makerere University Endowment Fund Run. They are considering taking up that fund and are inviting us to run to raise funds on 14 May 2017; it will be a Sunday. 

I would like to therefore invite the alumni of Makerere University, both in and out of this House, to go and participate in that run. I do not know where hon. Tayebwa is seated but I have also asked him, because he is a member of the Makerere University Council, to mobilise the alumni so that we can come out in a big force.

Today I met the outgoing members of the East African Legislative Assembly (EALA). On your behalf, I thanked them for the work they have been doing at EALA. One of the things that they brought to our attention is the fact that the President of Uganda is the Head of the Summit and therefore, the Minister for East African Community Affairs of Uganda will head the Council of Ministers for the rest of this year. They also congratulated our President and the Uganda Government for that achievement. We look forward to giving them the necessary support during their tenure. 

They also brought to my attention something which clearly bothered me. They visited Mirama Hills border post and observed that one, there is no health inspector; two, there is no bureau of standards’ inspector; and three, there is no agricultural inspector. The above mentioned are required at the border post. They also brought it to my attention that there is no accommodation and officers live in lodges. The education officers, customs officers and the security officers live in lodges and yet the smugglers live there too.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister and the Cabinet, I think let us approach the President during his tenure to ensure that at least the facilities on the Uganda side are put in place; the other side is for the Rwanda border. Let us support him by facilitating our people. I am told that they do not have means of transport. You can imagine a border post with no means of transport. Maybe they inspect on foot and chase robbers and smugglers on foot. Let us try and help them along those lines.

This week I read in the newspapers that the Government was waiving taxes on imported rice, but I do not know for what reasons. However, I also wondered what the Government was doing about the local producers that pay taxes. They train people and give them seeds, but I really wonder what the rationale is to waive taxes on imported rice. Is it import substitution? We grow rice in this country, in Pabo, Kibuku, Busembatya; all these are rice growing areas. I hope the Government can tell us how they are going to handle the local producers.

We have been talking about “Build Uganda, Buy Uganda” for a long time. If we are promoting rice of the foreigners and taxing our own rice here, I do not know how we are helping the economy. I hope that we shall be able to get some answers so that our farmers also hear about what we are doing for them.

Finally, because of the structure of the East African Community Treaty, we cannot amend the reports of EALA and yet they are laid here. I, therefore, would like to propose that the Clerk extracts the sector areas and gives them to Members, so that they know what is going on. 

There are some cross-border activities, for instance the Standard Gauge Railway; I am told that the Kenyans are waiting for us to start. I do not know why we have not started. The Rwandese are also waiting for us to get started. I hope that the Clerk can do that and facilitate the honourable members of the committee to look at those sectors and see how they can follow up. Thank you.

Honourable members, in the public gallery, we have Mr Edward Wright. He is having discussions with the Ministry of Health about how to establish a national ambulance service for Uganda. Can you stand for recognition? You are welcome. (Applause) 

I believe the others are friends of our Members of Parliament. They have come to witness the swearing-in ceremony. Hon. Asuman Kiyingi is up there; he also came to witness the swearing in. You are all welcome. Thank you very much.

3.01
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, we would like to register our appreciation to you for joining us during hon. Songa’s celebration in Zombo and for your commitment to serve this country. 

Madam Speaker, you mentioned that the honourable minister, Mr Kabafunzaki, wrote a letter saying that he is now an ordinary Member of Parliament. The way this minister has been handled in social media and the traditional media - print and electronic - I think in a way has really sent a shock wave in the nation about the conduct of ministers and also the House. He has been deliberately denied an opportunity to explain himself until maybe he does so in court.

My request would be, therefore, is: would it not be proper that the honourable minister – (Interjections) - Okay, the current Member of Parliament and former minister - is accorded an opportunity to make a personal statement on the Floor of this House, so that Members can also know the exact story from his side? Thank you, Madam Speaker.  

3.03
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to use this opportunity to inform the House that yesterday I met with hon. Kabafunzaki and he will be making a statement to this House at an appropriate time. He cannot do it now because investigations are still going on as you are all aware. However, I would like to assure you that he will come to this House and make a statement.

THE SPEAKER: I understand that the minister in charge of taxation would like to say something about rice. 

3.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you for giving me this opportunity to clarify on the decision of Government to waive taxes on unprocessed rice. 

It is true that we took a decision to waive tax import duty on unprocessed rice to be able to bring down the price of rice from Shs 4,500 to Shs 3000, to relieve us from the situation that we are in. This exemption is only for four months, effective from April. So, the tax waiver is on unprocessed rice, not all imported rice. We are monitoring the situation and we believe that this can bring down the price of rice from Shs 4,500 to Shs 3000. That is the condition that we gave them -(Interjections)- This issue came from – 

THE SPEAKER: No, let him explain; let him finish. 

MR BAHATI: As you are aware, we have all been looking for ways to help our people and we thought that this should be one of the ways. That is the decision we have taken and it will run for four months. It is an issue that came from this House.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development knows that the laws of taxation are passed by this Parliament; there is no law that has been brought to this House to that effect, unless there was an amendment that was brought when we were on recess and passed. I do not know whether it is procedurally right for us to now get information about an illegality on the Floor of this House. 

I know that the Finance Acts of 2006, 2015 and 2016 do not allow tax, which is an import duty, to be waived. Even if it was passed by the National Council of Ministers, it must be ratified by this Parliament. I do not know whether we are proceeding well to accept that information.

THE SPEAKER: Is this rice in husks? Is it what you call unprocessed rice? What is unprocessed rice? Is it rice in husks? 

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I must thank the previous speaker who raised the procedural matter. My problem was language; I was seeking clarification instead of procedure. I wanted to find out where the minister got the authority to impose tax and yet it is Parliament that passes tax.

Secondly, Uganda is an agricultural country. Not only do we grow whatever we grow but there are processing companies that do process rice. We need to know why Government is bringing in unprocessed rice knowing very well that the rural person does not have mechanisms for grinding it. 

People are dying now and yet you are telling them that you are bringing them rice that is not ready to eat but in husks and they have to find places to grind the rice! When we are taking decisions, we should be mindful that the people who are desperately hungry are the rural poor whom you want to give rice and then they start running around looking for grinding machines. 

Madam Speaker, I want the minister to come to us with all these explanations so that when we take a decision, we are mindful of the situation of our people. Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we moved under the East African Community Treaty - (Interruption)

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Countries have procedures and standards for products that they import. I can tell you that you cannot just export maize from here to Kenya if it does not meet certain standards.

I have heard the minister saying we are importing unprocessed rice with all its weevils in the husks. I am concerned, Madam Speaker; which countries are giving us this? Honourable colleagues, this kind of statement comes at a time when those of us engaged in agriculture are facing a real problem of the armyworm. When you import agricultural products, which are not properly refined and processed, you get these kinds of problems.

I wonder which countries are sending unprocessed rice to Uganda and what is the level of processing? Madam Speaker, we need to know the standard of rice we are importing into this country.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I seek clarification from the minister. Honourable minister, you are talking of importing unprocessed rice to this country probably to address the food deficit that we have. However, I wonder what quantity we are looking at before we can reinstate this tax. 

If we are taking about a time without quantity, it is possible that in four months we can have this whole country flooded with imported rice that eventually our farmers will have nowhere to sell their rice when they harvest. Therefore, are you looking at certain quantity of rice to be imported such that we can then lift the tax? Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We made a decision based on the price and period. We have exempted them for four months and the condition is that the price of rice must come down to Shs 3000 from Shs 4000 –(Interjections)– If it does not come down, we - (Interjections)- Just a second so that I can finish -(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. I was in the north last weekend and I passed through Zombo and even went to Bweyale and Gulu. I was able to buy rice in Gulu at Shs 2200. If there is anybody who lives in Gulu, you can stand up and tell this House that I am telling a lie.

First of all, we are importing the rice with its husks; two, we have got to process the rice and then you are going to force us to buy it at Shs 3000. Are you in order to impose an even greater price and burden on the people who are already suffering?

MS CHEKAMONDO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I came from my constituency on Saturday and rice is at Shs 3500. Therefore, if we are importing this rice, what quality or type of people are you bringing this rice for?

Secondly, we are already in a crisis, don’t you think you are bringing another crisis by bringing in this unprocessed rice? You might bring in diseases or even plastic rice. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I think something must be done better.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know the rice growers were threatening to come to Kampala to demonstrate and I said, “do not come, I will raise your matter in the House”. Let us find a solution. 

MR BAFAKI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Hansard can easily confirm that I raised this point while we were trying to look for a solution for hunger in this country. I requested Government to waive taxes on food for six months. This issue came here - the minister is aware - and I am glad they have come up with a solution.

Madam Speaker, we are here on same issue of hunger in this country and we have not moved any step. The seeds that we were given have not even germinated to give us food. I would pray to the Government that instead of bringing in unprocessed rice, we consider bringing in processed rice and waive taxes on it for four months so that people have food. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Is it free rice? Is it for distribution to the citizens?

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I seek guidance after listening to the submissions of hon. Kakooza and my senior, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, and other concerns of members.

Madam Speaker, in your communication, you had asked a question as to how Government came to the decision to waive taxes on imported rice and a chance was given to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to explain this to us. We understand that what Government did was an illegality because it did not pass through this Parliament. At the same time, even the price that he is telling us about is more than the price of rice that is being locally produced. They are importing unprocessed rice and I personally heard that they are booking rice from those countries right from the fields. 

Wouldn’t it be right for the minister to come to this House with a comprehensive report to clear the air about the whole process? 

How did they reach the concession? How did they make their orders? Who is supplying that rice and why is it unprocessed? Why are they booking rice from the fields instead of empowering our communities? We cannot finish this in a short time.

Madam Speaker, I request that the minister comes here to tell us how they came to that decision. This is discrimination against our constituents; the rice is going to Mbarara and passing my hungry people in Ssembabule. That is the guidance I am seeking. 

THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, I would like to inform the House that the Minister of Finance, Planning and  Economic Development, under the East African Community Treaty, has the power, where he deems it appropriate or necessary, to exempt a certain category of goods for the sake of harmonious co-existence of the member states. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not have the treaty here. Therefore, I propose that the minister comes here with a statement including that clause in the treaty that you are claiming gives you power so that we debate this issue here and complete it. Come with a statement on Tuesday next week. 

Honourable members, I have amended the Order Paper by postponing item No.5 - Prime Minister’s Question Time - to make way for something, which is a bit urgent which has been under the docket of the Committee on Trade, Industry and Cooperatives for some time; that is the issue of foreigners working in retail trade. We shall make room for that later. Now I invite the Minister for Gender, Labour and Social Development to make a statement. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT 

3.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (GENDER AND CULTURE) (Ms Peace Mutuuzo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development is out of the country on official duty. I was delegated to hold the Floor. I would wish to present a statement on the International Labour Day celebrations. 

You are aware that on the 1st of May every year, Uganda always joins the rest of the world to commemorate the International Labour Day. The day is celebrated in recognition of the dignity of labour and the important contribution that labour makes to the socio-economic and political development of nations. In Uganda, the International Labour Day is gazetted as a public holiday and ceremonies are organised at the national level and within the local governments. 

The national celebrations will be commemorated under the theme: “Build the Nation through Good Work Ethics.” This theme resonates with the Uganda Vision 2040. As the country aspires to transform from a peasant to a modern and prosperous country, there is need to develop value systems based on ethics, integrity, national identity, positive cultural practices, positive attitudes and mind-sets that put in place a well-defined ideology. This value system needs to be embraced by every citizen. 

To this end, Government developed the National Ethical Value Policy to promote and preserve the rich cultural identity and values of Uganda to enhance national development within a harmonious environment. The policy provides for ten national ethical values, namely respect for humanity and environment; honesty; upholding and defending the truth at all times; justice and fairness in dealing with others; hard work for self-reliance; integrity; moral up righteousness and sound character; creativity and innovativeness; social responsibility; social harmony and national unity. 

Madam Speaker, during the International Labour Day, we recognise workers and employers for their contribution to the economic and social development of our country. The Government, employers, workers, unions, community groups, civil society organisations and the public reflect on the achievements and challenges of work and socio-economic development. 

Madam Speaker, the importance of employment and labour are anchored in the national Constitution and espoused in the National Resistance Movement Manifesto, 2016 to 2021. The NRM Government has been implementing economic reforms that aim at achieving economic growth of at least 6.5 per cent per year. 

This year’s theme is also in line with the Government’s commitment to use all possible measures to create employment for all and ensure that workers’ rights are respected and sustainable employment is achieved as a mechanism for achieving inclusive job rich growth, as reflected in the 2016 to 2021 manifesto, to which wealth creation and good governance are major pillars. 

Madam Speaker, the venue for this year’s national celebrations is Kamuge Saza Grounds, Pallisa District Local Government. The other local governments have been encouraged to commemorate the day with activities reflecting the theme in their respective districts. 

To prepare for the event to commemorate this important day, a national organising committee has been constituted and is being coordinated by my ministry. Pallisa has also constituted a district organising committee to oversee the site preparations for the day. Pallisa District will also coordinate the neighbouring districts to be present at the national celebrations. 

The programme is expected to begin at 8.00 a.m. with a series of activities, which include a march-past by the forces, workers and the public as well as the exhibition of products by the local investors. His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda is expected to preside over the occasion. 

I wish to appeal and call upon all stakeholders - honourable Members of Parliament, district political leaders, the media and private sector to participate in the preparations to ensure that this year’s International Labour Day is memorable.

In conclusion, I wish to inform and request Members of Parliament to –

a) 	Note that the International Labour Day will be commemorated on Monday, 1 May 2017 at Kamuge Saza Grounds in Pallisa District as the national venue.

b) 	Note that the theme of the International Labour Day 2017 is “Building the Nation through Good Work Ethics”.
c) 	Note that the local governments will commemorate the day in their respective districts.

d) 	Note that honourable Members of Parliament are requested to attend the national celebrations in Pallisa.

I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable members, you have been invited to go to Pallisa on 1 May 2017. I am sure you are happy to go to Pallisa. Do you want to talk about Pallisa, hon. Atiku? You have three minutes.

4.29
MR BERNARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. 

The celebration or commemoration of International Labour Day is an important function. As Parliament, we must therefore use this occasion to examine whether as a country we are standing at the same footing with the International Labour Organisation’s pronouncements, particularly in regard to minimum wage.

Madam Speaker, I remember very well that in the last Parliament, one of us moved a motion seeking leave of Parliament to bring a private Member’s Bill that would enable us revise the law and put in place a minimum wage that reflects the current situation of the labour force in the country. Madam Speaker, if the ministry is not ready to help this country have a minimum wage that can help the labourers, give us an opportunity to resurrect this motion. We can come with a private Member’s Bill that will help us have a law that can give this country a minimum wage commensurate with the current situation in the country. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that Bill was shelved together with the others and I have been waiting for the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development to bring it up. The author of the Bill is hon. Arinaitwe; I do not know where he is. Can the chairperson of the committee, hon. Komuhangi, or any of the members tell us where we stand with that Bill?

MS ASAMO: Madam Speaker, the Bill is before our committee. It is one of the Bills we want to embark on after the budget process. Thank you.

3.32
MS LILLY ADONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for organising the International Labour Day celebrations. My concern is about labour export. Lately we have been seeing a lot of horrible pictures of Ugandans – I do not know whether they are genuine - being taken out and exported by companies but I do not know whether they are licensed or supervised by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.

Madam Speaker, this reminds me of the history I read about slave trade; there is no difference. As we commemorate the International Labour Day and we talk about work ethics, can the ministry tell us whether we have the capacity to supervise these companies? We cannot sit here and call ourselves leaders and yet Ugandans are being sold and mistreated. Can they verify whether those pictures are genuine or they are just purporting to be Ugandans? If they are Ugandans, then we are worse than the leaders that sold slaves.

Madam Speaker, my prayer to the ministry is: can those companies that are exporting Ugandans to go and look for greener pastures, as they say, take stock of the people they have already exported to go and work? Can we institute measures where we can monitor and guarantee the safety of the people we are sending out?

Madam Speaker, the pictures I saw made me spend sleepless nights and I was waiting for an opportunity for this House to debate that issue. I cannot stand it. We are celebrating work ethics but what kind of ethics? Madam Speaker, I submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have been expecting a statement from the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development on labour export. This House had placed a ban on labour export but suddenly, they said they have signed the agreement without coming back to this House. We demand for that statement, hon. Mutuuzo. It is long outstanding and we need to debate and come to a conclusion on this matter.

3.35
MR JACKSON KAFUUZI (NRM, Kyaka County South, Kyegegwa): Madam Speaker, when I heard that the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development was presenting a statement on International Labour Day, I expected to hear in that statement how many jobs have been created in this financial year. I know that ministers and the President have been moving around looking for investors. Therefore, I wanted an evaluation of what we have achieved as far as job creation is concerned, so that we know what we are celebrating. 

Looking at the output of the universities, there is a time bomb – unemployment everywhere. People are seated with master’s degrees in the villages. I expected the statement to tell us that we have achieved this much and got this much employment, whether in the private or public sector. My humble prayer is that the minister be required to give us an evaluation of the employment situation. (Interruption) 

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Whenever the country is celebrating days like the International Women’s Day, Independence Day, the International Labour Day, among others, it has been our method of work for the minister in charge to come and specifically inform Members of the House on where the day will be celebrated, the theme of the day and officially invite them. Issues regarding policy come up in the ministerial policy statement or from a specific request by a Member where the ministry brings a statement here for debate. 

Madam Speaker, what we have been doing is coming to inform Members. However, from what hon. Kafuuzi is raising, it is as if the minister is required to come and give a ministerial policy statement. If we are to benefit from the ministry, let us give them an opportunity or the committee that is handling their ministerial policy statement to bring the report and we all discuss and ask whatever question we wish to ask. 

I noticed that we were going into debating the statement as if it is a ministerial policy statement. I seek your guidance, Madam Speaker, as a matter of procedure.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this was to invite us to go and attend the celebrations and also to inform us about what the rest of the country is going to do. I do not want to anticipate what the minister will say on the International Labour Day celebrations. However, if she is ready, she may want to talk about, for instance, how many jobs have been created in the country on that day. However, at this stage, it is difficult for her to account; she can only inform us.

MR RUHUNDA: Madam Speaker, I did not want to bring to order my whip. However, if I am going to be invited for a function, I should know the details of that function because this helps me to know whether it is worth celebrating.

Madam Speaker, I know that the next motion is about hunger. Agriculture is the biggest employer in the country and this means that we have many more people unemployed because agriculture is the biggest employer. Therefore, if you invite me to go and celebrate, what am I going to celebrate on the International Labour Day with all these unemployed youth?

It is very important that you inform me so that when I come to celebrate, I celebrate from a point of success but not just be given an invitation and I swiftly move for that invitation.

3.41
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. How I wish that this little money that is going to be spent on the celebration of the International Labour Day could be given to the people who are starving in the country.

Madam Speaker, when you read the history of the labour movement in the whole world, the workers of the world united to fight against exploitation and fight for employment. There is no job security in this county; people do not have jobs. There is no minimum wage; people are being exploited. Even the few companies that are in this country are exploiting our people and paying them minimally and Government has never come up to protect our people. Therefore, I do not see the reason why Government should spend the little money we have on celebrating the International Labour Day.

Madam Speaker, some few years back on the International Labour Day, some of us were invited for the celebrations in Tororo and they wanted to give us medals but I refused. I said, “Why should I get a medal when my people are being exploited?” There is no need at all. Ugandans are suffering; they have no food, no jobs, no job security and yet you are here talking of celebrations. What are you celebrating? 

This Government has failed to put in place a minimum wage yet it is aware that Ugandans are suffering and you are talking of celebrations. What are you celebrating? That money should be given to the people who are dying of hunger because there is no need to celebrate at all.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you had wanted to stop this celebration, you should have come in February and moved a motion that this should not be celebrated. For now, you are late. If there are issues you would like addressed, go to the committee or wait for the report when we come to discuss here. Thank you very much. See you in Pallisa.  

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING THE PRESIDENT TO DECLARE A STATE OF EMERGENCY TO ADDRESS THE ALARMING FOOD INSECURITY IN THE COUNTRY

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Amoding. This motion will take just one hour, honourable members.

3.45 
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I move under rule 47 of our Rules of Procedure to move a motion to urge the President, through Parliament, to declare a state of emergency to address the alarming food insecurity in the country.

Madam Speaker, I would like to draw the attention of colleagues to their iPads. The motion has been uploaded and they can follow what I am saying here. 

“WHEREAS objective XXII of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy states that the state shall take appropriate steps to encourage people to grow and store adequate food, establish national food reserves and encourage and promote  proper nutrition through mass education and other appropriate means in order to build a healthy state;

AND WHEREAS Objective XXIII of our Constitution urges the state to institute effective machinery for dealing with any hazard or disaster arising out of natural calamities or any other situation resulting in displacement of people or serious disruption of normal life;

NOTING that Article 110(1)(b) provides that the President may, in consultation with Cabinet, by a proclamation, declare that a state of emergency exists in the country or any other part of the country, if he is satisfied that the security of the economic life of the country or a part of the country is threatened by natural disaster;

FURTHER NOTING that most parts of the country have this year suffered prolonged drought and famine, which has not allowed people to plant on time while what has already been planted has also dried up and has not yielded any fruits;

NOTING FURTHER that the prolonged drought has become a big threat to the lives of both people and animals and since Uganda largely depends on agriculture for both income and food;

REALISING that as a result of this drought and famine, a number of people have been taken ill and others have died of starvation;

COGNISANT of the fact that food insecurity has escalated and it is believed to be the major reason behind the wave of criminal activities, which have swept the country and caused mayhem throughout the country, since people are desperate to get what to feed on;

AWARE that Members of Parliament have on several occasions alerted Government of the looming dangers that the country faces if stringent measures are not put in place to arrest the level of famine in the country; 

Now, therefore, let it be resolved by this House that the President of the Republic of Uganda declares a state of emergency in the country to address food insecurity.”

I beg to move, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded by several Members. Present the justification, hon. Amoding.

MS AMODING: Madam Speaker, in July 2016, the issue of hunger and food insecurity was first raised by hon. Silas Aogon of Kumi Municipality, drawing the attention of this honourable House to this matter. During that discussion, a request to carry out an assessment of the situation in the affected districts was made to the line ministry.

Madam Speaker, a subsequent motion raised by hon. Jacquiline Amongin of Ngora District in October urged the President to declare a state of emergency in Teso sub-region. That motion also urged the Government to put in place an affirmative action plan to address the root causes of famine in Teso sub-region. Government was also urged to come up with a timeframe on irrigation and water harvesting as well as provide agricultural inputs for Teso to address food insecurity in the region.

However, Madam Speaker, given the fact that the motion was focusing on Teso, it was put on hold because honourable members observed that many parts of the country were also affected by food insecurity. Consequently, a directive was given by the Speaker that a meeting chaired by the chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, hon. Lowila C.D., Woman Representative of Pader District, be convened for all Members affected by food insecurity. This was done so that a common strategy could be designed to respond to the hunger situation, whereupon the Lowila report would be incorporated into the Amongin motion.

Madam Speaker, consequently, the Minister for Disaster Preparedness and Refugees came and informed this House that the status of food insecurity in the country, according to a national assessment survey conducted, had deteriorated and it indicated that 45 districts across the country were facing a food crisis. A disaster for the whole country was looming, according to Government’s report. This particular report emphasised that over 1.3 million Ugandans were in need of urgent food by the end of 2016. 

Furthermore, according to Government’s data sources, 65 per cent of the people in Karamoja sub-region, by the end of last year, were having one meal or half a meal a day as opposed to three meals. About 35 per cent of that population in the districts, which include Katakwi, Amuria, Bukedea, Kumi, parts of Serere and Kaberamaido, were in the same category as Karamoja sub-region. 

Madam Speaker, a few parts of the country were reported to be in emergency stage of food insecurity. Isingiro District and Teso sub-region were cited to be the most badly hit areas. Government, in its own words, warned that if individuals and families did not manage the available food stocks at household levels, the situation could quickly deteriorate to emergency and famine stages of food insecurity within the first quarter of 2017. These words are underlined and this is the quarter we are in. 

About 50 per cent of the people in some districts were reported to be in a minimal stage of food insecurity. This means that these people could still afford a few meals though their stocks were running low. These districts include Koboko, Yumbe, Moyo, Maracha, Arua, Zombo, Nebbi, Adjumani, Amuru, Nwoya, Gulu, Pader, Lamwo, Kitgum, Agago, Soroti, Ngora and Amolatar. 

People in Pallisa, Butaleja, Rakai, Isingiro and Tororo were having access to one meal a day. Those in the districts of Oyam, Apac, Kiryandongo, Masindi, Buliisa, Kyankwanzi, Nakaseke, Kiboga, Mubende, Luweero, Kyegegwa, Sembabule, Kiruhura, Lwengo, Ntungamo, Kamuli and Kibuku were having one meal a day at that time, honourable members. That was last year when this issue was first raised, around July 2016.

The dry spell that has ravaged the country has been blamed on climate change brought about by, among other things, deforestation, wetland degradation and burning of fossils into the atmosphere, which has warmed the earth. As a result of the changing climate, most farmers across the country were reported to have registered massive crop failure in the two rainy seasons that Uganda experienced between March until about September and December last year. This long dry spell has scorched crops and created water and pasture scarcity, which has also resulted into livestock death. 

Madam Speaker, I know that honourable members who come from those districts facing this particular issue know what is happening in their districts. 

Furthermore, Madam Speaker, World Food Programme carried out an emergency food assessment from December 2016 in consultation with Government, UNDP and World Bank, among other agencies, to assess the number of people affected by food insecurity nationwide. According to the World Food Programme’s Uganda Emergency Food Security Assessment Report, they estimated that 10.9 million Ugandans are currently suffering acute food shortage. Of this population, 1.6 million are in a food crisis. The number of people likely to suffer food shortage was predicted to rise to 11.4 million by March 2017. 

Madam Speaker, following these events, a joint action plan involving all relevant ministries was designed on how to respond to the hunger situation. The line ministry requested this House to release Shs 56.56 billion, and a further Shs 15 billion which was meant for local council elections to be reallocated to address the food crisis in the country. 

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees further circulated to us a plan for the distribution of food items to the affected districts. This was sent on your iPads. However, this food has trickled in and has been very insufficient in the few districts that the ministry has attempted to reach out to. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to put it on record that the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, in consultation with other line ministries, assured this House that it would feed the most affected districts between February and April 2017. However, as I have chronologically narrated before you the details, the few affected districts that have so far received food have only received insignificant quantities - between 100 to 200 bags of posho. 

Madam Speaker, despite the fact that some areas have received rain as we speak, it will take a while for most of these vulnerable districts to recover from this hunger crisis. Until the first harvest, which is expected in two months’ time, we will have buried hundreds of persons across the country due to hunger. 

As the movers of this motion, our prayer is that we urge the Government to declare a state of emergency in the most affected districts to allow friends of this country to come up with food aid to assist these affected districts. Madam Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

3.57
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo South County, Dokolo): As I stand to speak, Madam Speaker, our people are going without food. Many of them are dying as I talk. People have died, including children, in many parts of the country. We have got reports from various Members of Parliament about their concerns.

As a Parliament of Uganda, our duty is stipulated in the Constitution. Our roles, mandate and powers are in the Constitution. Declaring a state of emergency is for the President. However, the motion that we are moving right now is urging the President to declare a state of emergency because of the level of unprecedented and unmatched starvation in this country.

Madam Speaker, with this high level of starvation and hunger, as Government we have not provided enough funds to handle this situation. We have not put in place machinery to handle this situation. 

Our Constitution is very clear that it is the President to declare a state of emergency. I have the National Policy for Disaster Preparedness and Management of this country. This policy was passed by Government and signed by Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere, Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees. In this policy, it is clearly stated - I am going to read it to Members because this is the wisdom of Cabinet and I would like to thank them very much for this policy. I thank you very much, honourable Cabinet members.

Let me take you to where the wisdom now lies and why I am thanking the Executive. Let me go to the power of the President, in their policy; it says, “Article 110 of the 1995 Constitution gives the President the mandate to declare a state of emergency in any part of the country in the event of a disaster. The minister in charge of disaster preparedness and management shall provide the President with all the relevant details on the cause and effects of the disaster, mitigation and relief measures to be undertaken. In a situation where the disaster is caused by natural or human-induced hazards, the President, in consultation with Cabinet, shall declare an area or the nation to be in a state of disaster.”

Where are the conditions? This state of the national disaster shall be declared when most of the basic social services of a community have been seriously disrupted and broken down, causing widespread human suffering. I think famine falls under here; it is really serious.

The second condition is that a state of national disaster shall be declared when the local government level is unable to provide the affected communities with relief services and goods in the immediate short term. It is clear that all our local governments cannot supply or handle this situation and I thank you for that wisdom.

The third is when basic human needs are lacking due to disaster and the affected community is unable to cope with their own resources. There is no water, no food, nothing, and I think we are in a state of quagmire that must be handled by this Parliament. 

In this policy, which I think is very good, they say, “A state of national disaster shall be declared for a specific period, for a specific part of the country or a district.” Are you hearing this - specific area or part or entire nation, and that is where it falls.

Honourable members, it is clear, and in the wisdom of the framers of the Constitution, they provided for a disaster commission under Article 249. Honourable members, I would like to refer you to Article 249 which says, “There shall be a Disaster Preparedness and Management Commission…” However, this commission is not there. Government has not yet put it in place - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Three minutes more.

MR OKOT OGONG: Honourable members, I have all this material with me but due to lack of time, I would like to earnestly and honestly plead with Members of Parliament that this motion that we have brought is in good faith because most of our people are suffering. We have not brought this motion to undermine Government. We have brought this motion to actually empower Government to get available resources and focus on handling the hunger situation and mobilise resources.

Madam Speaker, when you look at our public finance, there is supposed to be a contingency fund but as you are aware, we passed it but there is nothing in the contingency fund. It is from this contingency fund that natural disasters are handled. As per now, we have no resources. 

We would like you to therefore agree and resolve that we pass this resolution that a state of emergency be declared. We can then focus on handling the hunger situation and the Movement will be effective because we shall have handled a problem that could not be handled by any other person but the ruling government. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okot Ogong, are you proposing it for the entire country or for a portion of the country?

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, it is clear here that the minister responsible for disaster preparedness will present a report to the President and from the minister’s report, it will be in the wisdom of Cabinet to declare either a district, a region, districts or the entire country, but the entire nation is suffering. I thank you.

4.05
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to first thank you for having accepted to recall Parliament to discuss such a pertinent matter. Allow me to also acknowledge Government’s efforts to help the suffering people down there, more so in Teso. Office of the Prime Minister, I know you have done a lot but a lot more needs to be done.

Madam Speaker, on 14 July 2016, I rose on the Floor of this very House to raise a matter of urgent public importance on the issue of hunger. We asked for an assessment to be done and it was done. Around October, hon. Jacquiline Amongin moved a motion to declare a state of emergency but it was watered down due to certain circumstances.

Madam Speaker, we came back here and you rightly directed that a comprehensive plan be put in place to manage the looming disaster. However, my problem is that as I second this motion, the Government, much as they have done so many things to support us in this crisis, has failed to uphold all the recommendations that came from this House. If you come to Kumi, you will shed tears, honourable minister. Some people eat termites and you can imagine what it takes to gather a kilo of termites so that you can get satisfied. It is a very difficult situation. 

Madam Speaker, as we talk, what people have resorted to is violence in the homes. The socio-economic life of our population is totally distorted. A woman in Teso tried to climb a mango tree to save the lives of her children; she fell down and died. In Kumi, a family went for poisonous cassava because they had no other food to eat and a primary four pupil died. This is just kilometres away from where I live in Kumi town. It is a disaster. 

If you go to many parts of the country such as Tororo, we have a report that over five people have perished in the last one week. Butaleja is experiencing the same situation. For how long shall we wait?

Madam Speaker, Kenya declared the drought a national disaster. Uganda needs to declare this issue of hunger as an emergency. We need to declare a state of emergency so that we save our people from suffering. It is too much. I therefore support the motion that a state of emergency be declared.

We lack coordination. It is there but it is not enough. When we declare a state of emergency, coordination will be streamlined and resources will trickle in. Everything will be proper. When we talk about fixing matters of the environment, irrigation and whatever touches agriculture, if we declare a state of emergency, things can now move in the right direction.

I stand here not just to stand. When I say I am supporting the motion, I am supporting the Government because this is my government. We have delayed to declare a state of emergency. We need to declare a state of emergency so that Uganda can come out of this situation. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we went on recess, we had asked the Government to address this situation. I have seen a statement from the minister here and I want to invite him to present it. If you are not satisfied then you can continue with the motion. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

4.10
THE MINISTER OF DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Mr Hilary Onek): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My colleagues, Members of Parliament, I definitely share with you the sentiments and the suffering of our people where there is hunger, particularly where there are extreme conditions of hunger.

In my statement, I am going to present to you what Government has done to date. Where it has failed or needs improvement, Parliament will recommend and we shall go by those recommendations because it is Parliament that appropriates our budget. It is Parliament that makes major decisions on how Government should spend. This will assist us a lot to mitigate this problem.

Madam Speaker, the rainy season began in most parts of the country with the exception of the sub-regions of Karamoja, Teso, parts of Lango, Bukedi and parts of Acholi. The hunger situation however is being felt in all districts of the country because this is the planting season. Traditionally, it is a lean phase of the food cycle but it has come after a prolonged drought. The worst affected areas are the northern Teso districts of Katakwi, Amuria, Soroti and Kaberamaido. 

The food security situation in Karamoja sub region was stable during the period of December to January. However, it is now on the down trend when most parts of the country -

THE SPEAKER: Members, listen. You will have time to rebut. Just take notes; you have an opportunity to rebut.

MR ONEK: Madam Speaker, the failure of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to operationalize the contingency fund, as provided for in the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2015 is the main cause of the challenges we are now meeting in responding to the relief food needs of our people.

Madam Speaker, in July 2016, I wrote to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development requesting for Shs 141,750,000,000 to meet the relief food needs of 3,000,500 people. To arrive at the above figure, we assumed every individual would eat a quarter of a kilo of food per day and we were relating to the cost of food at the time, which amounted to that money. That was the formula we used.

Madam Speaker, I got only Shs 3 billion over a period of 12 months to feed the whole country. In October 2016, on realising that the Shs 3 billion was grossly inadequate, an additional Shs 3 billion was released by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. In January 2017, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development added Shs 10 billion. This was followed by a release of Shs 5 billion and subsequently another 10 billion in April. 

Therefore, the food we bought during this period, which we have been distributing during the last three weeks, is what has reached some of the districts. The grossly inadequate release of funds, which comes after long delays, has affected our normal process of handling these problems.

Madam Speaker, on realising the above challenges, I made an appeal to development partners. The Peoples’ Republic of China responded by giving us 5,893 tonnes of rice. This helped us to revise the emergency food budget downwards from Shs 141 billion to only Shs 52 billion because we equated this to the amount of food we needed, which has still not been realised.

Madam Speaker, the distribution plan for the relief food procured in January and February was presented and approved by Cabinet and later Parliament at the end of the month of February. I recall that when some districts complained that they were not adequately included, we had to revise and make sure that those districts that were not adequately provided for are included. Therefore, we have come with a revised appropriation of food in annex 1 of my report.

Using the earlier limited transport capacity, the Office of the Prime Minister still managed to reach 197 destinations in 74 districts during the last three months with 33,360 bags of 100 kilogrammes of posho; 3,336 metric tonnes of maize flour; 8,781 bags of 100 kilogrammes of beans; 38,370 bags of 50 kilogrammes each of rice. These details are in the table as you will read on the next page.

All the most affected sub-counties in the districts of Katakwi, Amuria, Soroti and Kaberamaido have been covered with relief food -(Interjections)– At least the districts received the food but how it was distributed is where the question applies. We shall have to discuss that. 

Deliveries of relief food to the districts of Alebtong, Amolatar, Apac, Dokolo, Kole, Lira, Oyam and Otuke began today. We flagged off the trucks today. Deliveries of relief food to the southern Teso districts of Bukedea, Kumi, Ngora and Serere also began today. We also flagged them off today. The UPDF gave us trucks to help us deliver the food. I am very hopeful that the food insecurity situation will ease by end of May, which is one and a half months away, when fast growing crops will have come up. 

The Office of the Prime Minister currently has the following quantities of relief food, which we are now distributing: In store at the moment, we have 2,174 metric tonnes of posho, 3,974 metric tonnes of rice and 323.9 metric tonnes of beans. We have already distributed these to the districts: 3,336 metric tonnes of posho, 1,918.5 metric tonnes of rice and 876.1 metric tonnes of beans.

In spite of all the above efforts, the population in food shortage crisis areas has increased from 3.5 million people in February to 5.5 million people to date because the situation has changed and more people now want food. However, the coming of the rains will see these numbers drop considerably by the end of May 2017 when fast maturing crops are harvested.

In order for the Office of the Prime Minister to feed the population in need adequately for the next one and half months, if we calculate based on the quarter kilogramme per person, we need an additional Shs 123.750 billion, which is equivalent to US$ 750 million. The formula for arriving at the cost of relief food required is as I stated earlier.

With improved transport capacity, now that the UPDF has come in to help, I assure colleagues that the Office of the Prime Minister will be able to reach all the people in need of relief food across the country within the shortest possible time of two to three weeks.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, in spite of the onset of the rains in most parts of the country, it will still take a minimum of 45 days before people harvest fast maturing crops. The Office of the Prime Minister, therefore, requires additional funds of about Shs 50 billion to back up what we have in store in order to supply more food to the areas affected.

The increased stress is not because the drought is intensifying; it is because the country is going through the planting phase of the food production cycle. This was pre-empted by the earlier drought referred to as the lean period.

Madam Speaker, I will attentively listen to your contributions and suggestions. My district is one of those affected as well, so really, I am part of you. Let us get this problem resolved together. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Everybody wants to speak. Let us start with hon. Esther Anyakun.

4.23
MS ESTHER ANYAKUN (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to say something. I would like to support the motion that has been moved by the Member of Parliament for Kumi District. 

I am perturbed, Madam Speaker, and you heard us making noise from this corner when we heard the honourable minister who prepares disaster saying that Karamoja was in a better position between January and April. When we had just come to Parliament in 2016, we had a meeting with His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda together with the two ministers responsible for disaster preparedness. In the meeting, we told them about the red indicators reflecting what was going to happen. We expected this situation to be handled. 

People in Karamoja are dying. We are waiting for people to make noise in the media before food is taken; as the minister says, it has been taken this morning to the Teso region. Should we take videos to show the country and the entire world what is happening in Karamoja? We would rather allow a state of emergency to be declared for Karamoja and we go back to receiving aid from international bodies. Previously, USAID and DFID used to give us free hand-outs. Why can’t we go back to them for dependence because our people are dying? 

The Government should declare that they cannot manage. Whatever was taken there three months ago was just like a drop of water in an ocean as it did nothing. I have over 100 people who come to my home asking for something to eat. I even fear to go home. The Members of Parliament from Karamoja cannot have three meals a day because we fear to put on weight. In case we go home, what will the people tell us? Most of us are stuck here in Kampala and we cannot go and check on our farms while other Members can go and check on theirs. 

Madam Speaker, if it necessitates that we go back to Karamoja and we make videos for the international community so that they know what is happening, it is fine by me. We thought that by going to the disaster ministry, they would provide a solution. I have personally been there three times in the last week with the same submissions. While at the Office of the Prime Minister, I met hon. Monicah Amoding and we submitted on the same issues. We were told that it would be immediately after Easter and we are now entering May. I thank you.

4.26
MS STELLA NAMOE (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion to declare a state of emergency to handle the issue of famine not only in Karamoja but in the entire country.

Madam Speaker, it is now clear that the Ministry of Disaster, Relief and Refugees is not able to handle disaster. How can you have four lorries to distribute food in the whole country! By the time that lorry is in Karamoja, five people would have died somewhere. 

The ministry does not have the capacity and so they should help us and declare a state of emergency so that other people can come in to support the lives of Ugandans. Karamoja was worse off and now Teso that has been a bit fair is also in a bad situation. Where can we go? The minister needs to come out on this.

I also have concerns about the money that has been appropriated. How do you buy a bag of posho at Shs 400,000 and yet in the local market you can get these bags of posho at a cheaper price? This is exploitation of the highest order. (Applause) The ministry is exaggerating the cost of this food and that is why we cannot get enough of it. 

For how long will this Parliament keep on appropriating funds for this? We have to be sincere; we need accountability and transparency. Before this Parliament appropriates any funds, we first need to get accountability for the other money. We need the distribution list and we shall go and confirm with our districts whether they received what you have just stated. That way, we can cause action.

Madam Speaker, we also need to get data because the data that the minister is reading here is not correct; the numbers are higher than that. The distribution should be based on vulnerable families. Support the vulnerable families. It is not the whole district or the whole country. There are families that are in dire need that are always left out. Food was taken to Katakwi but vulnerable women were just looking at that food being snatched by those who were able to take it.

I think we need a mechanism to see to it that we save the lives of these vulnerable people who are suffering. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.28
MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the mover of the motion but I would like to first address myself to the motion title. I appreciate that many parts of the country are facing famine but addressing myself to the title of the motion, - declaring a state of emergency - this may be a step too much. There is a better word we could use to address the situation. 

We do appreciate what the rest of the country is going through, but carrying a motion to declare a state of emergency in the country is just too much. Declaring a state of emergency means that it is a situation of insecurity or national danger so grave that Government – (Interjections) - I need protection.

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members. Allow the Member to speak on the motion, please.

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: We need to understand what a state of emergency is and appreciate its meaning. A state of emergency –(Interjection)

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members. Allow her to make her contribution; you will also speak. Honourable members, you will be able to say that yourselves.

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: We can substitute the phrase “state of emergency” with the phrase “state of national disaster” so that Government can mobilise resources to address the hunger situation. When you declare a state of emergency, it means we are suspending the normal provisions of the Constitution. When you say that we are meant to address the problem by carrying a motion - If we amend it to a national disaster, Government will come in, we shall suppress some expenditure and give priority to those areas that are famine stricken.

Madam Speaker, I want to mention that it does not only end with supplying food; it means mitigation and looking at means of adaptation. Supply of food is short-term but we need to have a long-term approach. Hon. Stella Namoe has also addressed the issue of accountability; how was the money that was appropriated used? We need to help Government to take decisions on how we can address this and scale down on some infrastructure development projects to address the situation in Teso and Karamoja without declaring a state of emergency. Thank you.

4.32
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to associate myself with the motion on the Floor that a state of emergency be declared to avert the current situation. Why do I say this? Whereas I do not want to disagree with my colleagues entirely, what we are talking about is supported clearly by the law and the Constitution. It does no harm whatsoever, honourable colleagues, for us to request Government to declare a state of emergency to support and rescue its people. 

We are talking about roads; yes, they are good. We are talking about oil from the ground; yes, it is good. However, you cannot have this without your people. People must first have food. That is the most important. You may take cover from a bullet or from whatever it is but you cannot take cover from hunger and famine. 

This is what I am talking about and I am talking about it because I have gone through it for very many years. Ever since I was born, I had never gone through this kind of situation where you find people virtually on the verge of dying. I am not saying that I have seen them die and being buried but they are on the verge of dying in Isingiro District. (Interjections) They are more or less dying, anyway.

Government should be in position now to suppress most of these votes across the board to support and rescue its people. We are not saying that we should stop every activity in the country; no. We are only telling Government that the people of Soroti, Isingiro and all those people from the greater north, even those from Bushenyi, want food. 

The only thing we must take care of is accountability, honourable colleagues. I would like to thank the minister but I would also like to look at the list of the deliveries that you have made. Thank you for the attempts you and your team have so far made; Martin Owor and colleagues, thank you. However, we want to see greater details as we also struggle to get much more for our people. 

We should also be thinking a bit wider than this. I was looking at the budget of the Ministry of Water and Environment; it has a paltry Shs 493.5 billion, which is three per cent of the national budget. When you look at the details from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, they are saying that because of lack of water and because of drought, our economy has shrunk by so much and yet there is a solution in water and in agriculture. However, they are not making use of the few available resources to feed those very pertinent sectors like water and agriculture. 

This is where we, as Members of Parliament, should put our feet down and say, “Enough is enough; let us have water and agriculture to ensure that our people no longer starve”. Let us make sure that if we got about Shs 800 billion in the Ministry of Water and Environment, every constituency will get about four or five irrigation schemes. Will you come here to cry again that your people are dying of hunger? No! I think it is high time we became a little bit more scientific and stopped playing about with the lives of our people.

Finally, there is Operation Wealth Creation. They are doing a good job; thank you. However, the other time 50 per cent of the seeds that were supplied never germinated. Why waste all that time instead of concentrating on irrigation? 

My brothers and sisters in Government, Rt Hon. Prime Minister and whoever is concerned on the frontbench, I think it is high time we started looking at the linkages that we need to rescue our people. We should also be concentrating on supplying not only food but also quick maturing materials like tubers - sweet potato cuttings, Irish potatoes and cassava cuttings. This is because Government can never and has no capacity whatsoever to feed the entire population for all the time. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: We are now using two minutes each, so please be quick. 

4.37
MS JACQUELINE AOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Nebbi): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I am not going to take so much time. 

I am ashamed that we are addressing symptoms rather than the root causes. The food is being distributed alright but what led to that? The underlying problem that we have all heard about is climate change; so what are the remedies? It is tree planting. The food that is going to be distributed is just for a short term. We have to look at the short term -(Interjection)– Yes, I do not refute that -

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members.

MS JACQUELINE AOL: I do not refute the short term remedies and the mid-term as well as the long term remedies. However, what are we doing as leaders? What are we doing as parliamentarians? Why are we hiding our faces behind the food distribution? What can’t we do? I think we can promote tree planting so that we can - 

THE SPEAKER: Order! Honourable members, we are trying to find a solution to this problem. 

MS JACQUELINE AOL: I call upon Government - (Interjection) - I do not support the state of emergency because Uganda is Uganda – (Interjection) – I ask for your protection, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I have protected you but your time is up. Order! Please conclude, hon. Jacqueline Aol. Allow her to speak and conclude, honourable members.
 
MS JACQUELINE AOL: I am going to summarise but if you can give other Members more than five minutes, why can’t I - 

THE SPEAKER: No! Hon. Agnes Taaka, take the Floor.

4.40
MS AGNES TAAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I seek your protection against the noise. 

THE SPEAKER: Order! I would like Members to understand that the movers have more time than other people. That is how we work in this House. Hon. Taaka, you have two minutes. 

MS TAAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion- 

THE SPEAKER: Allow hon. Taaka to speak. 

MS TAAKA: Madam Speaker, the hunger situation in the country right now -(Interruption) 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. The Rules of Procedure of this Parliament are very clear that the Speaker’s ruling is final. The rules also elaborate a detailed procedure of challenging the Speaker’s ruling, part of that, and which is the most obvious, is that more than 70 people should stand up at a go. Therefore, the decorum of this House must be preserved.

As a point of procedure, can hon. Jacqueline Aol be called to apologise for challenging the Speaker’s ruling without recourse to the Rules of Procedure? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is unfortunate that this is the second time the honourable member is saying that. The other day, she said it from that position - that I give other people more time. So, hon. Aol, please apologise. 

MS JACQUELINE AOL: Madam Speaker, I rise here to apologise and to withdraw the statement. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

MS TAAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I was saying, the hunger situation in our country calls for action beyond what is taking place right now. The minister has indicated that they have been distributing emergency food since December, but I rise to inform this House that the ministry is now overwhelmed by the number of people suffering because of hunger. 

Madam Speaker, I have been going to the Office of the Minister of Disaster Preparedness since December last year looking for food for the people that are dying of hunger in Bugiri District. However, it was only towards the end of February that a truck of rice was taken to Bugiri although it was specifically marked for schools. 

Madam Speaker, families are dying and the people of Bugiri are practically feeding on poisonous cassava. We are burying people every day because they have failed to get what to eat. Therefore, I support this motion so that we get access to food aid for our people and their families. 

Madam Speaker, I am also perturbed by the fact that some districts are not mentioned in the distribution plan. When I called the commissioner last week, he told me that they are first considering Teso and the northern regions because the situation there is really pathetic. 

Madam Speaker -(Member timed out.)

4.44
MR HAMSON OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In lieu of a media brief by members of the Lango Parliamentary Group yesterday, I now rethink the plight of our people. 

Today, we received communication from the Office of the Prime Minister and I have in my possession a copy of communication signed by a one Martin Owor informing me of the rice delivery they have made to the CAO of Alebtong District. However, I have also seen through the distribution plan highlighted by the minister and I would want to know from the minister why only rice and yet the distribution plan contains maize flour and beans for Alebtong District. Why only rice?

On the issue of the state of emergency, Madam Speaker, I think as a Parliament this is just an advisory note to Cabinet because the Constitution says that the President may, in consultation with Cabinet - (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much, hon. Obua. I am giving information in relation to your question, “Why only rice?” Minutes ago, the Speaker suspended debate on exempting taxes on rice. The information I am giving you is that there are ministers and permanent secretaries who have imported rice in this country and they want an exemption so that they can supply the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees. That is why they are supplying rice. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, I have listened to my good friend, hon. Odonga Otto, making very serious allegations and lumping ministers without substantiating which ministers imported rice with the intention of asking for a tax waiver. 

I wonder whether he is in order to make such allegations without substantiating. I am a minister and I represent Kiboga District. My people of Kiboga would like to know if I am one of those that imported rice with the intention to evade taxes. Can he substantiate, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Odonga Otto, do you have the information about the – Okay, please let us have it.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, this is exactly what I wanted to say when the issue of rice was still on the Floor. The information I have is that the honourable Minister of Finance, Matia Kasaija, and Keith Muhakanizi have imported rice worth colossal sums of money and have been moving to this Parliament to get exemptions so that they supply the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness. I can even mention the name of the minister who brought these facts to me because they know where they disagreed from. Should I mention more names?

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, in this kisanja hakuna mchezo, which somebody interpreted on the Floor of Parliament, I would like hon. Odonga Otto to lay on the Table the papers indicating a company, which belongs to hon. Matia Kasaija and/or Mr Keith Muhakanizi that is importing rice. Just lay them on the Table. If he is not ready today, then he should withdraw the statement and come back ready to lay such documents on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Will it be possible for you to lay those papers on the Table?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I am on the record of Parliament. I was even seeking audience with your office because I did not want to mention these names on the Floor of Parliament. The minister who divulged all this information to me is hon. Kibuule. He specifically came to me and said that there is a disagreement between some ministers in relation to supply and exemption of taxes on rice.

MR HAMSON OBUA: Madam Speaker, that is a very strong point upon which I would like to seek clarification.  Why is that in the distribution plan, Alebtong is meant to receive beans, maize flour and rice, but in the letter I am holding, what was delivered to Alebtong this morning was only rice.  I would like to seek that clarification from the minister.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, on the issue of the state of emergency, I was saying that this is just an advisory note to Cabinet. There are countries within and outside East Africa that have done so. We are not saying that we are borrowing a leaf from them, but let this proposal by Parliament be assessed by Cabinet. If there are areas within this country that warrant a state of emergency like it has been done in Kenya, Ghana, Nigeria and Somalia -

I would like to appeal to our Cabinet ministers because we do not sit in there. When you sit in Cabinet, we implore you to study this proposal, assess it and if there are districts and regions or sub-regions within this country that would call for a state of emergency, the powers are vested with you. As for us, we can simply advise. Otherwise, as a Parliament, that is our mission and dream - (Member timed out.)

4.53
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for recalling us to discuss this very eminent matter. 

I support this motion 100 per cent. In line with what the seconder, hon. Okot Ogong, submitted, I think we erred as Parliament when we failed to devolve some powers to declare a state of emergency to the districts. If only we could have declared or devolved some powers to the LCVs to declare a state of emergency, which is monitored for a period of time like in the United States of America. 

In the United States of America, different states can declare a state of emergency when, for example, they suspect a hurricane coming. That state of emergency declared by the state or by districts would only stand for 30 days or until the national assembly like this one rescinds it. So, in line with that, I support it the motion.

Secondly, the document the minister has given to us is incomplete. This document does not tell us which districts have received the food aid and based on which parameters. I will give an example. My sister, the Woman MP for Masaka District, received 40 tonnes of rice; another one received 60 tonnes of rice, and that is the hon. Kasolo; and the Vice-President of the Republic of Uganda received 90 tonnes of rice all to take to Masaka. Madam Speaker, compare Masaka and Agago and other vulnerable places. Therefore, the issue here –(Member times out.)

4.55
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Listening to what the minister presented and observing him, one can clearly see that the minister is overwhelmed. The demand for food, the demands in his office given his budget and his efforts; you would clearly see that he is overwhelmed.

Madam Speaker, the world is already concerned about the unprecedented starvation and hunger in East Africa. If you recall, the issue of hunger was an emergency item at the Inter Parliamentary Union (IPU) Summit. There were concerns about people dying. The issue of hunger is a matter of life and death. Therefore, I stand to support the motion that we declare a state of emergency. Since we cannot feed our people as Government, let us call on our friends for assistance.
 
Madam Speaker, how many Ugandans should first die for us to get to know this is a serious matter? Somebody says that we should call it a “national disaster”. Why call it a national disaster when there is no call for emergency?

I would like to conclude by reiterating my earlier position that we declare a state of emergency so that those who have enough food, those willing –(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for giving way. I would like to give information to my friend. We all will recall that Government suspended local council elections because of food shortages in this country. When the honourable minister was giving information to this House, he made it very clear that the Shs 15 billion would be used to provide food to each area that was affected.

Madam Speaker, we waited, and he mentioned very clearly that within one month, they would have covered all the areas that were affected. However, I have never seen food going to Amuru. In Karamoja, food has not been supplied more than twice. Surprisingly, Madam Speaker, some few days ago, we witnessed food being taken to Mbarara, a place that is not even seriously affected by hunger.

MR MWIJUKYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I conclude, any state within East Africa declaring a state of emergency will not be a surprise –(Member timed out.)

MR KAFUUZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point procedure. The hon. Monicah Amoding’s motion was about declaring a national state of emergency. However, when the hon. Felix Okot Ogong came in to second it, he referred to a state of disaster. 

My humble request is: would it not help us if the Attorney-General could guide us on what a “state of emergency” means. That is important because while they are referring to Kenya, Ghana and other jurisdictions, we might be proceeding irregularly.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this House cannot declare a state of emergency. It is the Cabinet and the President who can do it. All this House is doing is to say, “Can you consider?” We cannot declare a state of emergency here. 

5.00
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable member for proposing that before we proceed with this motion, we get to know exactly what we are talking about. 

The motion is calling upon the President to declare a state of emergency. It is true, declaration of a state of emergency is provided for under our Constitution. However, we must be cognizant of what it entails before we decide whether we want to go that way or not. 

Madam Speaker, under a state of emergency - assuming the President complies with your recommendations - Government is at liberty to suspend or change some functions of the Executive, the Legislature and the Judiciary during its persistence. Usually, a state of emergency is used as a rationale for suspending rights and freedoms guaranteed under the country’s Constitution or its basic laws.

Under a state of emergency, all rights of citizens guaranteed in the national Constitution, in the laws or even in international conventions for civil and political rights can be derogated from. I want to add that a state of emergency is always a tool commonly used by dictatorial regimes to clamp down on people’s rights.

Article 4 of the International Convention on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) permits states to derogate from certain rights and the power to declare a state of emergency clearly relates to the sovereignty itself. Therefore, honourable members, before we –(Interruption)

MR OYET: Madam Speaker, I am a law student and I appreciate the legal provisions in our Constitution. Article 110 clearly states the ingredients which would actually inform the decision of the President to declare a state of emergency and I would like to read it verbatim. Article 110 (1)(b) states thus: “…in which the security or the economic life of the country or that part is threatened by internal insurgency or natural disaster.”

Madam Speaker, Article 110 (7) reads, “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament shall enact such laws as may be necessary for enabling effective measures to be taken for dealing with any state of emergency that may be declared under this article.”

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like you to guide us on this point of procedure. Is the Attorney-General proceeding right by saying that the provision for a state of emergency is only applied in dictatorial regimes? Is he proceeding well? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you look at Article 110, it states that a state of emergency can be declared - (a) where a part of Uganda is threatened by war or external aggression, which is not the case here; (b) where the security or the economic life of the country or that part of the country is threatened. I think that the resolution should be limited to “the economic life” and the “natural disaster” without touching security. It can be designed in such a way that it is only dealing with economic life and not security.

MR RUKUTANA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that explanation. However, the problem we have is that we have not operationalized Article 110 (7). In the absence of a specific law, our jurisprudence requires that we look to common law. What I was telling you is the practice at common law. At common law, that is exactly what a state of emergency entails. Had we operationalized Article 110 - (Interruption)

MR ODUR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Our Constitution is very clear. The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda is supreme and any other law that is inconsistent with it is null and void. It is therefore quite embarrassing for the Attorney-General, who is very learned, to come here and make such statements. Therefore, is it in order for the Attorney-General of Uganda to come and undermine the Constitution, which he is supposed to uphold and protect? 

THE SPEAKER: I think he is interpreting it in a different way. However, I would like to appeal to the Government to understand the context. This is about the economic life of the people in parts of this country. It can be limited to that. 

Our resolution is not binding because we are saying, “Can Cabinet consider what we have proposed when it sits.” Of course, we cannot declare a state of emergency but we can say that the economic life of part of the people in this country is under threat by a natural disaster. 

5.07
MR REAGAN OKUMU (Independent, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think that is why you are the Speaker. Uganda exists because of human beings. If there are no people and there are only animals and forests, I do not think Uganda would still be called Uganda. Therefore, people’s lives should be primary to this Parliament and to this Government. 

Yesterday, I was in the canteen and I was walking out with a colleague from Teso and another colleague joked and I thought that it was a bad joke. That colleague asked, “Why are you eating in the canteen when your people are starving; why don’t you go and starve with them?” I thought that should not have come from a national leader.

I can see this attitude in some of the people who are moving out to come and bring illegal issues that are defended by the Attorney-General. I see this as a moral blow to the country. There must be some morality. A state of emergency is not an extreme thing; even America does this. It is just about pride, but what pride do you have?

Madam Speaker, during the war in the north, we lobbied the Government. People in the displaced camps were in extreme conditions but Government did not declare a state of emergency. The reasons were, “How can we declare a state of emergency in that place?” It was an issue of pride. Until we met a number of donors that eventually asked us to give them a tip that the situation was out of control, Government had failed to declare a state of emergency. In this case, we could just say that the Ugandan Government cannot feed the hungry people so that other people can come and help us. That is basically what it means.

5.10
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. As I speak in support of this motion, I would like the minister, and especially the Attorney-General, to understand that all we are saying in this House is that there is a state of food crisis in parts of this country. I would not like to believe that it is in all parts of the country. 

We are just saying that there is a crisis that deserves special attention and since the Constitution allows us to do so, we urge Government to do the needful and declare a state of emergency so that other countries can come in to support. We are not saying that Government is not able. We know that while Government has tried, it has not been able to succeed. 

Madam Speaker, in February, Members of Parliament from Acholi, Lango, Teso and Karamoja cried on the Floor of this Parliament saying that their people were dying of hunger. Government committed itself by giving us a list for food distribution and promising that in a month’s time everybody would have got some food aid. However, to date districts that are worst hit like Agago have never seen any drop of food. Agago District needs to be considered under the Karamoja case because we border Karamoja. Since Government is overwhelmed, let it cry out -(Member timed out.)

5.12
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak County North, Amuru): Madam Speaker, the issue we are discussing is very important and has no boundaries, party or region attached to it. I feel ashamed that some people cannot even appreciate the fact that we are talking about something that they cannot even tolerate in a day. If you tell these people to stay hungry from morning to sunset, you will find them crying. 

People are looking for termites so that they can survive for a day; people are looking for rats in the bush so that they can eat; and people are looking for mangoes from all distances to at least feed for a day. Women and children are dying but we are not willing, as a country, to accept that we need to do something. We should do something good for our citizens so that we can be proud of our leadership. Put away your pride of being NRM, or being a Prime Minister or the Attorney-General and look at it as if it were you, your child or your wife. How would you feel about it?

I wish we could do our best as a Parliament and then we leave the rest to the President and the Executive. However, with the calibre of people like this Attorney-General going to advise the Cabinet and the kind of Cabinet we have, I do not think you have a heart for the country. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I find it interesting that we get donations to support our budgets and no one is ashamed of that. So, why should we be ashamed to say that we want food?

5.14
MR IBRAHIM KASOZI (FDC, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion. 

I do not see the reason the Government fears to declare a state of emergency in those areas. If you read the minister’s statement, paragraph 1.8, he says that having tried to talk to the Ministry of Finance and they refused to come in to help, they went ahead and appealed to our development partners for help. In doing so, the Republic of China responded and what they responded with is what they are distributing. He was alone and he appealed and they responded. If the Government comes out openly, all the development partners will come and that crisis will be solved. 

Madam Speaker, this will act as a short-term solution but a long term solution will require all politicians. This is because if we realise, after every end of elections we experience hunger all over the country because we spend one year engaging our voters in non-productive activities. We spend four months towards the end of our term engaging them in politics, three months waiting to be sworn in as Members of Parliament and leaders in various positions, and then we spend another two months before noticing that the politics has come to an end. We keep engaging in politics and not any –(Member timed out.)

5.16
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Madam Speaker, I thank the mover and seconders of the motion. However, as I give my support, I would like to say that the prayers for the state of emergency must be specific as already explained by the Speaker. So, worries of abuse should not exist. Abuse of human rights, restriction of movement, shutting down Parliament are not the purposes for which the motion was moved. 

In West Nile, we have bigger problems, which many people are not able to see because of the case of refugees. There is a problem of giving refugees food and money to buy food from the same markets as our people. However, our people are not given food, but refugees are given, causing disharmony and disparity. Refugees are given money to buy food from the same markets as our people. When the price of food goes up, our people cannot afford, which is double starvation. This should be addressed. 

There are people who are generous. There are people who are trying to solve the problem, including you, Members of Parliament. When you visit your constituencies or friends, they expect you to bring some money or food. Some voters come to your homes. However, if we have individuals or organisations like the Forum for Democratic Change (FDC) with food and they bring food to give out, why do you arrest such people for distributing food when the problem is lack of food? 

Forum for Democratic Change has food even in the stores today. When we take the food to be given out, police will deploy to arrest people. Why are you ashamed of that? The NRM should take food; UPC should take food; anybody who has food should give it out. Do not arrest members of FDC when they are distributing food.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I would like to suggest that methods of raising food within a short time should be given. There are food crops, which can mature within three months –(Member timed out.)

5.19
MR YORKE ODRIA (Independent, Aringa County South, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. If you visit Yumbe District, especially Ariwa Subcounty, which is in my constituency, you will realise that the people of Ariwa are hosting over 80,000 refugees. I am very disappointed with a report which has been submitted by the minister. He has visited that place and he knows the hunger situation as well as the drought problems. 

Ariwa is the most stricken subcounty in the whole of the north and West Nile regions. There is no clean drinking water. The place is very dry and the refugees taken there have cut down all the trees for fuel. For the two weeks I have been in the constituency, I have buried seven people. 

Land in Ariwa is owned by communities and we have 11 landlords. A week back, we lost one of the landlords who had given land out to host over 10,000 refugees approved by the Office of the Prime Minister (OPM). Surprisingly, this landlord died because of hunger and he was buried like a dog. There was no support from OPM or Government. Children are dying because there is no food. 

Ever since I went – I came back two days back – there has been no single drop of water or rain. Animals are dying. When you look at animals, they are as if they have contracted AIDS. (Laughter) If animals can die because of lack of pasture, how about human beings? The other day they took 50 bags of beans for the entire district, which is hosting over 200,000 refugees. The refugees are now like kings and our people – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know that people were not happy with what hon. Aol was saying, but she was saying something about what we need to do about planting trees.

5.21
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Madam Speaker, I stand here with tears. I want to agree with the motion that we advise Cabinet to consider declaring a state of emergency.

Madam Speaker, I would like to draw your attention to the document supplied by my fellow engineer, the senior minister. I would like to agree with hon. Odonga Otto that some ministers may be getting tonnes and tonnes of relief food. According to the document I have here, if you go to annex 2 - I want to go to the part for Amuria - Madam Speaker, I request you to give me some extra time. (Laughter) If you consider the food relief, which has gone to Amuria, 5,200 bags so far - Unless the minister withdraws this but the document has the dates, time and venue - 5,200 bags!

Madam Speaker, can I go to the Members and give it to them? I have been adding. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I give you one more minute to explain.

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Speaker, Butaleja has got 250 bags; Kamuli, which you represent, got only 300 bags. 

THE SPEAKER: Eeeeh! (Laughter) One minute for hon. Waluswaka to give us the figures.

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Speaker, according to the distribution plan, Amuria was supposed to get 4,800 bags but they are now in 5,000s. Where did they get extra mandate to go beyond the budget? I would like to thank you.

5.24
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion. 

Yesterday, I was watching television – it was NBS or NTV – and there was a story of a woman who was picking ants from an anthill and she took them home. They even showed her roasting them. She then served them to her family. I counted the number of people who were eating those ants; they were about 10. After that, she said “now I have finished”.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, if you look at page 3 of the statement of the minister, item No. 1.7, this is where the problem is. The problem is not that Uganda is poor or that we do not have resources; the grossly inadequate release of funds, which come after long delays by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, is the problem. 

The minister has told us that his budget was Shs 141 billion. He has already received Shs 31 billion, including the Shs 16 billion for the local council elections. Because of the assistance of the Chinese people, he has reduced the budget to Shs 52 billion.

Madam Speaker, I want to make two concrete recommendations. The first is that we can sit and talk and make recommendations but at the end of the day our people are dying, so it is time for us to behave as a Parliament. The minister now needs Shs 21 billion to come to the aid of our people. We shall talk about irrigation, fees and so on later because as we speak, this woman has no more ants to feed her people. Therefore, we need the Shs 20 billion released by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development this week –(Member timed out.)

5.26
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Madam Speaker, it should not have taken Government to come to Parliament to raise this issue, especially in a situation where there is a lot of hunger in this country with people dying. Any responsible government would have moved immediately to the relief of these people. (Applause)

Hon. Magyezi has just told you – we all watched news on television and we saw people eating ants as reported. There was also a pregnant woman who fell off a mango tree. Everywhere, people are crying “Government tuyambe - Government help us.” My appeal is that, whether we declare an emergency or not, Government should move quickly to the rescue of the starving people, including the people of Koboko who are in this category. Government must move quickly to provide this money. 

The honourable Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees has asked for Shs 140 billion, please avail that money so that we can rescue our people.

Finally, this famine should teach us that Government should prioritise irrigation infrastructure projects like roads and power among others. Irrigation infrastructure must become one of the priorities for Government and for this country and resources should be allocated for it such that we do not face this hunger again. Thank you very much. 

5.28
MS NABBANJA ROBINAH (NRM, Woman Representative, Kakumiro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to draw your attention to page 4 of the report, item 1.16, where it says that the Office of the Prime Minister currently has the following quantities of relief food in the store: Maize – 2,174 metric tonnes; rice – 3,097 metric tonnes; and beans – 323.9 metric tonnes. 

My question is: why put this food in store when our people are looking for survival? Madam Speaker, we have always transported maize seeds to our constituencies. If you do not have transport, why don’t you allow Members of Parliament to take this food to their people? (Applause)

Madam Speaker, we are yearning left and right yet we have food in store.  It seems there is a problem with transportation. If there is a problem with transportation, MPs have cars, please allow them take food to their people. I thought I needed to draw the attention of Members –(Interruption) 

MR AYEPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give to my honourable colleague is that before Easter, I met the Commissioner for Relief, Mr Owor. He clearly told me that the biggest problem was the procurement process for trucks and he promised that immediately after Easter, he would give me food. 

Madam Speaker, the biggest problem that they are facing is the procurement of trucks because they are following the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (PPDA) regulations. Can members look at the PPDA? These are some of the reasons for the delay. You cannot talk about PPDA in an emergency situation –(Interjections)– Let us suspend all the restrictions and give our people food. I support what my colleague has said that Members of Parliament should transport the food to the different constituencies. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We need to finish.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, I support the contention that we need to review the PPDA process because most Government programmes are failing to take off because of the procurement process. 

I personally have a problem relating to Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA). A tractor broke down in my constituency and my road has not been maintained for the last six years. Three months down the road, the engineer told me it requires Shs 5 million, but the PPDA process will take the next three months and so, it makes it a longer process. I support the idea of reviewing this procurement process of Government programmes.

THE SPEAKER: I hope we can get more equity. If you look at page 11, there are areas like Ik which got additional aid and others got blankets. 

MR ANGURA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The hunger situation is very bad. In the last two weeks, my home was broken into twice and every time they broke into the house, they ransacked it looking for anything that looks like cereals. That puts us in a very bad situation. The motion that has been moved here was not brought in bad faith. Therefore, we need to implore Government to come out very fast to respond to this issue. 

We recently requested the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to release Shs 60 billion but as you heard from the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, the releases from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development are disappointing yet this is where we should start from. If this money had been released as it was requested the first time, maybe by now the problem would have started calming down.

I would like to implore the House that whereas we are appropriating for the immediate rescue, we should also start planning to have silos established. I represent a constituency that neighbours Kenya. I want to tell you that whenever harvest starts, all the food in Uganda is sold to Kenya because they have silos. I think it is high time we started preparing them. 

I know many of our people are currently in the gardens especially in the areas where the rains have been favourable of recent. What emergency rescue is Government providing to buy this food because most of them will start selling it cheaply? If some of this money was even given to those who can buy food and keep and supply it during times of need like this, it would be very - (Interruption)

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I am perturbed by the fact that 11 years ago, this Parliament, under your jurisdiction, passed an Act of the Uganda Warehouse Receipt Systems Authority. It is very painful that this authority has remained a very small entity within the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and is given only Shs 900 million per year. 

This is an authority, which is supposed to implement exactly what the honourable member is talking about - ensuring establishment of silos, ensuring that they are working, ensuring quality and standards among others. Madam Speaker, nothing has been provided as we speak for this authority. I am not even surprised that we are in an emergency situation.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, I think your two minutes have elapsed.

5.31
MR LAWRENCE BIYIKA (NRM, Ora County, Zombo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, it is very unfortunate to have a food crisis in Uganda with all this good soil, weather and good climate. However, two months ago, I hinted on this; I said that the solution to our food crisis, in the short run, is to temporarily ban food export and increase the emergency food and water aid to the communities. That will help us. What we need is emergency food aid, not a state of emergency.

Another very important thing we need to do in a period of six months is to get fast growing and early maturing crops that can rescue our situation. 

Lastly, we are not sure whether the ministry used the little money allocated to buy food aid for the community or this food came from donors. That one is a very important area we shall pay attention to. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.36
MR SAMSON LOKERIS (NRM, Dodoth County East, Kaabong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support my colleague who raised the motion urging Government to declare a state of emergency. 

Honourable members, I am from Karamoja and we have always faced food shortages. We have met the Prime Minister and the First Lady about what is happening now, but no one has heard our cry. I think when disaster or hunger falls, it is good when there is responsibility. Like the other time when we had hunger, food was taken to Isingiro and they gave the Karimojong one trailer. 

People do not have political parties; Uganda is our country. While we are here discussing more and more bureaucracies, our people are dying. How will we come back; who will vote for us? For us in Karamoja, we have left this issue to God because we tried to bring it before this House and nobody responded. They brought us little food. 

The most important thing, Madam Speaker, is that Government should come in. The Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees should advise Government. When you look at the allocation for Amuria and Katakwi where Ecweru comes from, there is a lot of food; that is why he is comfortable. However, the rest of us who come from other areas get only 400 bags. Let us look at critical areas affected by hunger. This is not a campaign programme. We are not trying to give food so that we please everybody. What is important is that Government focuses on areas that need emergency help and declares this like Kenya did. His Excellency –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: What is bothering you, hon. Waira? (Laughter)

MR WAIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When you look at the motion and even the minister’s report, it seems to sympathise more with Teso and Karamoja regions. However, Busoga region is badly off as well. We do not have rain in Busoga and yet it should be raining by now. The armyworm has attacked all the crops. 

Madam Speaker, in this report, the remaining food is going somewhere else. If we continue like this, then Busoga as a region is likely going to die while we are looking on. I request the minister to reconsider the plan he has put in this report so that Busoga region also benefits. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Is that the point of procedure? (Laughter)

5.41
MR HERBERT ARIKO (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion to urge Government to declare a state of emergency to address the famine situation in Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, my colleague is indeed clarifying on the affected areas where I come from too. I represent a municipality, but it is very difficult or almost impossible to reach Soroti Municipality right now. If that is the situation in the municipalities, what about people who represent the rural areas?

Madam Speaker, we must look at the issue of hunger and famine in a bigger perspective rather than simply giving food. When people cannot eat, then they are not productive. A population that does not have food cannot send their children to school. A population that is thinking of how to survive tomorrow is likely going to be a violent population. A population that is disoriented about their wellbeing is going to be detrimental to the development of the country. We must look at it from a broader perspective.

Madam Speaker, we have listened to the minister and he points out key aspects. He points out the delay in releasing funds and instead of being given Shs 141 billion he simply got Shs 3 billion. What does this mean? It means there is lack of prioritisation. Prioritisation is becoming a challenge in this country. (Member timed out.)

5.44
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My colleagues on the front bench and I have been listening very attentively to the contributions to this very important motion. There is no difference between our colleagues’ opinion, on both sides of the House, and ours on the importance and urgency of the problem of food shortage in our country brought about by the lack of rain we have gone through. 

The debate almost tended to suggest that there is a difference in importance. I would like to affirm that there is no difference in the way the Government takes this matter. I have heard colleagues saying that Government fears; there is absolutely nothing that Government fears. On the contrary, Government is confronting this difficult situation head-on. (Laughter) We will continue to subdue it until the country is feeding normally. 

I was surprised that in many of the contributions, there was no reference made to what my colleague, hon. Onek, told this House about what Government has been doing to alleviate the plight of our people. Government has been doing whatever it can in spite of the resource constraints. We have even talked to our friends and no wonder, a few of them; especially the Chinese have come in to give us a hand during this time of need. 

There is a common position about the need to do something significant to alleviate the food shortage and the suffering. Now, the question though is: what should be done? Is the motion the answer? The motion is definitely not. The answer is for Government to take even more vigorous measures to ensure that where there is need, the need is met and where there is a gap, the gap is closed. 

Madam Speaker, for example, a point of transport has been raised as one of the problem areas. Government has already mobilised UPDF, police and prisons to provide the necessary transport to ensure that the food reaches the areas where there is urgent need. Therefore, transport is not an issue now.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, when we talk of this motion, let us look at what we are talking about. Let me read to you the definition of a state of emergency that we are talking about. My colleague and I were googling for the definition of a state of emergency and it is as follows - I can quote - (Interruption)

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, this Parliament has always been talking about the hunger situation in the country. It has almost been a weekly issue brought up by members in the presence of the Prime Minister and ministers. We have received many written reports and explanations in this Parliament on hunger when our people are dying. Hunger does not wait for people who are googling to find the definition of an emergency or a disaster. 

Is it in order for a whole Prime Minister to begin googling to find the meaning of a state of emergency now when the Constitution is very clear about the definition of a state of emergency?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, a state of emergency is defined very clearly in the Uganda Constitution, Article 110.

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I wish hon. Akol could listen to me the way I listened to him. The definition, which is corroborated by what the Constitution says, is: “A situation of national danger or disaster in which a government suspends normal constitutional procedures in order to regain control.” Madam Speaker, Government is in control.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Prime Minister, if you are in control, can you tell us where you are going to get the money so that hon. Onek can feed the country for the next 45 days?

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, this is a good point you have made. This morning, Cabinet sat and discussed this matter of food shortage under the chairmanship of President Yoweri Museveni. This is a matter we have done by the way on a frequent basis. Cabinet decided on five things:

One, to pay special attention to containing and controlling the current food shortage. That was number one -(Interjections) - The answer is clear because in the same Cabinet, Government decided that the budget should be further readjusted to get money to get more food for those people who are vulnerable and in difficult conditions.

Madam Speaker, the second point is that - 

THE SPEAKER: Let him explain. 

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. It is right that colleagues should listen. Apart from controlling famine, there is more money to be made available to purchase pesticides so that the armyworm can be dealt with.
What I mean by more money being available is further budgetary readjustment.

The third point that Government decided on was that -(Interjections)- The Right honourable Speaker has ruled on the matter. The third point is that one of the problems identified was population -(Interjections) - Madam Speaker, I have only two or three points remaining. The third point was ticks. A number of people are suffering because their cows are dying due to ticks that are resistant. Therefore, we want to ensure that the ticks are controlled.

Madam Speaker, the fourth is that in hospitals at the moment, we have a shortage of drugs because of the foreign exchange gaps that have been created. Therefore –(Interruption)

MS AMODING: Madam Speaker, I am at great pains to call the honourable Prime Minister to order. However, is he in order to stand before this honourable House, constituted by honourable Members of Parliament, who are here to inform and advocate for the people that they represent constitutionally, people who are starving and dying, and simply talk of plans? 

Is he in order to come to this House and continue telling us about programmes, aspirations, long term visions and goals that the Cabinet is planning in the long run yet our people are dying and being buried? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is important for the Government to have short term, medium term and long term plans. We cannot just address the hunger and leave the future to cater for itself.

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: If I may conclude what I am saying; President Museveni directed the Minister of Finance to, if necessary, suspend some of the projects in order to make sure that money is available for these priorities. In conclusion therefore, Madam Speaker, because -(Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I feel very uncomfortable that while the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is speaking we have to request for this procedural matter. I want to draw the attention of this House and the Prime Minister to page 4 of the minister’s report. 

Madam Speaker, I want you to know that this Parliament gave the Government more money after we passed the motion we gave them; could the Prime Minister talk about the additional money given to them, because that is taxpayers’ money? Let the Prime Minister tell us why this food in form of maize and beans has been stuck in the stores for over two months. We passed the motion in February and this food has been stuck in the stores for over two months; that is a fact you cannot deny.

Can the Rt Hon. Prime Minister also clarify to us - The minister has done us a favour by saying that although the situation was bad in February, the situation has doubled; it has gone from 3.5 million people to 5.5 million people. Therefore, by May there will probably be 10 million people starving, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. 

Madam Speaker, I am at pains; however much you give money to this Government - We have to be assured that this money will reach the people. We have given them money before and they did not deliver the food; it is in the store. Now they are saying we are going to bring you unprocessed rice; while you continue dying, we shall continue doing our business. Madam Speaker, can we get clarification on this matter. I am really at pains to cause the Prime Minister to answer the questions left behind by his own minister.

The situation is becoming worse; Parliament has given you money and you have not accounted for it and you are saying the Cabinet has decided that more money should be invested. Where are you getting that money from? Madam Speaker, I am very uncomfortable but I am demanding that the Prime Minister must clarify on this matter.

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, as I conclude, I would like to say that a field station has been put up in the field under the leadership of Minister Musa Ecweru, who is doing commendable work in handling this exercise.

The minister has now moved from Teso. Today he is moving to Lango to see how the situation is – (Interjections)- My last comment, therefore, is to say to colleagues that this motion moved today, important as it is, does not have sufficient basis for being passed and Government is already taking necessary measures. Therefore, the motion should be defeated. I thank you.

6.01
PROF. OGENGA LATIGO (FDC, Agago County North, Agago): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank the Prime Minister for his response. 

Madam Speaker, watching the House from outside, it is quite clear that the issue has not been resolved and there is no real resolution on this matter of drought and hunger in Uganda. It is not sufficient for the Prime Minister to respond when people still have faith in their hearts. It will not help this country, it will not help Government and it will not help the Prime Minister. 

I would like to make two or three small observations. First of all, the problem that we are facing is that these people who were supposed to work on behalf of the people are fearing to present to the President and the country the magnitude of the problem. So they run around suggesting that they have done something. 

All you need to do is a simple calculation based on these figures and you will see that even the money that was suggested covers nothing. More importantly, this problem is unprecedented in Uganda; we have never experienced this and we see people responding casually as if nothing is wrong.

Madam Speaker, there is nothing that this country can do to address the hunger situation. I came from Agago today; I drove from there in the morning when I saw the notice that there will be a sitting. I lost a few kilos that I had been planting. 

Even if you gave this Government money now, there will be no food delivered to the people; food from where - Uganda, Kenya, Tanzania or South Africa? Therefore, this is not a joking matter. The Government should understand that we are standing here not because we do not like this Government but it is because this Government is responsible to the country for the challenges that its people face. 

Madam Speaker, I would suggest that you suspend this debate today and we continue the debate tomorrow and then Government reassesses. I do not want to blame my brother, Hilary Onek; he is just a victim. I do not want to blame the Prime Minister; he is just a victim. We have got to deal with this thing in a more sober way than I have seen here, in a less joking way than I have seen here. 

Therefore, my proposal, Madam Speaker, is not to change anything. I see that the rains have come and in 45 days there will be no food because there is no crop in this country that matures in 45 days. People will feed on leaves of wild plants, termites –(Interjections)– I do not know of any worms in this country that we can feed on.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, what is your proposal?

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO:  My simple proposal is that for the country to be satisfied that this Parliament is actually addressing this matter, let us suspend this debate and extend it to tomorrow.
Hopefully, the Prime Minister and Government will be prepared to accept the challenge of the situation, to admit that things are not possible and finally to ensure - 

You see, when things happen like this, it is an opportunity to make long term commitments, and I agree with the Prime Minister; can we make long term commitments on agriculture? Can we make long term commitments on storing food so that when drought comes then we have excess food like Kenya, Malawi, South Africa and the USA have?

I propose, Madam Speaker, that we do not have to end the debate the way it is because nothing will happen. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, personally I am sad because since August, I have been telling the Government, “we are going to have a problem; can we have a comprehensive programme.” I even named the ministries for the storage, handling, production and marketing. I do not know what else we can do. I am very frustrated.

6.07
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to start by saying that there is no equity in the distribution that has been given by the minister. Looking at page 10, you notice that there is a lot of conflict of interest from the minister in charge of this because Amuria benefits in many ways. On page 11, item No. 103 shows that there are a lot of benefits going to the same district. Also look at page 12 under items 137, 138, 139, 161, 162, 163, 165 and 168.

Madam Speaker, if we go on like this, then even if we give money to Government, it will only be a small section of people in ministerial positions to benefit from this kind of effort that Parliament is trying to put into place.

Madam Speaker, I would like to go back to the point that you have raised. I would like to see Government coming up with something that will help our people. There are times in his country when there is plenty of food which I would have expected our Government to buy off and place into storage so that when there is scarcity, the food is redistributed. We are not seeing this happen. (Interruption)

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you. I would like to thank you for giving me way. We are sincerely talking from the bottom of our hearts. Much as people upcountry, including those in Kamuli District, are crying, there is relief food being given to people in Nakawa Division and yet these people can easily get food – (Interjections) - Nakawa in Kampala is in the minister’s paper.

Madam Speaker, Lira received 500 bags of Chinese rice divided into 50 kilogrammes. Where is this rice that the country bought? Why are you giving only rice? We thought that if you gave us beans, at least if it rained once, twice or thrice, we would be planting these beans to help us. Why are they stocking the beans? This implies that they are relying on the donations and our monies are not being used. I thought that I should give you that information.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Can we please have a way forward?   

MR MAGYEZI: I am looking at what Prof. Ogenga Latigo proposed.  A Member is saying they received 893 kilogrammes of rice from the Chinese. I have looked at the table that we were given but in the store, we still have 3,000,097 kilogrammes and what has been given is 1.9 million kilogrammes. The total is 5,000,015 kilogrammes and the minister is not telling us what has happened to the 893,000 kilogrammes of rice from the Chinese. A Member even talked about what happened to the local rice.  

Madam Speaker, I would love to support the proposal of hon. Ogenga Latigo. Let us go back and sober up and look at the real situation so that the minister can give us a comprehensive answer. Even if you gave me 300 bags of posho for the whole of Bushenyi District, are we really addressing the problem? Why don’t we look at a comprehensive strategic plan involving local governments, our leaders and the private sector? 

Madam Speaker, may we go back so that you give us another day tomorrow? I thank you.

MS ALUM: Thank you so much, honourable colleagues, for that useful information. As a way forward, we need to get decent feedback about the money that we had given to the Government so that we know where this money has gone.

Secondly, the agriculture ministry should also come up with a plan on how these pesticides are going to be distributed because the minister yesterday told us that they lacked the money to buy the drugs. If we are to deal with short term arrangements, what happens to the crops that we are planting if there is no money to buy the drugs? This means that even what the farmers have planted will be eaten up by these pests. 

It is very key that Parliament is assured that there is enough money to buy the pesticides to protect the crops that have been planted.

Finally, I would like to support the motion and refer to page 3 where the minister says that Government has made an appeal to development partners and the People’s Republic of China. I will join the minister to go to other development partners to borrow and seek a helping hand. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I informed you that we have been discussing this matter since August. We even organised our Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to visit the stressed areas. Personally, I would prefer that we take a decision today and Government sorts itself out. I now put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that this House do resolve to advise the Government to declare a state of emergency.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: If they do not want, they can leave. However, for us as Parliament, we have done our part. Mr Prime Minister, the rest is in your hands to declare or not. The Government has the responsibility to support the people of this country to get food. I thank you. Let us go to the next item.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY ON THE INCREASING NUMBER OF FOREIGN RETAIL AND WHOLESALERS IN UGANDA

6.15
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr Kenneth Lubogo): Madam Speaker, thank you for granting us space to present this report.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the House is still in session.

MR LUBOGO: To start with, I would like to lay on the Table the minutes that arose from the meetings that led to the construction of this report. 

This report has been on the Parliament agenda for about three weeks and I know that Members are acquainted with it. I will present the report in a structured manner but I will not follow word by word.

The sectoral Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry is mandated under our Rules of Procedure to oversee activities of the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities among others. At the inception of the Tenth Parliament, the committee embarked on an interactive process with the various stakeholders with the aim of acquainting itself with the operations of the sectors under it.

Following the committee meetings with the business community, a number of issues and complaints were raised, including:
(i) 	The high influx of foreigners in retail trade and failure by the responsible Government departments to control the influx.
(ii)	High costs of credit; 
(iii) 	High rent by landlords in US dollars.

Subsequently, the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry conducted an oversight visit to Kampala City’s commercial areas last year to ascertain the veracity of the above complaints and how the local traders have been affected. Precisely, Madam Speaker, the committee sought to find out the following:

1.	To ascertain whether non-citizens are involved in retail business;
2.	Whether the foreigners in question are trading legally;
3.	The effect of foreign traders on the local business community; 
4.	How the different agencies are collaborating to address this issue;
5.	To propose remedial action for approval by the House. 

Madam Speaker, we appreciate the importance of trade to the world economy; and for any gains in trade, the ratio of export value should be higher than the value of imports. We have tried to show the status as it stands now on page 4 –(Interjections)- The report is on the iPads; it was uploaded. It is there under today’s business. I have seen it and I have it on my iPad. It should not be a question of whether it is not uploaded.

Madam Speaker, on page 4, we discuss the current trade situation in this country and I would not want to go into the details. Members can read that on page 4.

Methodology

Madam Speaker, the committee conducted on-spot assessments of the conditions of the local traders operating in Kampala City and we held meetings with the following:

a)	Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives (MTIC)
b)	Kampala City Traders’ Association (KACITA)
c)	Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA)
d)	The Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration, Ministry of Internal Affairs
e)	Uganda Investment Authority (UIA)

The committee also received written memoranda and reports from various stakeholders.

Committee Findings, Observations and Recommendations
Madam Speaker, the committee found out that a significant number of foreigners started coming into this country as far back as 2005. These foreigners came in as investors mainly in construction, manufacturing and financing of real estate or as tourists. Since then, a significant number of them have diverted into wholesale and retail trade.

According to the validation exercise conducted by the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives in 2012, there were more than 800 foreign traders in Kampala and out of these only 160 traders met the US $100,000 threshold as required by the Investment Code Act. In a meeting with the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, the committee was informed that the on-going validation exercise has recorded over 1,500 foreigners so far. 

The committee found out that most of the foreigners come into the country under the guise of tourism with prior information that their entry permits could easily be changed into residence permits and thereafter they acquire work permits. 

Upon entry, the majority of foreign traders divert from the original intended investment plan or conditions issued under their investment licence. Moreover, some of the foreigners are operating without the required or relevant work permits. The committee observed that there are a number of investors whose firms were granted investment licences in certain projects but have since diverted and were operating different businesses. We examples of such companies, which we have listed below as:

(a)	Associated Steel Limited: This company was licensed to engage in steel fabrication but it has diverted to real estate.

(b)	Electrical Excellence Limited was licensed in 2013 to engage in assembling and distributing electrical appliances, with a planned investment of US$ 300,000. Currently, the firm is involved in electrical works contracting.

(c)	Equator Catering Limited: The project was licensed in 2012 to establish a hotel and tourism training institute in Hoima. However, the firm is currently operating catering services for Tullow. The firm had already acquired land for the project, which is now lying idle.

(d)	Easy Solar Uganda Limited: The project was licensed in 2013 to engage in assembling of solar equipment, with a planned investment of US $188,000. Uganda Investment Authority attempted to follow up on the implementation status of the project in November 2013 but the manager kept dodging them and has since failed to respond.

The Uganda Investment Authority further informed the committee that foreign chain stores or large supermarket businesses are not considered among investors as per the Investment Code Act, except the shelter or building that houses the supermarket. These chain stores are, therefore, handled like any other traders for purposes of licensing.

Observation: The committee noted that the influx of foreign traders into retail business in Uganda has partly been triggered by these gaps and poor implementation of the existing legislation and policies.

It is important to note that while Uganda has fully liberalised the business sector, some countries have retained some sectors for their citizens in order to promote domestic entrepreneurship and support local business survival. In Ethiopia, for instance, the three sectors of retail, banking/finance institutions and telecommunications are exclusive for the citizens and no foreigner can venture into them. 

The committee noted that foreign owned chain stores or supermarkets are set up to sell goods imported into Uganda, largely from their countries of origin. Even commodities such as oranges, mangoes, nuts etcetera, are imported and sold in these retail stores yet our local mangoes and oranges rot in the villages.

Regulation of Foreign Investors Intending To Engage In Trade
The committee addressed itself to section 10 (1) of the Investment Code Act, which prohibits a foreign investor from operating a business enterprise in Uganda except in accordance with an investment licence issued under the code. Important to point out is that the same section however, under subsection (5), exempts the application of subsection (1) to a foreign investor intending to engage in trade. 

I will only quote subsection (5) of that section: 
“(5)A foreign investor who is intending to engage in trade only shall not be required to comply with subsection (1) but shall- 
(a)	 incorporate a company with the Registrar General as is required by law;
(b)	deposit a sum of one hundred thousand United States dollars or its equivalent in Uganda shillings at the Bank of Uganda, which shall be specifically used for importation or direct purchase of goods for the business.”

Subsection (6) states thus: “Upon compliance with subsection (5), the Bank of Uganda shall issue a certificate of remittance to the foreign investor.”

Madam Speaker, the committee found out that the requirement of payment of the US$ 100,000 has since become too little and can easily be acquired. As a result, many foreigners easily obtain entry permits, which enable them to engage in trade.

The committee analysed section 10 of the Investment Code Act, Cap. 92, and observed the following:

1. 	A foreigner intending to engage in trading business in Uganda is exempted from the requirement of obtaining a licence under the Investment Code Act.

2. 	The purpose of the requirement for payment of US$ 100,000 or its equivalent into Bank of Uganda was meant to control the outflow of foreign currency to import merchandise by foreign investors engaged in trade only. However, this requirement has since been overtaken by the Foreign Exchange Act, 2004, which liberalised the inflow and outflow of foreign currency. 

	Section 9 (2) of the Act allows such transactions to be carried out through commercial banks and, therefore, it is no longer mandatory for the category of foreign investors under section 10 (5) of the Investment Code Act to deposit US$ 100,000 in Bank of Uganda. 

3. 	The fact that foreign investors intending to engage in trade are now at liberty to deposit the said amount with commercial banks makes the whole arrangement prone to abuse. A number of prospective foreign traders may, on rotational basis, use the same amount of money to obtain entry permits since all that is required is proof of deposit of this money in a commercial bank. 

Madam Speaker, what we are trying to say here is that these people can deposit money in a commercial bank, get proof, get cleared and then withdraw the same money and give it to another person. They keep rotating it like that.

The Trade (Licensing) Act, Cap 101

Madam Speaker, the committee found out that foreign traders divert from the kind of trade for which they were granted a licence to a different trade; for instance, a company might be licensed to deal in textiles but ends up trading in spare parts. 

Kampala City Council Authority (KCCA) admitted that it is not possible to revoke such licences for those businesses because, according to their argument, usually the company memorandum of association is wide enough to capture all possible businesses in trade, giving space to the licensee to change the business. 

The committee noted that whereas company memoranda of association are too wide, they are a requirement of the Companies Act for the purpose of registration of a company. On the other hand, a trade licence is issued under the Trade (Licensing) Act, Cap 101, as amended, for regulating the business environment.

Under the Trade (Licensing) Act, section 8 states thus: “No person shall trade in any goods or carry on any business specified in the schedule of this Act unless he or she is in possession of a trading licence granted to him or her for that purpose under this Act.” For purposes of determining the trade licensing rates of any trade or business, the Act has set out criteria to be used. 

According to the Trade (Licensing) Act, which amended the schedule of the Act, trade licensing rates are determined according to the nature of the business to be carried out and the grading of the business area. Therefore, whether the memorandum of association of a company provides for a wider scope of businesses that may be carried out by a company, any changes in the licensed business, though within the scope of the memorandum of association, must comply with the Trade (Licensing) Act. 

The company’s certificate of incorporation, articles and memorandum of association are required for the purpose of verification of its legal status and other compliance issues in accordance with the Companies Act and other laws. Accordingly, it is an administrative weakness of KCCA to allow foreigners to vary the purpose of their licences. This act leads to losses in licence fees and may lead to misplacement of some businesses since certain businesses may not be allowed to operate in some places.

Madam Speaker, the committee further established that some foreign traders operate their businesses without trading licences from KCCA; on receiving certification from the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, they go ahead and open businesses and trade freely. Therefore, there are those who are operating without trade licences at all. 

The committee observed that the collaboration between Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, Ministry of Internal Affairs, Uganda Investment Authority and KCCA is not well streamlined in as far as licensing of investors and  traders is concerned. 

The committee further observed that the foreign investors who are originally established as manufacturers end up taking over the whole distribution chain, establishing retail and wholesale businesses in all trading centres of Uganda. This has created unemployment of local citizens. 

You will find, for example, that somebody has established a factory and he produces goods, but that same person and his people establish the wholesale stores and they go ahead and establish the retail outlets; hence, they dominate the whole chain to the last consumer. 

Weak Institutional Framework 

Madam Speaker, the Investment Code Act mandates Uganda Investment Authority to promote, facilitate and supervise investments in Uganda, among other functions. However, some key areas of the Investment Code Act are poorly implemented or not implemented at all. 

The committee found out that the monitoring and implementation of the Investment Code Act is poor due to limited funding and inadequate capacity. With regard to the issue of monitoring investment licences, for example, the committee established that Uganda Investment Authority has never revoked any licence under Section 20(3) of the Act despite various breaches or violations of the conditions of investment licences by the investors. Since Uganda Investment Authority was established, they have never revoked even a single licence despite all the violations going on. 

The committee further noted that Uganda Investment Authority operates under Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We feel that this limits its effectiveness to support harmonisation of trade related initiatives, investment, licensing and monitoring. However, the committee was informed that His Excellency the President had directed that Uganda Investment Authority should be transferred from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. 

The committee, however, observes that even with the President’s directive in relation to UIA, the Investment Code Act needs to be amended to effect the intended policy shift. This makes the implementation of the directive quite challenging.

Madam Speaker, Uganda Development Corporation, Uganda Investment Authority, Free Trade Zones Authority and Export Promotions Board have similar and related mandates of promoting investment and commerce in the country and boosting domestic production. However, you find that they are segregated and distributed in different ministries. 

The committee observes that Government introduced a one-stop centre for relevant agencies to ease investment registration and synergise different roles in licensing investors. However, some agencies have failed to collaborate in enforcing this policy. 

The committee further observed that a number of agencies and departments which would promote trade and investment are scattered in different ministries. The fragmentation of related agencies leads to duplication of mandate, waste of resources, conflict of responsibility and costly business registration. 

Hawkers and Street Vendors

The committee found out that unregulated hawkers and street vendors on the streets of Kampala and verandas of shopping areas have worsened the plight of local traders. These vendors sell similar merchandise to that of the formal traders, moreover at a much lower price. This has significantly affected the sale and turnover of the formal traders. This problem arises from the failure of KCCA to allocate gazetted areas for hawkers and vendors.

The Trade (Licensing) Act, Cap 101, provides for hawkers licences. Section 16 prohibits a person from acting as a hawker unless he or she is in possession of a valid hawker’s licence. Section 1 of the Trade (Licensing) Act defines a hawker as a person who, whether on his own account or as a servant of another person, sells goods by retail other than in trading premises or in markets established under the Markets Act. 

Regulation No. 2 of the Trade (Licensing) Act provides for restrictions on places of hawking; for example, a hawker is restricted from offering or exposing goods for sale within one mile of any store licensed under the Act or within one mile of any municipality, town or trading centre.

The committee observed that the increased number of hawkers on the streets was mainly because of the poor implementation of the existing laws.

High Cost of Rent 

The committee was informed that due to a liberalised market, property owners charge high rent and in some cases in US dollars, on top of exorbitant goodwill paid by foreigners to evict local traders in prime areas. Landlords give preference to foreigners who can afford to pay the high charges. This has been exacerbated by the financial pressure that tenants work under to meet their credit obligations from financial institutions. In addition, utilities like electricity and toilet facilities are charged separately from the rent. 

The committee observed that the payment of rent in dollars was considered by this Parliament in October 2016. This was during deliberations on the motion urging Government to come up with a policy that restricts the charging of rent in foreign currency by landlords of business premises. The Minister of State for Lands, Housing and Urban Development informed the House that the ministry was in the process of coming up with a landlord–tenants Bill, with the aim of streamlining and defining the relationship between landlords and tenants. The minister assured the House that the Bill would be presented for the first reading in November 2016. However, this Bill has not been presented to Parliament to date.

High Cost of Credit

The committee was informed that the high cost of credit and the continued drop of the value of the Uganda shilling against the dollar also poses a very serious challenge to our traders. Besides the unfair competition occasioned by foreign retail traders whose imports are financed by low cost credit from financial institutions in their native countries, Ugandan traders have continued to suffer exorbitant costs of credit. These range from 20 per cent to 40 per cent per annum from commercial banks and up to 20 per cent per month, which is equivalent to 240 per cent per annum, from private money lenders. This has resulted into closure of some businesses and loss of property staked as collateral. 

The committee noted that the cost of credit in Uganda is the highest in the region and this makes our businesses very uncompetitive. 

Madam Speaker, the committee made recommendations and we seek that the House adopts them for implementation: 

1. 	We note that in the Investment Code Act, there is a fluid provision which allows investors to carry on trading activities and yet it is not the core mandate of Uganda Investment Authority to offer or issue trading licences or permits. This particular area should be a preserve of the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives KCCA and local governments. This provision, we believe, should be urgently amended with the view of deleting it to avoid confusion and duplication of mandates across agencies. The investment licences issued by UIA should be restricted to other relevant areas but not trade related activities.

2. 	The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, KCCA, local governments and UIA and any other licensing bodies should implement the Trade (Licensing) Act together with the spirit that is envisaged in the Investment Code Act.

3. 	The committee recommends that funding and finances (the budget) to all post-entry surveillance, monitoring and operations be increased in order to eliminate the vices and problems caused by the illegal business activities that affect the local people.

4. 	The committee recommends further that local councils and authorities in liaison with the Directorate of Immigration should monitor and ensure that those foreigners or investors doing business in their jurisdiction have duly and fully complied with all the laws of the land. 

5. 	The committee further recommends that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives should move swiftly to regulate the trade activities duly mandated to it by the law and sensitise the public on the trade laws and emerging issues in the trade sector. Citizens should be empowered through regular sensitisation programmes about their responsibility to be vigilant and report trade activities done contrary to the law. Citizens should be given telephone hotlines and encouraged to go to the local authorities, immigration offices and police to report those that are non-compliant.

6. 	The committee recommends that Government should implement the provisions of the Trade (Licensing) Act, Cap 101, and the regulations made thereunder to ensure that operations of hawkers are well regulated. 

7. 	The committee further recommends that Government should expedite the process of coming up with the proposed landlord and tenants Bill, to ensure that the relationship between landlords and tenants is well regulated.

8. 	The committee recommends that Government should fast-track the review of the existing laws in relation to regulating foreign traders engaging in wholesale or retail commerce, with a view of making retail and wholesale business exclusive for only citizens, while foreigners should be encouraged to invest in areas such as manufacturing. 

9. 	Finally, the committee recommends that the Uganda Investment Authority and the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives should desist from licensing foreign chain stores or supermarkets that have subsequently turned to outcompete indigenous traders in wholesale and retail business, which effect has exacerbated unemployment in the country.

In conclusion, we believe that Government should continue to attract investors to this country but create a conducive business environment. However, in order for the local citizens to benefit from foreign investments, the interest of citizens should be emphasised.

If the recommendations entailed in this report are to be realised, we believe that political and technical goodwill is required at all levels of Government, especially the Executive. This is so because it is apparent that hitherto, there has been collusion as well as unwillingness by those officials who should be acting in the best interest of Ugandans.

The committee also encourages the Executive to borrow a leaf from our neighbouring countries, particularly Rwanda and Kenya, on best practice in improving the participation of the local citizens in business.

Madam Speaker, the report is signed by 17 out of 27 members of the committee, which is about two thirds of the members. I beg to report and I would like to invite the House to support the committee and adopt the report. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson and members of the Committee on Trade and Tourism for that clear and elaborate report and also the elaborate work undertaken. It seems we are happy. Would you like us to defer the debate?

MS ALUM SANTA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is a very serious report; it is well written and when you look at the magnitude of this problem and you read through the report, some of the recommendations made by this Parliament have not been followed up to now. 

I feel that we need time to internalise this report and debate it thoroughly, so that we help the committee or strengthen what the committee has put forward so that our people benefit from this report and from the efforts of Parliament. I, therefore beg, with your indulgence, Madam Speaker, that we defer the debate to the next sitting of this Parliament. I thank you.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and the committee for this report. 

THE SPEAKER: We want to know whether we should proceed –

MR NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, the issue of our people being continuously eroded out of their economy is much larger than what we think. Recently, people went on the street –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nsamba - 

MR NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, I am deliberating on that issue. You are aware that I am handling a Bill on local content, which is at consultation stage. The demand out there is huge about this problem.

Madam Speaker, I think it would be unfair in the remaining time - and also knowing that the glucose levels of honourable members have gone down - to debate this report today. It is my humble request that we defer debate on this report to the next sitting. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nsamba, how far have you gone with your local content Bill because it means we shall debate the report now and repeat the debate when you bring the local content Bill. How far are you with your Bill?

MR NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, when we initially came up with the motion on the Floor, our concern was majorly on how Government is spending our money in procurement of foreign companies. However, during the consultations that are ongoing, the stakeholders are telling us that our law is narrow; the problem is wider. 

We would be moving much faster but we are still doing consultations. Due to the demand, we really find it necessary to do further consultations so that we bring up a law, which is more comprehensive and which answers the issues of Ugandans.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we will defer debate and we will appoint a time for it. Please read the report, internalise it and get ready.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving us this opportunity to present this report. What I would like to say is that people out there have been looking forward to seeing this report brought to this House and they want to see the House take a position on this particular matter.

Issues related to local content may only be a subset of the whole thing and may not really be directly related to this particular matter. Therefore, it is my humble request, Madam Speaker, that if we cannot debate now, and I think it is appropriate that we may not, give us an opportunity at the next sitting to debate this report and have it adopted by the House. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.51
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the committee for this report. However, I would like to inform you that Government is equally concerned with the increasing number or influx of foreign traders in domestic trade. I presented the same matters to Cabinet, which has constituted a ministerial committee to further study this matter. Unfortunately, the report has just come out from the committee. We are going to harmonise it with our report –(Interruption)

MR BAFAKI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think we agreed that we are not going to debate this report. I do not know whether procedurally. We are moving right when the honourable minister gives a statement when honourable members have not debated the report.

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, it could be true that Cabinet is taking some steps. However, I think the country has been waiting for several years for the Government to take steps. In the Seventh Parliament, I went to Egypt and I came back and reported here that in Egypt, if you are a foreign investor, unless you are employing nine Egyptians you cannot get a work permit. I also reported that in Malaysia, unless you can prove that you are employing 11 Malaysians you cannot get a work permit for one person. 

It was in the Seventh Parliament and now we are in the Tenth Parliament and we have been talking about these matters all along. When I came back from Ethiopia last year, I told you that the Ethiopian Government has ring-fenced certain areas for their people. I told you all this but the Government does not listen. 

How long will Ugandans wait? Let us debate our report then you can take our ideas if you want. We shall debate this matter tomorrow and then we shall wait for you and Cabinet; whenever you want to come back, you come. However, I think tomorrow, let us debate this and we give our proposals because Ugandans have waited for too long. This cannot continue.

I am sorry, honourable minister; you are my friend but no way. (Laughter) On this one, it is very hard. Therefore, debate is deferred to tomorrow. However, it will come after we have dealt with one or two of the Bills. Thank you.

MS KYAMBADDE: It was just additional information. I was not stopping the debate but just informing the House that Government is also consulting. Thank you very much for the opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: How long is the lottery report? We only have one clause in the Bill. Where is the chairperson?

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LOTTERIES AND GAMING (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017

6.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Lotteries and Gaming (Amendment) Bill, 2017” be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded by several members of the Cabinet. Justify why you want it for second reading.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, the object of the Bill is to amend the Lotteries and Gaming Act, 2016 to restructure the rate of gaming tax from 35 per cent to 20 per cent so that we are able to tax the owners of the gambling companies and then 15 per cent goes to the people who win in gambling. It is more of restructuring. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson, can you read the report if you are ready.

6.56
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development considered the Bill entitled, “The Lotteries and Gaming (Amendment) Bill, 2017” that was referred to us on 4 April 2017. We would like to report to the House as required by the Rules of Procedure. 

Madam Speaker, I beg that I straight away go to the committee observations and recommendations.

The committee observed that the rate of tax of 35 per cent on the total amount of money staked, less pay-outs or gross gaming revenue, renders it impracticable for the operators to break even hence pushing them to operate illegally. 

A rate of 20 per cent on gross gaming revenue coupled with a withholding tax of 15 per cent on winnings is deterrent enough to limit the operations but not to push the firms in the sector to operate illegally. 

Madam Speaker, under the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2017, it is already proposed to re-introduce the withholding tax of 15 per cent. Therefore, there will be no revenue loss to Government. 

Our recommendation is that the Lotteries and Gaming (Amendment) Bill, 2017 be passed into law. I beg to report.

Madam Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table a copy of the original committee report and a copy of the minutes of the committee, together with all other relevant materials that we used in the process of considering the Bill. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Are there any comments?
 
6.59
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am personally uncomfortable with what the chairperson has just said, that they are trying to reduce the tax on the operators so that they do not continue operating illegally. I am at a loss; how can you use that as a justification? 

I remember in the Ninth Parliament, we had issues with gambling. The problem of gambling has spread up to the village level. Trying to make life better for the operators so that they can operate legally is self-defeating by this Parliament. You want to reduce the taxes so that they can now pay willingly, meaning that this country cannot enforce rules. 

It is unfortunate that you go for some Ugandan investments like Good African Coffee, which you have now closed. It is so shameful, and at the same time you are getting these Chinese and Indians with their gambling machines and you want us to make them operate legally at ease. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the last financial year when we were dealing with this Bill, we had wanted 40 per cent but we came down and agreed to have a middle ground at 35 per cent.

7.01
MR FELIX OKOT (NRM, Dokolo South County, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I think the minister did not memorise what we discussed here in the last Parliament. The intention of Members of Parliament to vary tax in gambling and lottery was basically to reduce the penetration of gambling in the country. 

Most of our youth and children were gambling in all the villages and the intention of Parliament was to put in place a deterrent measure through taxation. The intention was to tax them so that we reduce the activity of gambling in the country. However, these are mafia who can go through many ways; now the minister is telling us to consider them because they are not making money. 

Honourable minister, can you give us the evidence of the research that you have done and concluded that these people are not making money. We have to get a report from you saying that this is in fact affecting their business. What about the tax level and the profit level? You have to do a scientific analysis; where is it?

Madam Speaker, I feel that we should not amend it by varying from 35 to 20 per cent because it defeats the intention of putting it at 35 per cent. It is clear that we made it difficult for these people to continue engaging in gambling. Right now in the villages - actually some districts made ordinances to chase them away but the minister is here telling Parliament to allow them have more profit so that they buy more machines for people to gamble. We cannot accept this. 

MR BAFAKI: In my county Kazo, the LCIII chairpersons together with the subcounty chiefs have passed ordinances to get rid of all these machines because they are becoming very dangerous to our youth. I do not know whether the minister has to rethink that Bill.

7.05
MR CHARLES NGABIRANO (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform this Parliament that effective last year, at the request of people in the villages, I carried out an operation in conjunction with the LCV chairperson of Isingiro District. We have confiscated over 40 slot machines and they are at Mbarara Police Station. We carried them from across the villages.

The business of gambling is so detrimental to us that we must rise to the occasion and ban it if possible. I started this move because there was a boy who was given money to buy products from the shop and he instead took all the money to gamble and went into hiding.

Recently while here in Kampala, I found a heap of motorcycles around a building. I stopped to see what these boda bodas were doing; the boda boda riders were all inside gambling. 

What we have been discussing in the trade report is about us, Ugandans. We cannot chase away foreigners when we have lost our values and opened up for everything. We must have certain core values before we start complaining. I propose that we maintain the 35 per cent for the operators and add 15 per cent for the gamblers. Thank you. 

7.06
MS SYDA BBUMBA (NRM, Nakaseke North County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am really surprised that the committee is just recommending further penetration into gaming and those related activities. 

Right now it is the elderly people who are farming in the villages; the young people start gambling very early in the morning. Some of them even sleep at the gaming places. It has become alternative employment and yet it is not yielding any value. Madam Speaker, our people are crying because of poverty, but these machines are siphoning money from the economy, which is not backed up by production. 

I would like to recommend that a punitive tax be put in place. We need to weigh the merits and demerits of these gambling and gaming machines. First of all, they are immoral. Most of these people who are breaking into people’s houses at night sit in those gambling places and plan their bad activities. Therefore, if we cannot ban them, then let us put in place a punitive tax. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as Commissioner Arinaitwe comes up, I would like to say that at one time I was walking in one of my towns in Namayira and the young people came in big numbers saying, “Mama webale…” - they said, “thank you for coming” and I wondered what they wanted. They said they wanted to show me something so that I could carry it away. We walked into one of the shops and they said, “That is the machine; take it away because people are stealing and selling their animals to come and gamble.” 

I came back really disturbed. I wrote to the President, saying I want to know whether these operators are licensed, first of all. Secondly, I would like to know whether they are paying revenue to the local governments where they operate. Thirdly, I said I wanted to know where they take the coins. The coins belong to this country but they are collecting them every month. I did not get answers. Does the minister have information?

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would really like colleagues to understand this. The first point is that we took a decision as Parliament to regulate gambling and, therefore, we passed a law on gambling. 

We delayed to come up with the regulations. However, we have now finished the regulations and in the regulations, we have instructed the board that there should never be gambling in villages. There can only be gambling in municipalities and towns –(Interjection)– If I can finish in just a minute. I know that there is still gambling in villages but we have told them to effect that immediately. There shouldn’t be any gambling in villages.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, when did you issue the order?

MR BAHATI: The regulations were passed I think two months ago and we have been telling the board to effect that. If it has not been done, I am informing the House that according to the regulations, gambling can only take place in municipalities and towns.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, in our villages, a developed centre can be called a town. What is the definition of a town for this law?

MR BAHATI: It is a town as approved by the Minister of Local Government. The second point is that the 35 per cent which was approved by this House was put on the gross revenue of the gambling houses. 

This restructuring helps us to discourage gambling because we are now saying 20 per cent should be on the houses and 15 per cent on those who gamble. Therefore, this is restructuring to discourage gambling.

7.11
MR RWAKAJARA ARINAITWE (NRM, Workers Representative): Madam Speaker, I remember when I was on the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, similar amendments were brought and actually they were requesting to exempt gambling. We refused. I am wondering even now, if you want to increase tax or discourage gambling, why don’t you leave the 35 per cent and slap more tax on the gambling? The reasons are very clear.

Madam Speaker, we have failed to get clear justifications as to why we should really allow this business to go on because it seems we are not even benefitting from these – (Interruption)

MR ASIKU: Madam Speaker, I think there is a misconception. There is a difference between gaming and gambling. Gambling is an illegal practice; it is never licensed. Therefore, what we are talking about is not gambling. What we are talking about is gaming and betting. Is it procedurally right to refer to licensed gaming as gambling?

THE SPEAKER: This is the Lotteries and Gaming (Amendment) Bill, 2017. Okay, what is “gaming”? Can you explain what gaming means?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, gaming is authorised by law. Gambling is not authorised by law.

THE SPEAKER: Give us examples. When I go into a lottery, isn’t that gambling?

MR ARINAITWE: Madam Speaker, whether they call it gaming or whatever they call it, they include casinos and other games where you go and gamble - you put in money in anticipation that you will get more money. Basically, whether we change terms or not, it is gambling. You are just risking your money to get more money out of it without trading or doing any other business. 

All in all, the business is bad for our communities and everybody agrees on that. Therefore, if it is bad, let us put in place more taxes to make sure we discourage this business. 

Madam Speaker and Members, you know very well that they just make machines. Actually, I was renting my house to a Chinese and in the garage they were manufacturing these machines. They do not put in a lot of technology in these machines. They collect money from these machines and take them back to China. Honestly, I do not understand what is wrong with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Why are you encouraging this business that just extorts money from us and takes it out of the country?

7.17
MS NAGGAYI NABILAH (FDC, Woman Representative Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on the issue of regulating and legalising betting or gambling or gaming – they are the same thing but just a matter of semantics. 

It is associated with domestic violence across the country. When men do not work and go to gambling centres, when their women go to these SACCOs and get money, these men come back to pick those savings and use it for gambling. Maybe the Government is trying to tell us that they have relegated this country to illegal activities made legal through laws, because gambling is gambling but Government thinks it is an opportunity to make money while making our youth idle. 

No wonder this is actually related to the famine in the countryside. When they say that our people do not farm, how can the minister stand before the whole country and say it is “okay”, you can move away from the villages and go to towns and municipalities. It is encouraging youth rural-urban migration not for purposes of gainful employment but to gamble. So, I think the minister should actually be ashamed – (Interruption) 

MR BAHATI:  Madam Speaker, is it in order for hon. Nabilah Naggayi, who was with us in the Ninth Parliament, seated where she is seated now when we debated this issue of gaming and lotteries and passed a Bill, and it is this Bill that we are operating in, to come here and say that I am encouraging this activity when actually, they are the people who moved it in this House? Is she in order, aware that as a senior legislator if you are not satisfied with the law, there is a proper route to amend or repeal the law?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the law was made by the House and it is owned by this House. It is not a product of hon. Bahati. 

MS NAGGAYI: I would like to appeal to Government because the issues we have discussed today portray a government that does not care for its citizens. I think Government should be wary of hurling such an image where people think that Government is making policies that are not positively intended to impact the population. 

Actually, it is the foreigners who own all those gaming facilities. Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, is it an investment? What are the licensing regimes that these people have in this country? I am really surprised that we have people – (Interruption)

MR ANGURA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. Gambling has actually become very dangerous in the villages. Whenever these investors are distributing these gaming machines in the villages, they go unescorted in their open cars. However, whenever they are coming to open them, they are escorted by police and gather a lot of money from the community. 

Even children who are sent to the shops to buy cooking oil of Shs 500 end up remaining there because the coin has been dropped in that machine and they fail to go back home. That is the information that I wanted to give you.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, today we have had a very rigorous debate about the situation in the country for very many hours. I would like to request that we go and reflect on this issue and debate it another date.

THE SPEAKER: In fact, honourable minister, I will be happier if you came with the regulations so that we debate them and we know how you intend to apply them if we allow. Let us have those regulations. That word “town” – all these villages are towns! 

MR ITUNGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not understand the definition of a town. Tonight at 9.45 p.m., there is an Arsenal football match. In those villages, there is no power and no Dstv, so the youth walk to trading centres to watch those matches. Therefore, if you are going to make a law, you do not have to say this is a town and this is one is a village.

Secondly, I have owned an institution for the last 25 years and I have seen students crying after failing to graduate because of gambling away their school fees. This is an evil that we should not allow.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let us defer this matter. I do not think anyone is satisfied with the rationale for now. Let us go and think about it.

7.23
MR THOMAS TAYEBWA (NRM,	Ruhinda North County, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, we are talking about the regulations but the regulations you made cannot work because betting or gaming is now done by mobile phones. Whether you are in the rural village or not, you will do betting. So, the regulations will not work because of the boundaries. 

Secondly, I would like to confess that I have ever tried to do this business. When I went into it, I had invested some good money. What I discovered is that all credible banks in Uganda do not open accounts for betting companies - all of them – Standard Chartered Bank, Stanbic Bank, Dfcu, Barclays - because they believe it is an immoral business that ends up killing people. 

Thirdly, when you look at the bets which they use to determine the odds, those odds are bought from London at 45 per cent. This means that whatever money you win, 45 per cent of it first goes back to London. I can tell you that through betting, money laundering is becoming a problem. I can assure you that betting companies are being used to launder money and they need to be investigated. I ended up dropping it because I could not go on with that kind of business.

The moment you leave more money with the betting companies, you are giving them capacity to invest more in attracting people. As a way forward, I would like to suggest that – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Are you debating? I thought we had deferred debate on that matter so that we can reflect on it. I have asked the minister to bring his guidelines so that while debating, we can also understand how he intends to implement them.

MR TAYEBWA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.

7.25
MR HERBERT ARIKO (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will strictly confine myself to your guidance that the minister will go and come back.

However, I would like to share with colleagues that as we go to prepare and come back with this Bill, according to Wikipedia - Dictionary of English - gaming is a noun which means the practice of playing gambling games. Are we together? That is the meaning of gaming. It is a practice of playing gambling games. So, as you go to prepare, remember that that is the meaning –(Interjection)– I am just giving reflection points as we come back. I am not debating. 

Secondly, I also would like to request the minister - As leaders, we are now thinking of moving Uganda from its current state to a state that has realised economic development. Therefore, we must be guided by certain scholarly reflections. Amartya Sen, in his work on capability and human development approach, talks extensively about freedom as well as choices as part of the things that will foster development. He goes ahead and analyses that if a state allows human beings to exercise freedom without limitation towards where they want to see the country going, then development will remain a myth. Get some people to think about some of these scholarly teachings about development. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.27
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County South, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I always believe in your ruling and guidance. Normally, I would not like to challenge it. However, considering what we discussed this afternoon about hunger and we deferred the debate to tomorrow and yet it is a serious matter; now again, on gambling, we are also going to sleep on it –(Laughter)– It is going to be too much for our people. 

Madam Speaker, this Bill has only one clause and we are ready to pass it. The matter is very clear like light and day. Let us make our decision right now so that tomorrow, we debate the hunger situation affecting the country. Let us finish this one today. 

THE SPEAKER: What is clear about this one according to you? (Laughter)

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. (Laughter)

(The House rose at 7.28 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 27 April 2017 at 2.00 p.m.)
