

Thursday, 2 April 2020

Parliament met at 10.36 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this morning sitting. As you recall, we agreed to continue with the general debate on the Covid-19 to give advice to the Government. I have heard that there are those who are concerned that we are here but I do not know how the Government would have laid the budget without Parliament. I also do not know how they would have laid their instruments if Parliament was closed. I do not know where they would have got the supplementary if Parliament was closed. I think Government should advise itself on the obligations of Parliament to the country. 

Secondly, honourable members, I would like to reiterate that if there are those who travelled in the recent past and have not been tested, they should do so. Yesterday, one of the members was saying that, “You see, when I came back, South Africa had not yet been identified as a high risk area.” But you know that Dubai was never mentioned anywhere as a high risk area yet it has accounted for almost 90 per cent of the infections in this country. 

Therefore, no country is high or low risk. Any country other than – if you have been out of the country, please organise to go and be checked. 

Thirdly, honourable members, during the debate, I would like to appeal to you not to raise points of information or clarification. I would like every member to have their two minutes to say their issues without interference so that their views are captured. 

I do not see the Prime Minister but I see other members of the Government. So, let us begin with item – I think there was something to lay. Honourable minister, do you have something to lay? That is item 7.

LAYING OF PAPERS

10.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay an Addendum No.3 to Supplementary Schedule No. 2 for the financial year 2019/2020.

THE SPEAKER: It is sent to the Committee on Budget for perusal and report back. 

10.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay a proposal from Government to borrow $100 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group to provide sufficient financial resources to the health sector to mitigate negative effects on the economy due to Covid-19.

Secondly, I would like to lay a proposal from Government to also borrow $250 million from the International Monetary Fund for the balance of payment support to the Bank of Uganda. 

Lastly, I would like to lay a proposal to borrow SDR 71.6 million, which is equivalent to $99.8 million as additional financing from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group to finance competitiveness and enterprise development project. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, all those are sent to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back. 

Where is the Attorney-General? Item 7(IV) is for the Attorney-General or Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. Do you have the instruments? 

10.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay, on behalf of Government: 

    1. Instrument 2020 No.45, the Public Health Notification Covid-19 Order, 2020; 
    2. Instrument 2020 No. 46, the Public Health Prevention of Covid-19 Requirements and Conditions of Entry into Uganda Order, 2020;
    3. Instrument 2020 No.52, the Public Health Control of Covid-19 Rules, 2020; and
    4. Instrument 2020 No.53, the Public Health Prohibition of Entry into Uganda Order, 2020.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, those –

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also thank the Government for laying the statutory instruments. 

Last week, on Tuesday, I raised this matter and Government promised to come up with these statutory instruments and indeed, they were gazetted. My concern, however, is that the President has issued new directives, which have not been captured in the statutory instruments that are being laid on the Table today.

I would like to find out whether the Government intends to have supplementary statutory instruments to cover the new directives that were issued by the President. 

The challenge right now is that the new directives by the President are creating a lot of challenges for law enforcement officers, the DPP and even the Judiciary. For example, there is a curfew. Under what law has that curfew been pronounced? If somebody is arrested today for violating the curfew, what offence are you going to charge him with and under what law are you going to charge him?

We are talking about four metres distance but it is not captured anywhere. 

These statutory instruments have deadlines that are different from the deadlines established under the new directives. Ideally, what should happen is that presidential directives should come after statutory instruments. Otherwise, we are going to find ourselves following proclamations that are not backed up by law.

If Government finds it extremely necessary to issue directives here and there, they could declare a state of emergency. Otherwise, without having a state of emergency, you cannot have directives because presidential directives, per se, are not laws.

So, we are finding ourselves following directives that are outside the law. So, Government should really come out very clearly and pronounce itself on this matter. The idea of issuing directive after directive without force of law is going to cause a lot of legal challenges for the country. I hope that the Attorney-General will come and clarify on that issue, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what I can tell you is that last Friday, the President invited us the top leaders of the branches, the Chief Justice, the Deputy Chief Justice, myself, the Prime Minister and others. It was the position of the Chief Justice and I that we should have a state of emergency declared.

However, the objections came from one of the ministers who was in the Cabinet. They told the President that it is not necessary and that we can go under the Public Health Act yet this matter is beyond the Ministry of Health.

10.48
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Under Article 110 of the Constitution - You know, the President cannot do everything on his own without involving Parliament. The authority of the President is also derived from Parliament.  Besides - (Interjection) - Yes, Articles 98 and 99 give the President a lot of powers but we do not have laws, which empower implementation.

Article 110 - Without declaring a state of emergency and we already have curfew - How can we have curfew without that declaration of a state of emergency? Madam Speaker, when you made your communication, you said, people were wondering why Members of Parliament are in Parliament operating.

Without Members of Parliament coming here, there are certain things, which cannot be done. Even the declaration of a curfew is very irregular. The legal minds or the learned people should help us so that we do things the right way. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, I would like to appeal to the Government to look carefully at Article 110(1), if not (a) then at least (b) and (c). Thank you. 

The Prime Minister is not yet here but we are not going to adjourn. We agreed to meet this morning so there are no excuses.

10.50
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. At times we get concerned. Since last week, we expected the Attorney-General to sit with us. The Attorney-General does not have a constituency and he came late yesterday. Offices are closed but even now, he seems to be too busy for Parliament at a time when we need him most.

Madam Speaker, at times the President should be advised that as he is appointing people in these offices, he should appoint people that are nationalistic and interested in the running of this country. We are there struggling for statutory instruments - Yesterday, Madam Speaker, we saw police in town running around with people that had refused to vacate the town. They were moving here and there, beating up people that had refused to go.

As we raised yesterday, every head of department is issuing a travel permit, “This is my doctor, he is moving on duty” or “this is my staff who is moving from this place to this place”. The President said, the document should be issued by the RDC but yesterday when we were somewhere, we saw different documents issued by different offices and heads of department.

Therefore, the Attorney-General should be here to clarify on some of these things. However, at a time when we need him to be here, he is busy doing his work. Madam Speaker, we would request that you direct - because this is an office that has more than one person – that the Attorney-General appears here, before the Prime Minister, in the next five minutes or else -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday we agreed to meet and the Government is aware that we are meeting; the business we are doing is for the country. I therefore expect the Prime Minister, his deputies and the ministers to be here. Let the Attorney-General or his team arrive here within the next 20 or 30 minutes. Nevertheless, we are going the start the debate.

10.52
MR VICENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday when the Rt Hon. Prime Minister presented a statement on responses on COVID-19, I expected him to tell the country what we are doing, as professionals or scientists, towards discovering a cure or a vaccine for COVID-19.

Madam Speaker, I would expect the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to tell us what has been done in this direction. In other countries, we are hearing that scientists have come together and they are putting their heads together with clear funding for this. I would have expected part of the money that is being appropriated for this response to go towards studies so that we can be able, as a country, to look into the resources and professionals we have and they put this together.

We have professionals in universities like Makerere University and Mbarara University. However, what happens in this country is that they are never funded. I would have loved that specific funds go straight to helping these professionals so that they come up with something that we can base on. The approach may be different for some of these diseases in the tropical regions as compared to other countries.

Madam Speaker, the other issue is that in this country, we also have herbalists who have been working alongside conventional medicine. I would have –(Member timed out.)

10.55
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Madam Speaker, when the Prime Minister was giving out information, I wanted serious clarification on the following matters, especially for us who come from the islands. 

The island is so porous and even as we speak, people are still entering this country at night and policemen and security personnel are saying that they are overwhelmed. Above all, they do not have enough fuel. Therefore, how prepared is the Government to give enough fuel to personnel on the islands?

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I would like the Prime Minister to clarify because in case the islanders are hit, we do not have ambulances. I would like the Government to tell us how prepared it is to give ambulances for the water people in case they are hit hard.

Thirdly, all the health centres in the islands are understaffed with no protective gears. How prepared is the Government to send these items to these vulnerable people that can cause problems to this country anytime? 

Lastly, I would also like the Prime Minister to clarify on the issue of food because they are going to first distribute it to Kampala and then other places. In my area, there are 47 beaches with people who have been told not to move; they are almost in thousands. How prepared are they? I am now told they are now going to people’s homes and getting food by force; some came from Mukono and other places but they are being told not to move. They are now moving to people’s places and getting food by force. How prepared is this plan to salvage these areas in the islands, especially the 47 beaches? Thank you very much. 

10.58
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (Jeema, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the Prime Minister for the statement he gave yesterday and the efforts the Government is taking in addressing Covid-19. 

Madam Speaker, there are two issues that I would like to propose as mitigation. One relates to the congestion in the prisons. I would like to propose that Government considers releasing prisoners, especially those whose sentences are about to expire. They should also release minor offenders. 

Under the Prisons Act, Madam Speaker – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are conducting additional meetings. 

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Speaker, under the Prisons Act, Government can invoke the prerogative of parole and remission to allow some prisoners go away. Our prisons are congested and should this virus attack our prisons, it is going to be a very big disaster. It is one aspect Government should consider. 

Finally, when the Prime Minister was speaking yesterday, he talked about distribution of relief. He said they will begin from Kampala and Wakiso. He also said they must begin from somewhere. 

Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, it is not a question of beginning from somewhere but actually having priority areas. I will give an example. There are those of us who come from districts bordering Kenya. Kenya was the first country to suffer from this virus in East Africa. What the Kenyans were doing was to run into Uganda for safety –(Member timed out.) 

11.00
MR MICHAEL KABAZIGURUKA (FDC, Nakawa Division, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have a very serious challenge in Nakawa, Naguru Go-Down to be precise. About three weeks ago, one of our residents returned from Dubai. At that time, Dubai was not listed amongst the Category A countries. Therefore, when eight new cases were realised, there was a request sent out by Government asking all the people that had been to Dubai to report for testing. 

This particular lady reported for testing and at that time tested negative. She was advised to go back home and do self-quarantine. After two weeks, which was yesterday, she went back for testing and unfortunately the results were positive. This lady went back home and was mingling with the other family members. Knowing the nature of Naguru Go-Down being a very slummy area, the impact is definitely beyond that family.

Madam Speaker, my disappointment is that when I received that information yesterday at about 9.00 p.m., I contacted the KCCA Surveillance officer, who indeed confirmed that – 

THE SPEAKER: Go straight to the point. 

MR KABAZIGURUKA: Madam Speaker, my disappointment is in the manner in which this scenario is being handled. By the time I arrived here, there was no official from KCCA or the Ministry of Health on site to deal with this emergency scenario. 

I would like to appeal to Government to please pay serious attention to this because Naguru has over 10,000 people in a slum so the impact could be very serious. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

11.03
MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. This pandemic has reminded me of the day Parliament approved a facility for a private person to construct a hospital in Lubowa. 

Preceding that debate and approval of that facility, Madam Speaker, the Minister of Health systematically gave us the situation of the health sector in terms of the facilities, the staffing and also equipment. I remember very well, in her statement, she said that if Parliament or Government gives a little more money and less than the facility we extended, we would have put our facilities at different levels in a situation where we can be well supported.

Unfortunately, we did not listen to the Minister of Health and went ahead and approved that facility. I do not know if by now Members of Parliament can access that place where the hospital is being constructed. 

The question I would like to ask the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is, that facility was a commitment from us from Government and now that we are in this situation, isn’t it possible for us to postpone that –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, try not to go into preambles. Just go straight to the point. 

11.05
MR CHRISTOPHER KALEMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Kyotera): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for the statement. Mine is the provision of food to our communities. I support the idea of going to LC1s and using the Army. 

However, my worry is that you have decided to begin distributing food in Kampala and Wakiso. We have a bad history here because even the President begun giving money to the youth from Kampala and it ended here. My worry is, you might also end the food distribution here.

Therefore, it is better do allow people to support their own communities, including the Members of Parliament. This is because if you start from here, our constituents will be on our “necks” and “fight” us if we do not have enough – 

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members! 

MR KALEMBA: Secondly, the support given to our health workers at the porous borders is not enough. Our health workers are not supported; they don’t have protective gears. My worry is in Kasensero Landing Site and Mutukula Border the health workers are not supported. Kakuuto Health Centre IV currently does not have power. 

So, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we would like you to give more support to border areas. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, it is not only the money for the youth that stayed in Kampala and Wakiso; even the skilling programme has never left this part of the country.

11.08
MR ISMAEL OROT (NRM, Kanyum County, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to first of all, commend the Government and Parliament for the effort they have tried. Yesterday, when the Premier was delivering his statement he clearly mentioned that none among the sick has died. That is very commendable and we would like to pay special tribute to our medical personnel because they are daring. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the challenge on food is that the food in our country is customary, not every custom can consume posho and beans. So, you should take that into account. Yes, you cannot take posho and beans –(Interjection)– the staple food for the vulnerable people in Buganda is matooke. If you go to my place it is millet bread. So, we would like also to ensure that you look at that point when delivering food.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, the patients from where they are receiving treatment – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can you conduct yourself honourably.

11.10
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, on the issue of food, I would like to request that based on the situation on the ground, we urgently address the issue of those who are already sick in the hospitals. Yesterday, the minister for – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am going to reject some of you from the Chamber. There is a caucus there. Don’t look behind you whip, I have seen you.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, informed this House that they are waiting for the work plans to support the districts. Therefore, I request that this part of the food be taken to those who are already sick, as we are launching this in Kampala and Wakiso. Also, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we need a full programme so that we can inform our districts when they will get theirs.

Secondly, you talked about the borders. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we requested for a detach at Elegu border, and that has never happened because of the porous borders that we have. Many of them are trying to trek in into the country and it is difficult to manage. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we need your guidance on the test that the ministry is doing. We heard from Kalangala yesterday and today, many people are rising; people have been testing negative but later after some days, the result show positive. So, how effective is the 14 days?

Lastly, Right Honorable Prime Minister, on the preparedness of the regions, the referral facilities are not – 

THE SPEAKER: No information, you finished. Members, just sit I have got all your names.

11.12
MR PETER OCEN (Independent, Kole South County, Kole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to go straight to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. On the implementation of the presidential directive, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in a situation whereby RDC has put off his phone permanently because he is overwhelmed and he is saying there is no facilitation and he cannot leave his phone open now, what are we going to do in this kind of situation?

Secondly, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there has been a lot of beating continuing even up to now. Yesterday, one of our clergy in Bala Subcounty was called from his house and was beaten terribly. As of now, he is getting treatment. Another issue is the implementation by the forces; the collection of the motorcycles in Kole District, yesterday alone, over 60 motorcycles were collected. Actually, when they get you riding or park a motorcycle, they just pick. If you want to get it back, you pay between Shs 100,000 and Shs 150,000. At the moment, the motorcycles are in the custody of police.

Finally, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we have people living with HIV/AIDS. I did not hear from you yesterday, include these people in the list of those who are going to benefit from these foodstuffs. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would be very happy if you can harmonise this kind of situation. Thank you very much.

11.15
MS MARGARET LAMWAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to ask the Prime Minister on the issues of the district taskforce on COVID-19. All the systems have remained at the district headquarters; even the Government vehicles are parked at the district headquarters, yet people at the villages are real suffering. They have even stopped the boda bodas from carrying the patients. Between yesterday and the other day, we have lost over 10 people in Kitgum District. Three people were beaten by snakes and one was a woman who died when she was supposed to deliver and others succumbed to Malaria and other common diseases. 

Another issue concerns the distribution of food. You mentioned areas in Kampala and Wakiso, yet you know very well that we have vulnerable people; people who are suffering from nodding syndrome in Kitgum, Lamwo, Pader and Omoro where they cannot get food elsewhere. I request the President or the Prime Minister to ask the Resident District Commissioners (RDCs) to relax a bit on the transportation of patients from various places to the hospitals.

Lastly, I come from a place that borders South Sudan. In Kitgum District, we have a porous border where many South Sudanese come –(Member timed out.)

11.17
MS GORETTI AJILO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Prime Minister for the presentation. Yesterday and this morning I received calls from the Village Health Teams (VHTs) from my constituency. Their problem is that whereas they are supposed to be administering medication to children who are five years old and below – treatment for malaria, cough and other ailments – they cannot administer this medication now because they fear receiving people. They are actually turning patients away because of fear of catching Covid-19. Their request is that as Government considers giving protective gear to the medical personnel, the VHTs should also be considered for at least masks and gloves.

The other issue is about the taskforce. I would like to add my voice in questioning the rationale of having general secretaries of parties participating in the taskforce. It is the professional and technical people who have to be co-opted to the taskforce – like somebody talked about people from the public health department. Really, Covid-19 is not political. It does not know political parties and so, I wonder why politicians are into this.

Lastly, I think the money to be given to the districts should be fast-tracked. Yesterday, again, my CAO said whereas they have the –(Member timed out.)

11.19
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Prime Minister for the statement he gave to the House and the nation, yesterday. I have about three comments to make. 

The first is on the quantity of the food to be given to the people. We appreciate this is a situation for which nobody had prepared and, therefore, some immediate action has to be taken. However, from the computation of what the Prime Minister said yesterday, the Government is giving 100 grams of food to every person per meal. A kilo of food is supposed to take somebody for six days. That means a meal is 100 grams. 

In my place, people use plastic cups to measure the quantity of food. One cupful is actually half a kilo. It means that flour is supposed to be used for today’s lunch and supper, tomorrow’s lunch and supper and the next day’s lunch. How can this be?

Secondly, Madam Speaker, you granted me leave and I moved a motion in this House urging Government to revamp the national food reserves. This is something that this Government must consider seriously. If we had the national food reserves, we would have where to go and pick food from. The neighbouring countries have this: Kenya has it; Tanzania has it. Uganda does not have it. I do not think we need more than Shs 30 million to establish the food reserves for this country –(Member timed out.)

11.22
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I thank you for giving me the opportunity today. I have a few things to raise. One, I thank the Prime Minister for the report presented to this House. However, I have found a few things missing, especially the issue of the work plan. Our district – Ngora – submitted a work plan on the 24th of March detailing what was required to fight Covid-19. Yesterday, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was telling us that they did not send the money because the districts had not sent the work plans.

Madam Speaker, the people of Ngora want the minister to explain why he used a blank statement that “all districts had not submitted work plans.” That is something which is very dangerous.

Secondly, because the health workers don’t have protective gear, some of them already fear to attend to the suspected cases of Covid-19 in Ngora District.

Thirdly, I would like to inquire from the Prime Minister as to how many ICUs we have in Uganda. That is important to know because this disease is serious. As we talk, over 900,000 worldwide are already infected and Uganda has 44 cases. 

My other concern is on the distribution of the food items. As you know, many people are going to be pulled together. There is going to be crowding at the places where they are going to distribute food from. I want the Prime Minister to clarify to me and other Ugandans what is – (Member timed out.)

11.24
MR ALEX BURUNDO (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am going to address three issues. First, the Prime Minister thanked us for donating the ambulances to help in fighting Covid-19. However, it is my humble request that the drivers of these ambulances be paid by the Government. We requested for this one time but Government did not take it seriously. This is the time for Government to take it seriously and pay our drivers.

The second issue is about the public address systems. I request the Government to buy public address systems and provide them to the RDCs or district health officers so that our people are sensitised because we can no longer call meetings and talk to them.

Finally, Madam Speaker, in addition to distributing food to the districts of Kampala and Wakiso, it is my humble request that we distribute food to the victims of landslides in Bududa and the host communities of Bulambuli so that they are also able to get out of famine. Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I invite hon. Koluo, I would like to inform you that hon. Deogratius Kiyingi travelled to South Africa and returned on the 6th of March. He has since been examined and he has been found negative. Therefore, hon. Kiyingi can return to Parliament. This is his clearance. (Applause) Let us have hon. Koluo and hon. Othieno Okoth.

11.26
MR ANDREW KOLUO (NRM, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have three issues to raise. One, water is a very critical component in the fight against COVID-19.

Water for my people in Kapujan Sub-County in Katakwi District was turned off by a contractor called AWICO Engineering Company Ltd due to non-payment of Shs 256 million by the district. Can the responsible ministry work this out as soon as possible?

Secondly, my colleague has mentioned something about a public address system. Madam Speaker, majority of the people in the villages do not have radios and mobile phones. It is therefore better that a public address system is moved around to disseminate information to the public.

Thirdly, in Katakwi District, the Chairman LV has totally refused to hand over the vehicle to the District Health Officer. He is moving with the vehicle in trading centres and Soroti. Can the responsible authority get this vehicle from the LV Chairman to help people in the fight against COVID-19?

Lastly, salt is an item –(Interruption)

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Aware that district chairpersons are also members of the task force, is it in order for the honourable member to inform us that the chairperson of his district has refused to hand over a vehicle that he is using to move around the district?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if I recollect the President’s address, he said all the leaders should assemble the vehicles at one point so that they are available to everybody. So, the member is in order. (Applause)

MR KOLUO: Madam Speaker, a packet of salt in Katakwi costs between Shs 3,000 – Shs 4,000. Can this be taken as a priority to help people get potassium and calcium, which is necessary for health? Thank you very much. 

11.29
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Madam Speaker, as of yesterday, all samples for COVID-19 from all over the country were being taken to Entebbe for testing. However, last week, Government informed the country that East African Community (EAC) Secretariat had donated three state-of-the-art mobile testing vans. The information was that these testing vans were supposed to compliment the testing at Entebbe. 

Yesterday, I expected the Prime Minister, in his address to the nation, to inform us where these vans are stationed. Right now, we have samples that are being moved all the way from eastern Uganda; Tororo, Mbale and other distant places to Entebbe and this is causing a lot of delays.

I would like to request the Prime Minister to tell us where these vans are. Have they vanished? Otherwise, every day, members of Cabinet keep telling us there are mafias. Could it be that these vans have disappeared? If they have not disappeared, where are they stationed? If there are three vans, why can’t we have one stationed in the east, one in the north and another in the western Uganda so that samples can be tested in those areas instead of having them moved all the way to Entebbe?

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I need clarification. What is the fate of these state-of-the-art mobile testing vans that were donated to this country by the EAC Secretariat? Thank you.

11.31
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Prime Minister informed us that general hospitals and health centres IV are being prepared to handle COVID-19. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to request you to take into consideration the fact that we have districts in this country, which have only one health centre IV and, therefore, there is need to support health centres III so that nurses are deployed there and treatment is also availed.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of recruitment, I was happy to hear that Government is planning to recruit staff. However, the problem with our recruitment process is that it takes very long. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this time round, the recruitment should not be business as usual. These staff should be recruited and deployed as soon as possible.

Madam Speaker, we need to reach all parts of this country. Whereas, some districts are benefiting from the information from the Ministry of Health through the media like televisions and newspapers, some areas like Amudat are not benefiting. Even when the telecoms have tried to help us to pass on the information before connecting a customer, people in such districts do not get information. Therefore, such districts should be supported with enough funds to be able to reach the people by using microphones, like what an honourable member did, so that the fight is handled by everyone in the country.

Finally, regarding relief food, everyone in this country is under lockdown. To say that they are beginning with Kampala is unfair. In the rural areas –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Let us have hon. Nokrach, hon. Nabulindo, hon. Apollo, and hon. Lyomoki. Honourable members, I have a list of names. Just sit where you are.

11.34
MR WILLIAM NOKRACH (Independent, PWDs Representative, Northern): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. My issue is directed to the Prime minister. 

The issue of food is good but how are you going to sustain it? In my view, it would be fair that as you give me six kilogrammes of maize flour, give me 10 kilogrammes of treated seed so that while I depend on the six kilogrammes, I am planting the 10 kilogrammes. I know that it may not be sustainable and our people will be misguided.

If people with disabilities are among the category of the vulnerable people you are talking about, I would request that you involve the secretaries for disability in each village to participate in the distribution. This is simple logic; nothing for us without us. If you do not do it, our people will not get anything.

The other issue I would like to raise is, you gave us a very nice plan but we are not aware of the Government’s plan for post pandemic issues. When Ebola attacked us, people died and the burial system was controlled by the medical people. In this case, what are we looking at?

Apart from that there were victims who survived and the Ebola victims formed an association. Definitely if our people from this COVID-19 survive what are you going to do for them? I would want to know from you –(Member timed out.)

11.36
MS JANE NABULINDO (Independent, Woman Representative, Busia): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. We people from the border are at the frontline. I expected the Prime Minister to begin with the border areas. There are people in uniforms guarding the border but they do not have any protective gear.

I have 200 ungazetted entrances, people are crossing and security is overwhelmed. Honourable Prime Minister, please consider the border people. We at the border depend on cross border trade but the border is closed.

I expected the Prime Minister to at least begin with the people from the border on relief food; people from Busia Municipality who depended on cross border trade. At least people from the village can forge a way of having a meal.

Honourable Prime Minister the health workers in Busia are not trained. The district health officer told me that people from the ministry called them to prepare for training but they have not shown up. They do not have protective measures and this is a border so consider the people of Busia, thank you. 

11.38
MR APOLLO MASIKA (NRM, Bubulo County East, Namisindwa): Thank you, for this opportunity. I would like to inform the House that I was the first whistle blower telling our Government about the seriousness of coronavirus which was coming to Uganda because I was in China and fell a victim.

I confined myself in the House for the first COVID-6 SARS for three months in China Beijing in 2003. When such a disease came, I was very concerned and warned the country about it. I thank our Government because it acted quickly that is why we have only 44 cases, and I believe that we shall handle them well. 

I am trying to blow another whistle because being a Member of Parliament of Namisindwa, a borderline where many people are entering our country from Kenya - this is like an artery from the heart - and are preparing to come for Easter. Many trailers from Busia and Malaba have been refused to enter Kenya and are now coming via Rwakhakha-

THE SPEAKER: No information.

MR MASIKA: We do not have any temperature -(Member timed out.)

11.40
DR SAM LYOMOKI	(NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank you for this opportunity to raise some few things. I am not going to raise anything on professional and technical issues but about the non-medical aspects of this lockdown.

The reason we decided to give food portions to people was because there are many people who have been living from hand to mouth, and are at home but we get information that the LCs might think that workers earn money and yet they should benefit from the food rations.

The Ministry of Labour has been left out in the discussions and in terms of the supplementary, we request that the ministry be part of the people involved.

The workers’ leaders at the grassroots should also participate in their localities, to make sure the workers benefit from these rations.

The food given is only for one month but this situation may continue for some time from the medical point of view. Government should be prepared to raise more funding for food and supplementation not only in Kampala but –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday I asked those who wanted to contribute to register but there are people writing to me to ask why I am not seeing them. I cannot see everybody at the same time but I have a list of those who registered and I am adding those who did not register on the list. Just be patient, we are here to listen to you today. 

11.43
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Without duplicating what my colleagues said and most especially those from the border, I would like to thank the Prime Minister for the report he gave yesterday.

However, security along the border is not well facilitated. I would like to defer from those saying that we should not prioritise security but our security is doing badly.

I request that you provide motorcycles for the GISOs who are combing the security line and especially the porous borders. Honourable Prime Minister, I would like to find out from you whether the order given to police is to arrest those who are even in their gardens.

As I speak to you now our people form Aburi village have been arrested from their gardens and hoes taken so I do not know whether this is part of the order that has been given.

We would like to request you, where necessary, to provide temperature guns for testing at our porous points, such that people who are gathered around there can be tested immediately without being taken to distant places for testing.

Finally, we thank you for the food that Government is going to provide but how I wish we could spread it across the country because as per now -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Olanya? For the record, let me tell the Prime Minister that we shall not accept a situation where only part of the country is supported with food. (Applause) No!

11.46
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, first, I would like to find out the criteria that we are going to use for the people to benefit from the food. Yesterday, you did not explain which category of people are going to benefit from the food that they are going to distribute. Are you going to consider the persons with disabilities and the elderly? How are you going to tell that this person is more desperate than the other person?

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, even if you are going to use the LC1s, we have some category of people who are more badly off in the villages. Those are people with disabilities. For example, in my district Amuru, some of them do not even move. They do not have transport to move to the food distribution points. How are we going to consider such kind of people? I propose that let us have special consideration for the persons with disabilities so that each and everyone is catered for. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, why are you starting with Kampala and Wakiso? Is it because sometime back, hon. Nsereko distributed food in Kampala? Is it because of that pressure? Let us try to be serious. Each and every district needs food. Our people are badly off. I feel that you need to disband this particular idea of launching in Kampala and Wakiso.

Thirdly, let us try to get the best ways of transporting people who are deep in the villages. For example, in my district Amuru, we have other places where ambulances cannot reach. Right now, you are not allowing boda boda people to carry those pregnant mothers –(Member timed out)

11.48
MR EMMANUEL KALULE SENGO (NRM, Gomba County East, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have only two or three points to make. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, thank you for your address. However, when you addressed us, there is one thing you did not mention. This is the issue of corruption. First, this disease would have been controlled easily but then we have information that people on that flight which came from Dubai were paying $50 and they were simply letting them in without being checked. That is why we fell into this problem.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I have a fear that if you do not take the right measures, even the distribution of food will be messed up because our people are very corrupt. Please, look into the issue of corruption.

Secondly, much as you are giving people food, we would request – as my colleague pointed out – that you put more emphasis on seeds. Instead of giving Members of Parliament only one tonne of maize, give us at least three tonnes each, so that we can distribute to our people so that they grow more food. We are not sure –

THE SPEAKER: Order, order!

MR KALULE SENGO: You are not sure for how long this scourge may go on. What if it takes several months, will you be able to sustain the giving of free food for all these months? I would think that as you give food, also give seeds so that people grow food so that at one time, they will be self-supporting. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

11.51
MR RICHARD GAFABUSA (NRM, Bwamba County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Quickly, Prime Minister, regarding implementation of the presidential directives; you are aware that in Bundibugyo, after the December landslides and floods, we have four sub-counties that are completely cut off and cannot be accessed by a vehicle; people only use boda bodas, including taking sick people for treatment. What are we going to do?

Secondly on food, colleagues have already raised the issue of Kampala and Wakiso. We are more vulnerable. If you remember when you came to Bundibugyo in December-January, people’s livelihoods were completely washed away. This virus has now come and people are completely stranded. How I wish you started with Bundibugyo because you went there and know what is on ground. 

Madam Speaker, these floods and landslides in Bundibugyo completely devastated the district, including washing away over 12 gravity flow schemes. We have an acute water crisis in Bundibugyo. You remember we presented to you that the district cannot afford to repair these gravity flow schemes. You now know water is a critical issue in management of this problem. We handed over this to the Ministry of Water and Environment to help us but up to now, nothing seems to be coming through.

You are also aware that Bundibugyo borders DR Congo. Like colleagues from the border with Kenya raised here –(Member timed out)

11.53
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister talked about organising resources. However, I would like to know when these resources will reach the district. For example, my district Oyam does not have protective gear at all. The district health team is struggling to the best of their ability.  Sincerely, without protective gear and masks so many people are now trying to improvise to the extent that some people are even using pads.

Secondly, I would like the Prime Minister to clarify on the issue of relief that he said will be distributed. We have our students who are in very many countries outside Uganda –

THE SPEAKER: Order!

MS ALUM: These are Ugandans. For example, in Algeria, we have over 200 students and most of the countries are dealing with their citizens. So, when will the Government also reach these Ugandans who are studying in different universities in foreign countries?

Thirdly, I would like to know the issue about the LDUs who are implementing the presidential directive. Madam Speaker, these LDUs are beating people. For example, when they find you in your garden when you are more than five people, they will simply begin beating you straight away and even confiscate the tools that people are using. Were these people sensitised, Rt Hon. Prime Minister? If not, I think this is not how we are supposed to do this.

Finally about the food, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you talked about very many sick people –(Member timed out.) 

11.55
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to make a prayer because the Prime Minister did not make it clear. The other day, I requested that Government takes it upon itself to hire, if we are to effectively address the issue of transport in every districts. They can hire like three or four vehicles at least for every parish and some boda-bodas in some sub counties where they cannot get vehicles for the sick, especially women. When there are emergencies, those vehicles would be available. 

In my district, I said we have three vehicles. Equally, I believe there are districts without vehicles. So, I am praying again through you, Madam Speaker, that the Prime Minister and his team take it upon themselves to hire vehicles for these areas so that we are safe during emergencies. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I wondered – because the Prime Minister told us they are going to be giving six kilogrammes of posho and three kilogrammes of beans per head. This food cannot even last two weeks. It can maybe go for one and a half weeks. So, I was wondering whether the Prime Minister will provide food every week or after two weeks. We need to be sure so that –(Member timed out.)

11.57
MR THOMAS TAYEBWA (NRM, Ruhinda North County, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, either by closure of business today or at least tomorrow, we need to get a clear programme for the distribution of food in upcountry areas so that we inform our people on the dates.

Secondly, I would like to know from the Prime Minister what they are doing for health centres III. These entities do not have temperature guns and the health workers are scared. So, are you putting in place mechanisms to ensure you distribute temperature guns to health centres III? 

Thirdly, we need to know the cost of this food. I think it is very important. At how much is Government buying this food? Downtown here, you find a kilogramme of posho is at Shs 2,200 and a kilogramme of beans at Shs 4,800. In my village, a kilogramme of beans is at Shs 3,000. Like how we give money for the welfare of the old people, why didn’t we get numbers and distribute money via mobile money to our local people so that they can buy matooke or other things on credit in their village? There, we are very sure that money will reach people compared to this food we are talking about. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, you know very many people are not used to being in their homes. People do not know how to be confined. Some people were going home –(Member timed out.)

11.59
MR RICHARD OSEKU (NRM, Kibale County, Pallisa): Madam Speaker, I have three issues. The first is: the other day, Uganda Virus Research Institute complained that they need some money to the tune of about Shs 1 billion to secure more testing kits. So, I want to know, from the Prime Minister, how far they have gone to provide this money. That is very important because so far, Uganda Virus Research Institute is the only entity testing for Covid-19.

Secondly, I agree on the issue of giving seeds to people to plant. I, however, want to propose that as the Government gives food, they also give some vegetable seeds like biringanya, dodo and sukuma wiki so that people can plant them. They will be able to rescue people in a very short run. 

The other issue is about food. As we speak, there are areas that are already hunger stricken. The other day, I watched on TV people starving in Tororo. They were showing us old women dying because they do not have food. So, this distribution of food should cut across the country. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, we have spoken about the issue of water. This is another important point because most of the time, Members of Parliament are called by their people saying the boreholes are broken. This is the time Government should undertake to repair all the boreholes so that people can get safe water. This will help them to fight Covid-19. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

12.01
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We are already in a state of emergency. What has stopped the Government to do it the right way because whatever has been pronounced shows that we are indeed in a state of emergency? Our Constitution is very clear. Therefore, what is really hindering the Government to come here to do it constitutionally?

Secondly, the other affected sector of Government is the media. What plans does the Government have for the media houses especially the payment of arrears? These media houses cannot right now get any money from adverts because of the situation. Why don’t you pay the arrears and adverts for these media houses because they are not getting anything right now from Government? I wish the media houses can also be facilitated because they are very important in this struggle. 

Finally, when you look at the way we are going to distribute food, I agree that the best method is by using Mobile Money. Also, we have seen allocations for RCCs, districts and others so that they can fight Covid-19. However, I have not seen any budget for Members of Parliament yet they are also very vital in as far as fighting Covid-19 is concerned. 

We have seen budgets for RDCs, chairpersons and other leaders. Members of Parliament are leaders and it is you, Madam Speaker – if it were not you, we would not be here but you insisted. The President never talked about us yet we go to our people to sensitise them on how they can fight Covid-19.

12.04
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the Prime Minister for the report and also appreciate the interventions by the President. 

The President made a pronouncement on the distribution of food. We are aware there are organisations that wish to give food as a relief under the corporate social responsibility. My prayer is that they should not be restricted. Instead, they should be guided on how to deal with that.

There are so many people under such circumstances who are also willing to assist the communities. Some of these organisations are situated within the communities and have a feel for the people they live with. 

So, I pray that the police and maybe Government guide on how these people can come out to assist other than discouraging them. 

Mr Prime Minister, I also would like to find out how emergencies are going to be handled. If I got a heart attack or if my children got a problem in the night, how are they going to be rescued in terms of reaching medical care immediately, because some of these cases can be immediate?

In addition, I would like to find out how –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would also like to know how the LCIIIs and local leaders are involved in this campaign.

12.06
MR KASSIANO WADRI (Independent, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to commend the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for the statement he gave us yesterday, in which he decried the absence and lack of the necessary protective gear and testing kits. This is despite the fact that in international news, we are reliably informed that Jack Ma of Alibaba China did make contribution to all African countries through the African Union. I wish he could tell us as to whether Uganda, as a country, has got its allocation.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, on the issue of food distribution in this country, which idea I vehemently welcome, I have the following to say. Honourable Prime Minister, in your office you know the vulnerability index in this country very well. The hardest hit parts of this country, as far as poverty is concerned, are northern Uganda and north-eastern Uganda. How I wish you took that into your consideration regarding how you are going to distribute these food items.

In addition, regarding the type of food that you are going to distribute, you know very well that posho and beans are mainly eaten by people from the north and northeast. In the centre, if you went into Buganda villages, I think matooke will appeal to them more than the posho and beans that you are talking about.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to make a special appeal for the refugee hosting areas. The refugees are a problem. Over the last one and half months, when the guns have gone silent in South Sudan, refugees are now able to go back to Sudan and only come back to Uganda on the day when they are receiving food ration allocations. That, therefore, exposes us to more chances of contracting coronavirus across the common border –(Member timed out.)
 
12.08
MR AJA BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to start by appreciating the efforts of Government and the national taskforce towards what they have been trying to do. However, I have major concerns on the steps taken to address the looming crisis because I have not seen the steps being taken on the issue of agriculture, which is the backbone of our economy.

Can we hear from the advisory, the steps taken on farmers in combating this so that when the time comes to mitigate the efforts, we find ourselves with a lot of food to eat? What efforts has Government taken? Where is the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries; and the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives in all this?

We are seeing our foodstuffs, which are perishable, not being taken seriously. People can no longer buy eggs yet chickens are still laying. What will farmers do? Where are we taking the eggs? Milk is now being seen as a luxury.

Therefore, what steps have the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives taken to make sure that these things go on? After COVID-19 has gone, aren’t we going to face a lot of hunger, if people are being sent away from their gardens? What steps are we going to take to make sure that we have food? What mitigation measures do we have in place?

Madam Speaker, many people have come here and talked about the distribution of food. I am happy that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister comes from my constituency and is one of my predecessors. People are already crying of hunger. I have heard one of the members saying that mobile money would be – Yes, it could also act well because nowadays, the fees on mobile money have been scrapped. The way you have been distributing money to the elderly, can’t that also be one of the measures to take such that the whole country moves at ago instead of -(Member timed out.)

12.10
MR KENNETH ONGALO-OBOTE (NRM, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like the Prime Minister to consider the presidential directive on supermarkets and boda-bodas in view of the fact that overzealous security personnel are closing shops and restricting movements of boda-bodas upcountry.

I would like the Prime Minister to consider the presidential directive on interactive places in view of the usage of boreholes, and the fact that this could be the major transmission points of this disease in places upcountry. 

I would also like the Prime Minister to consider the exorbitant price that we are going to pay for distributing these foods as opposed to sending money to people who will selectively buy food and at the same time, support local businesses.

I would like the Prime Minister to consider the fact that while we are using our IDs and waving them to access Parliament, can we access our constituencies? People need us and we need to go on radios and we have abandoned our constituencies. Can we be assisted to visit our constituencies? I would like the Prime Minister to ensure that security is accorded. 

Finally, I would like you to consider the fact that there are people who have been accessing ARVs in distant places from their places of abode. How are these people going to be assisted to access those ARVs, now that transport has been restricted? Thank you, very much.

12.12
MS PATRICK KASUMBA (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, yesterday during the beginning of the debate, hon. Sarah Opendi raised pertinent issues and one of them was the existence of mafias in this country. The country is very much interested in knowing whether we have mafias in this country. We would like to know the type of mafias, how they operate and the position of Government as far as these mafias are concerned.

Secondly, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Ugandans are exposed to social media, international television stations and the website of World Health Organisation. There is contradicting information about this virus. Yesterday, on several international televisions, they were saying that it is an airborne disease. I would like to know from the Government; what sort of disease is this so that our people can prepare?

Thirdly, as far as food distribution is concerned, you mentioned that food is going to be distributed to vulnerable people and I entirely agree with you. However, you did not pronounce yourself on who these vulnerable people are. Once we give food to these LCs to distribute - All of our constituents need food. Therefore, Government should pronounce itself on who –(Member timed out.)
 
12.15
MR EDWARD SEMBATYA (NRM, Katikamu County South, Luweero): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for his statement yesterday. 

In his address to the nation on 29 March 2019, His Excellency the President said that Government was going to talk to responsible persons in the financial institutions regarding bank loans to their customers. As we talk now, many people acquired loans and registered their businesses and property as security. 

I was listening to the Prime Minister yesterday but I did not hear anything regarding that matter. My request is, may we have a response regarding that issue? As we talk now, people are not working because they have been advised to stay home and moneylenders are on their necks. 

Secondly, there is an issue of security during this curfew period. People have been beaten, even if they are found seated on their verandas outside their houses. May we have some guidelines from Government as to how people should conduct themselves during this curfew period? This is because people do not seem to understand how they should behave during curfew hours. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

12.15
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for the statement made yesterday. 

I would like to begin with a comment on the issue of sending money on mobile money. I have seen instances where Government has compensated families and sent mobile money but you find a husband disappearing from their spouses without even mentioning how much money they have got. –(Interjections) - Therefore, we are going to cause domestic violence in families. I do not support that. 

THE SPEAKER: Order, please! 

MS MUGENI: Madam Speaker, the issue that I am raising is very serious and even the honourable Members of Parliament know it very well. If one of us in a family received mobile money and I know that we are five women married to one husband, nobody will mention that they have received money. We know this very well so let us not cause domestic violence in families. Let us agree with the Government that people be given physical food.

Yesterday, I was watching CNN and I observed that countries had come to their knees because of this COVID-19. I saw specialists saying that what countries need to do is to equip their ICUs. I toured our health facilities recently with officials from the Ministry of Health and I found that even some of our ICUs in Uganda that have oxygen cylinders do not have cylinder heads. For some that have cylinder heads, these cylinder heads are not compatible at all, which means that they are just –(Member timed out.) 

12.19 
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am glad the head of the taskforce is the Prime Minister, who is a medical doctor. The Prime Minister knows what is required with this disease that attacks the lungs. What we need, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, are ventilators and I do not know how many of them this Government has ordered for. 

Secondly, we need to equip the ICUs in all hospitals with modern equipment so that we can assist our people. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we also need to protect the medical personnel in our hospitals. You have heard that people have run away because they do not have protective gear. 

How has this disease circulated? It circulated because people run away from isolation centres because they do not have anything; they do not have food and necessities. Government should provide food to those people who are in isolation centres so that they can remain there; otherwise, they will move out and spread the disease.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, water is very important. We have got Lake Victoria where we get water; so our people should get water during this difficult time, free of charge, so that they can wash and get clean. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, re-call all retired medical personnel and they return to work. Pay them a risk allowance. If you pay them a risk allowance, people are going to be there.

On food, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you should have worked out how much a person earns as the lowest salary in this country and then give out – (Member timed out.) 

12.22
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I personally appreciate, on behalf of the people of Soroti, what Government is doing. However, I have a few issues that I would like to raise.

Listening to colleagues and hearing about what is happening all over the country, the tension in the country is too much. While it is understandable that everybody is scared, I think we also need to look into how to cool down the tension because some people are acting out of too much fear, to an extent that a man is not allowed to visit his wife. 

There was a nurse working in my village in Gweri sub-county. Her husband came from Ngora District to visit her and the community rose up against them, beat them up and sent them away. They said the husband is bringing them coronavirus. We need to find a way to cool down the tension in the country. Otherwise, it is going to cause other issues - psychological issues and others. 

Madam Speaker, I also think we are focussing a lot on the emergency aspect, which is okay, but three or four months from today, what is our plan as a country? There is definitely going to be an economic, political and social impact of this. How are we preparing for this? Could we think of setting up a team to plan for that time after this COVID-19 has passed? How are we going to re-protect ourselves as a country? 

My last thought is that we are – (Member timed out.) 

12.24
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Prime Minister for his submission yesterday. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you made me have sleepless nights after almost 80 per cent of my people called me to say that Government had forgotten them and they would never get food. I am happy that today you are here and I would like to submit by telling you that all Ugandans are equal. I do not want Government to take action that will see leaders segregated according to where they come from. 

When you decide to distribute food to Kampala and Wakiso, that means that we are not speaking for our people. I, therefore, advise that food be distributed equally to the whole country, and majorly, in form of money. Yesterday, you heard how a whole minister in the Executive was complaining about the mafias. If we talk about food, the mafias might end up bringing chicken mash or chachu to feed our people. I, therefore, would like to propose that our people be given money so that they can buy their own food.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, on the issue of the mafias, I would like the Minister of Health, Dr Jane Aceng, to come out openly and tell us whether she came from South Africa on the 15th of last month because this puts the presidency in danger. She has kept quiet and the complaint has been there. Today, she was addressing the country and she is very serious about this matter. Today, when the minister of state came in, I run away from her because she was near Jane Aceng.

Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, in response to your second submission, Busia Municipality has a line of trailers from Busitema to the border. As I talk now, the drivers are in communities lingering and we do not know what is happening to our women and our food is not enough. (Member timed out.)

12.26
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for the statement. Also, I would like to appreciate His Excellency the President for the directives to curb the spread of COVID-19. 


Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to comment on the enforcement of these directives by the security operatives, particularly LDUs and police. Ugandans do not deserve the brutality that is being visited upon them by the LDUs and police. In Bududa, for instance, just the day before yesterday, one of the citizens was shot in the foot by a trigger-happy police officer. They were found sheltering from a heavy downpour at a veranda and they were rounded up. So, one of them who took off was shot in the leg.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I am asking you a very critical question here. Citizens of Uganda are already tortured psychologically and emotionally by the scare of COVID-19. Are the LDUs, police and UPDF competing with COVID-19 to see who kills Ugandans first? Something must be done and drastic action must be taken.

Secondly, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you brought up in that statement the seven subcommittees of – (Member timed out.)

12.28
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also wish to thank the Prime Minister for his statement on the measures taken by Government to curb the pandemic. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the President mentioned that market vendors should live in the markets for 14 days. I wonder about this because many of the market vendors are women and they breastfeed; how will they live in the markets? Are there modalities or arrangements made for them? Will they carry their mattresses to the markets? What is going to happen, especially for those who are breastfeeding?

Secondly, I am terribly worried because of the crowds at the RDCs’ offices. People are lining up there and some are even soliciting for money in order to see the RDC. It is terrible. How are we going to curb this pandemic when people are allowed to crowd at the RDCs’ offices? I saw this in Nakawa, Entebbe and Wakiso. It is bad and something needs to be done. 

I am against sending money on mobile phones. The women do not have mobile phones and their husbands will take the money and use it for drinking. I am sure the women Members of Parliament here cannot allow that. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we want assurance that there are sanitary facilities in those markets. They should be able to take a shower everyday as they sleep in the markets. The children should have baths and they also want to sleep with their mothers there.

12.31
MR ROBERT KASULE (NRM, Nansana Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We thank Government for the effort on coronavirus. 

I have seen many people assigned to duties as we deal with coronavirus but I think that we have left out our foot soldiers called Village Health Teams (VHTs). In my constituency here in Nansana - which never sleeps but now they have been humbled - I have an issue where a family is suspected to have coronavirus. A family member came from Dubai and the whole village is on tension and nobody can access that home. The chairman cannot go there - he does not have a temperature gun – and the LCs cannot go there; the Village Health Teams would have wished to go there but they do not have any equipment. They are calling the medical numbers that were given but nobody is picking up the calls. Please, we are leaving out the basic foot soldiers that would have helped us.

Madam Speaker, wouldn’t it be the right time for us to pass the Bill on the national ambulance service so that we have a body that is in charge of ambulances? Yes, we can contribute ambulances as Members of Parliament but it is high time we have a body that is responsible, to which we can assign money and they buy ambulances that this whole country might use. Ministry of Health, stop sleeping on this Bill.

Lastly, health centres III in Buwambo have no protective gear at all and this would come in handy. I have an ambulance but even that ambulance cannot go and attend to these vulnerable people. I pray that health centres III in rural places are equipped. Rural places are far and wide, why don’t we have – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, I heard some time ago that the Government was proposing to withdraw the Health Insurance Bill. I would like to remind you that you cannot withdraw a Bill from a committee. You brought the Bill here, the committee should consider it and bring it to the House. You cannot withdraw it from wherever you are sitting.

12.33
MR JACOB OPOLOT (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I join colleagues in commending the President for his address and the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for his submission yesterday. 

I would like to refer to what hon. Gilbert Olanya raised yesterday about Uganda Christian University (UCU). Unfortunately, I am saying this when the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, is going out. However, I would like to believe that by the time the President sent home all the children in universities, he wanted to protect their lives. 

I would, therefore, wish to hear from the Prime Minister here and today that those who are compelling students to do exams and asking parents to pay when they are struggling to survive in this chaotic moment are brought to order and they should stop this forthwith. I would beg that since we do not expect to meet again tomorrow or on Monday, this pronouncement should come now because we are getting calls that UCU is proceeding with the same. 

A number of other secondary schools are also sending children online assignments and want them to download them; but from where? How safe are they where they are supposed to go to download this work from? These people are supposed to be at home. I appeal to you that you ask the Prime Minister to make a pronouncement here and today.

Secondly, I want to talk about the issue of emergency vehicles. I believe almost every subcounty has a police post. These subcounties should be effective centres for managing these vehicles. There should not be any chaos anymore because those structures are there to help people be rescued. I think the Prime Minister should give clear guidelines –(Member timed out.)

12.36
MS SUSAN AMERO (NRM, Woman Representative, Amuria): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Prime Minister for his address yesterday. 

Madam Speaker, there are other patients with other ailments who are supposed to be attended to in specialised units such as the Uganda Heart Institute in Kampala. Now that vehicles have been stopped from moving, how do we take such people to their clinics in Kampala?

The other concern is that the issue of facilitation seems to be rotating and lingering within Kampala here, in air-conditioned offices. Every time we stop at the roadblocks, the security personnel ask for water. What is happening with Government? They are not facilitating people who are at the forefront doing their work. How are we going to facilitate them? The next thing will be for them to accept bribes and then they will let people go the way they are not supposed to. We should be looking at how to facilitate these people; that is a sensitive issue.

Madam Speaker, yesterday, the Prime Minister talked about the recruitment of critical workers. I was surprised to hear the Prime Minister say that they are recruiting 10 laboratory technicians and 40 anaesthetists. I thought we needed more laboratory technicians at this critical time to do the testing other than anaesthetists who are based in the theatre. I think we need to reorganise our priorities and have this handled better.

My other concern regards the issue of distribution of food within Kampala and Wakiso. An empty bag cannot stand without support. We are Ugandans. We all eat every day. We wake up the same way. Therefore, food must be distributed all over the country –(Member timed out.)

12.38
MR ASHRAF OLEGA (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to thank the Prime Minister for coming up with some measures to protect more Ugandans from being infected. In fact, the whole country is happy that something is being done to rescue people from this dangerous COVID-19 disease.

My point is about implementing the President’s directives. The security personnel, who are deployed to implement the directives, are actually doing different things. In Yumbe, for example, boda boda riders are not allowed to carry food. All boda bodas have been impounded. Soon, people will go without food because even the vehicles have been impounded. The whole district is actually on a standstill. What is happening? Somebody should rescue the people of Yumbe.

The other point concerns security personnel. An elder was beaten thoroughly by the police. This elder was innocent and could not even fight anybody. People were just looking at the old woman being beaten and her bicycle was actually destroyed. What is happening now is unbelievable. 

Madam Speaker, I ask the Prime Minister to call the security personnel in Yumbe to order so that they can stop what they are doing right now.

The other point is about our borders. Yumbe borders South Sudan. When you look at that area from Koboko up to Elegu, there is nothing like a tangible entry point, which is manned by the Government. How are we going to survive? The refugees are moving to and fro. Let something be done to ensure our border is manned – (Member timed out.)

12.40
MR ISAAC EUTUKA (NRM, Upper Madi County, Madi-Okollo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Prime Minister for his statement presented yesterday. However, the criteria they used to select Wakiso and Kampala as places for emergency food distribution beats logic, if you look at the poverty index in this country. It is really difficult to understand how the Cabinet came up with the criteria to select Wakiso and Kampala when they know the poverty index in this country. As Members have said, we need food to be distributed to the whole country.

Secondly, Prime Minister, yesterday when you read the names of the seven committee chairpersons, you heard the grumbles in the House especially when you read the names of the chairpersons of two the committees of disaster preparedness and security. When we hear a name such as Musa Ecweru’s, we just know that the tap is closed already. This is because even as the minister in charge of disaster preparedness, he has never responded to any disaster request from the whole of West Nile. When we see him chairing a sensitive committee like this, we know that the tap is closed. 

You heard the grumbles and that is an indication that some of your ministers are not going to help us in this fight. Making such a minister a chair of a sensitive committee during this particular time is very disastrous. 

Lastly, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we have heard the concerns of Members about the distribution of seeds. I request that we bring –(Member timed out.)

12.43
MR GEORGE KUMAMA (NRM, Bbaale County, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to add my voice in thanking the Government, through the Prime Minister, for the statement that was made to Parliament yesterday. I thank the Government for the effort it has made so far.  I wonder what Uganda would look like today if those steps had not been taken. Now that those steps were taken, I think we have some time to meditate on this. 

From what we hear and see in this House, everyone is lamenting on very many concerns. I also want to urge the Government to improve on the security operations. The security guards are not doing a fine job. They find people seated in their homes, especially those in trading centres, and they start beating them because they want them to be in their houses. You cannot confine somebody in a house when he can be free to operate by either sitting inside or outside. 

Secondly, one time the House asked Government to have food storage facilities in every constituency. I would like the Government to think about food storage facilities in all our constituencies. We would not have this business of ferrying food. You are now going to buy food in Kampala and ferry it to all the villages yet there is food in the villages, which could have been stored there. It should now be a directive that these constituencies store –(Member timed out.)

12.45 
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a few issues to raise.

One, last time I talked about a stabilisation fund to support the agricultural sector, especially commercial farmers. We have already been informed that it is going down the drain. Many people are producing but their products are not being taken, like you heard about those perishables. Can the Government come in to support those farmers, especially at this time?

Two, can National Social Security Fund (NSSF) defer deductions to a later date so as to keep the companies afloat?

Three, can Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) process Value Added Tax (VAT) refunds for companies, as a matter of urgency, to guarantee a steady flow of cash within the economy?

Four, can URA also defer PAYE withholding tax to a later date so as to enable companies stay functional amidst these challenges and to ensure that our people remain employed?

Five, whereas the President talked about supermarkets and pharmacies in urban centres remaining open, in the villages it is not case. Very small shops are being closed and hence, commodities are being hoarded and sold at a high price. Salt, which used to be Shs 800 a packet, is now at Shs 2,000. Soap is also a rare commodity. As you distribute, think about those two commodities, especially for our people in the rural areas.

Finally, they talked of face masks. Some people are saying they are not necessary while others are saying, wear them. Which is which? Can you give us guidance on this?

You talked of agriculture as one of our major mainstay areas but it is not even in the addendum. You are not considering it. What about these inspectors? Who will inspect the foodstuff? (Member timed out.)

12.47
MS JUDITH ALYEK (NRM, Woman Representative, Kole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The first issue goes to the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Honourable minister, yesterday I received the Ministry of Local Government budgetary estimates for COVID-19 response. 

This budget is not clear even to the districts. For Kole, when I received this, I saw fuel for RDCs per district, Shs 7.5 billion; food isolation centres, 20 per district, Shs 4.8 billion; surveillance teams, five per district, Shs 1.3 billion; coordination of RDCs secretariat, Shs 1.6 billion; coordination by Ministry of Local Government, Shs 2.0 billion; operational funds per district – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Alyek, we are not discussing the supplementary now budget.

MS ALYEK: Madam Speaker, this budget is not clear.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, we are not discussing the budget at this stage.

MS ALYEK: Okay. Thank you very much. I just wanted clarification since it was not clear. People are concerned as to whether you are going to give districts this money or it will be broken down according to the number of districts. This is what was sent to the districts. I just wanted clarification from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

The second issue is about medicine refills for persons living with HIV/AIDS. Honourable Minister of Health, in Kole, 300 patients have already defaulted because of the distance to the facility; they cannot use boda bodas. I would like to request that measures should be considered for persons living with HIV/AIDS so that they can get their refills across the country. It is not only affecting Kole District but other districts as well. 

I would like to also ask the Ministry of Health where the Information, Education and Communication (IEC) materials have gone –(Member timed out.) 

12.49
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. From the report of the Prime Minister – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have a very long list. I will be picking members one at a time.

MR GODFREY ONZIMA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Prime Minister for the statement but I have noticed some gaps.

One is the issue of the quarantine. Madam Speaker, a lot of information has been given that people who are supposed to be quarantined have escaped from these centres and instead gone for self-isolation. This is a threat. At this moment, I do not expect that people should be allowed to go for self-quarantine. I think quarantine should be enforced.

Secondly, I wonder why people are being quarantined in hotels. Government should have taken people to areas where they can be controlled and monitored. In fact, people should have been taken to Kyankwanzi where there is security –(Interjections)– where there are beds, where nobody will escape. Otherwise, leaving them in hotels is as if they are clients of these hotels.

The third issue is on suburbs. When you look at the city centre, it has been cleared and there are few people but in the trading centres within the suburbs, life is as usual. I think we need to do something regarding this particular situation. Most countries where there are a lot of problems started like us. The numbers were two, three, four, five, twenty but now they have gone into millions. I think we need to take this matter seriously.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of food distribution, if Wakiso and Kampala are being picked as a result of the urban poor, all urban areas in this country have poor people. Giving Government services should be based on humanity and not political connotations. People are making a lot of noise – (Member timed out.)

12.52
MS VIOLET AKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Prime Minister for his address yesterday. I have three issues of concern.

My first issue is on maternal mortality. Although you said that some of the services are going to continue in our hospitals amidst COVID-19, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there is the issue of maternal mortality. As you are aware, Uganda has been doing badly. We have been losing 60 mothers per day. Actually, it has taken us a while to come from 400 mothers dying per 1,000 live births to 336 mothers dying per 1000 live births.

Madam Speaker, for us to think that a pregnant woman should seek for permission from the RDC to be able to access a health centre is telling a very big lie. For mothers who are here, once the water has broken, you know what I mean; it will never wait for that permission from the RDC for you to reach a health facility.

I would like to make an appeal to you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, that pregnant mothers going for antenatal care and delivery in the health facilities should be exempted from this directive. They should be able to get boda bodas or vehicles to reach a health facility. Otherwise, for us to think that they should access a health facility through the permission of the RDC shall be worsening the maternal mortality rate of the country.

My second point is about support to the districts. In Katakwi District, we do not even have these temperature guns at the district hospital. They are still using the normal way of measuring -(Member timed out.)

12.54
MR ROBERT CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I have read in the newspapers that we are running out of essential drugs that are used for treating other ailments. If we are not careful, we are not going to have Panadol, chloroquine and others. If it were possible, you would intervene to support our pharmaceutical industries so that they continue producing those essential drugs lest we go into a crisis that is bigger than COVID-19.

Whereas some colleagues are proposing that we give cash, I propose that we decentralise the procurement process of the food items and we send that money to the district taskforce teams so that they procure food. They will not only provide income to the local market but we would have reduced the cost of the supply chain of those food supplies. 

Thirdly, for easy accountability, I propose that the Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs) take lead instead of the office of the RDCs, so that we, the political leaders and RDCs, can carry out an oversight mandate during this process. This is because the technical teams are better placed to implement the resolutions that were made by the national taskforce team.

For the small and micro enterprises, I would like to request the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that when these women and men go to borrow money from the banks -(Member timed out.)

12.56
MR GERSHOM WAMBEDE (FDC, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Prime Minister, I have two suggestions. Whereas I commend Government efforts in combating the virus, I see that there is an increase in anxiety, which has not only gripped villages but Parliament as well. It is being caused by the fact that the streets are filled with stick-and-gun wielding uniformed LDUs. People fear soldiers because they think that they are there to shoot. We should look for ways of reducing that. 

The other cause for anxiety is transportation. Whereas coronavirus is dangerous and spreads like a bushfire, we have other dangerous illnesses like malaria, which is detected by testing. People might have a headache but they will fear to go to hospitals because there is no transport. Malaria also weakens the body.  

I propose, therefore, that you reconsider the issue of transportation and probably emphasise on handwashing, wearing of masks and ensuring places are not crowded. Please ease on transportation and procure more protective gear including the temperature guns so that places -(Member timed out.)

12.58
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I would like to appreciate the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Thank you for the good job done so far. 

In whatever we do, of course, there are always challenges and we must appreciate that. The people of Kumi Municipality have asked me to ask you when you are sending the food. They are waiting for it desperately. They believe in you and know that you are a very active Prime Minister and that you will deliver. So, they are waiting to see what you will do.

There is this issue of motorcycles for the Gombolola Internal Security Officers (GISOs). We have information that at the Internal Security Organisation (ISO) headquarters, there are over 1,000 motorcycles meant to be for the GISOs. These motorcycles would ease the work of Government but up to now, they have not been distributed. If it is true, what are you going to do about this?

Some people are getting distress calls from abroad because of the lockdown. There are people who are out of the country but cannot survive normally because the “pocket” at home cannot help them. They cannot send money to support such people. What is Government going to do? I got a call this morning from somebody saying that a girl called Aguti Mary Goretti is doing badly in Italy. How do we help in such situations? She is trying to see who can save her. Is Government concerned about our own?

The other issue is about confinement centres. In Kumi, we have one at Atutur Seed School. There are over five people there but they do not have food; when are you sending food? When is the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development sending the money? We would love to see it go today because I know –(Member timed out.)

1.01
MR HAROLD MUHINDO (FDC, Bukonzo County East, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to know from the Prime Minister - having indicated the centres of isolation in different regions, do we have plans to provide extra centres, because you and I are not aware of what is going to happen?

We have had cases of Ebola in Kasese and Bwera Hospital has been managing isolation of the Ebola cases. This could be a centre that could help; instead of looking at only one centre in Mbarara for the western region, probably other centres in other areas could be identified in that way.

Secondly, the President indicated that the cost of testing one case or one person is $65. However, other sources indicate that the cost is $4.5. The public would like to know the exact cost of testing so that we know that there is no foul play in all this. 

Thirdly, the Members of Parliament have given out ambulances; I have one too and I have given it out. I have been managing the cost of maintaining the driver, servicing it and all the repairs. Money is going to be sent to districts, does it include repairs and servicing of these ambulances? I ask this so that we do not have double costing, because Members could be ready to handle this and you have probably released –(Member timed out.)

1.04
MR PETER MUGEMA (NRM, Iganga Municipality, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, as we speak now, Iganga is full of discharged patients. Remember, the President gave directives for motor vehicles to take patients to hospitals but the discharged people are not being taken because the RDCs are not giving them permission to be taken home. How are we catering for those people? As those discharged people try to walk back home, they often end up being caught by the curfew and they are clobbered and brought back to the hospital. How is the Prime Minister going to handle that?

Yesterday, a neighbour of mine in Kitende, where I reside, came to me for only a quarter of a kilo of sugar. I wanted to give him but my daughter reminded me that the moment I do so, I will be an “idiot”. I saw the Vice-President on TV giving out some rice to his people and so did hon. Nsereko. Are you still sitting in Cabinet with an idiot or not? The President said that whenever you give out anything without going through the guidelines, you become an idiot. So, I am fearing to give out food to a neighbour because I will look like an idiot. (Laughter) Are we not going against the advice of the Bible? Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

1.05
MR ANDREW KALUYA (Independent, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to start from where hon. Mugema left off. When the President was addressing the country the other day, he really talked very harshly about the Members of Parliament who were giving out food. I would like to remind the President and the Rt Hon. Prime Minister that what we are doing now or what those Members of Parliament were doing is exactly what we have been doing through and through. 

For the four years that I have spent here, Members of Parliament have come in to supplement and actually help Government in some of these services. We are the doctors, the funeral service providers, the food providers. When we come out at such a time when the population actually needs us, the President then comes out harshly.

I would like to suggest to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister that he simply works with us. What you are promising the people of Uganda - giving them food - is not going to happen if you do not work with us. We are 452 Members of Parliament. If we unleashed this team to go and distribute this food, the effect would be greater than you saying that you are starting with Wakiso. Therefore, let us work with the Members of Parliament. Give us the guidelines. Give us what you have and we supplement on that; we shall feed our people using our resources.

Secondly, Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to draw your attention to these people who are suffering now. Most of these people have been working for Government. The people who are crying now have been working in different institutions and have been contributing to NSSF and NSSF keeps these people’s money and –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, the House is in session.

1.07
MR PATRICK OKABE (NRM, Serere County, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to thank you for your statement yesterday. 

First of all, I would like to bring to the Prime Minister’s attention that yesterday, we lost an elderly woman in Serere County. This old woman had pre-existing conditions and there are many of them like that, some with high blood pressure and others with diabetes and other conditions.

I would like to ask something important. We approved money for the Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment (SAGE). Isn’t this the right time to roll out this programme for the elderly? The medical people say the most vulnerable people in this COVID-19 are the elderly people because they have pre-existing conditions.

Secondly, Government asked us to surrender our ambulances to support this battle. Some of us have done it. It has already been said that we are even paying our drivers. Yesterday, I actually had to contribute fuel for my ambulance. However, the point I would like to raise is that we go through a lot of trouble to clear these ambulances and sometimes, we are not even exempted from taxes. I wrote a letter to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to exempt me from paying taxes for the ambulance but instead, I got a negative response. I paid a very large amount of money for the environmental tax for that ambulance. I think the Government now realises that these ambulances are not for our own luxury but they are for the health of our people. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, last month I launched six ambulances in Arua, purchased by hon. Mourine Osoru. However, the amount of tax she had to pay was colossal. It was over Shs 400 million in taxes for the six ambulances to work in Arua.

1.10
MR GORDON BAFAKI (NRM, Kazo County, Kazo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Prime Minister and Government for considering to give people of Kampala and Wakiso some food within this lockdown period. The lockdown did not give some people a chance to travel to their respective districts. Actually, if people were given a chance to travel to their respective districts, we would not be considering distributing food to Kampala and Wakiso.

You must also believe me that we have so many of our people who have come to Kampala from our districts and areas which we represent, but they do not have anything to eat. I would like to thank Government and the Prime Minister. I wish that you could proceed but you have to create a comprehensive distribution mechanism so that everybody gets.

Prime Minister, I think you should also consider giving each person a bar of soap. See what we are doing here. Everybody who comes here has to sanitise their hands. You also know that soap goes with salt; so if you are thinking of giving salt without giving soap, amend that budget to consider giving each family or person a bar of soap. 

Lastly, we have a lot of milk in my constituency and other neighbouring constituencies. Why don’t you –(Member timed out.)

1.12
MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I have a few concerns. 

Yesterday, you talked about giving food per head, which means per person. The whole country got excited because they were watching us on TV, like they are now. However, when you now talk about food which will be given within Kampala, I think we should find a way of making adjustments. Everybody is in need, including us, Members of Parliament, who are here. Should anything be given for free which we need - of course, we are lucky but we all need something, even while we are seated here.

Secondly, in Otuke, the technical team is still not yet ready. They do not even have protective gear. I just spoke to the District Health Officer (DHO) and they are more concerned about that. I think it is one thing which we should look into.

In Otuke District, we have three ambulances; one is for the Government, one for a private institution, and of course one which I purchased seven years ago. When I won a medal, I was given an ambulance but I had to pay Shs 27 million in taxes. I think the finance ministry needs to sometimes be favourable when you hear certain requests. 

The next point I would like to make about what a colleague talked about - women who are giving birth. Two days ago in Otuke, we had two mothers who died in a village because there was no transport. Although we are focusing on COVID-19, we need to also focus on other concerns or diseases because people are dying more than –(Member timed out.) 

1.14
MS MOLLY LANYERO (NRM, Woman Representative, Lamwo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the President of Uganda for taking the lead in the fight against COVID-19. 

Last week, when I was in Lamwo trying to monitor the enforcement of the presidential directives, we experienced a terrible storm. As I speak, more than 50 families do not have where to stay. Their food stores were destroyed by the storm.

I call upon the Prime Minister to supply the people of Lamwo with food urgently and also give them iron sheets so that they can build some makeshift structures to live in. In the wake of COVID-19, people are confined in their homes but these people do not have homes. There is also some kind of stigma. As a result, people have become anti-social. No one wants to take in these homeless people.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of the long-term plans, I think it is very important to increase the seed distribution to our people. The people of Lamwo are in their gardens because the rains are much. If we could get them more seeds, that would be good because in the future, they would supply the town people with food.

Madam Speaker, Lamwo has the longest border expanse with more than 260 porous entrances to and from South Sudan. This poses a risk to our nation. I would like to commend the security organs in Lamwo - the District Police Commander (DPC), the RDC and the army. They are trying their best but they are being let down because they –(Member timed out.)

1.16
MR PETER OKOT (DP, Tochi County, Omoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, the implementation of the presidential directives took effect at the same time in the country. I am wondering why, when it comes to the food distribution, which is also part of the presidential directives, it is now being done selectively. That needs to be clarified; otherwise, other presidential directives will also be defied.

Secondly, you need to make some clarifications. The information that goes to the public should not create unnecessary anxiety. The President said that food will be distributed to the vulnerable people. Is it going to stand like that or food is going to be distributed to the entire country? This needs to be clarified; otherwise, the information which is going to the public is very misleading. 

The other thing, Mr Prime Minister, is that at this time, every effort by every Ugandan, which is geared towards combatting COVID-19, must be commended. I am saying this in respect to what appeared in the media and probably in respect to the situation were the President got misinformed about an alert system, which is used in the Acholi community to inform people on the dangers in place. In this case, it is the COVID-19 danger that has befallen all of us. In Acholi, we use a system of ryemo gemo, which is not jok as somebody misinformed the President. 

We need to make this very clear so that the whole country understands that this is an alert system, which is used by the Acholi –(Member timed out.)

1.18
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Prime Minister for the statement presented yesterday. 

My prayer is that the food distribution also be scaled up to the people in the rural areas because right now, we are only focusing on the vulnerable communities in the urban areas. We need to plan for the rural areas as well; they are also vulnerable.

Prime Minister, nearly 90 per cent of the Ugandan population derives their income from small-scale and commercial agriculture. Uganda is a net exporter of food products to our neighbouring countries. My worry is that in the face of COVID-19, some countries might buy and stock food by offering our farmers better prices, say the Kenyan community. They will end up buying most of our food and our people might become food insecure. 

Therefore, I would like Government to regulate the export of food items to the neighbouring countries so that we have enough on the local market for the citizens to feed on. Maybe as Government, we can also set up a fund to buy food from the farmers, store and supply it to the food stressed areas in the country later on or immediately.

On the prices of commodities, we need to penalise persons who are hiking prices abnormally. Maybe we can have an economic monitoring team to go around and find out the prices of essential commodities. Most of us are from rural areas but you find prices of essential goods like soap, - (Member timed out.)

1.21
MS CONNIE NAKAYENZE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Prime Minister for the communication. However, I have a few concerns. 

One, there is need for the instalment of water facilities in areas that do not have water. In Nakaloke Subcounty, for example, in my constituency, water has been found in a particular place but there is a contention between the reproductive health centre where the water was discovered and other distribution centres. So, let there be an agreement between national water and reproductive health so that water can be distributed to the people. Incidentally, this falls back to us. The people call us demanding for water. Even then, we cannot handle. You can supply to a few but you cannot supply to everybody.

Madam Speaker, there is also need for those subcounties, which do not have health centres, to at least get help. I do not know whether it is going to be through the construction of others, because moving from one subcounty to another yet there is no transport is such a big challenge. Already, people are not allowed to move freely.

Madam Speaker, as the Government supplies food to different places - beginning with Kampala and Wakiso - I would not object but why can’t it be done at once, regionally, so that every region is handled concurrently by different taskforces? This will ensure that all regions get food at the same time to avoid lapses.

Lastly, I request that inputs be given to farmers – (Member timed out.)

1.23
MR KEEFA KIWANUKA (NRM, Kiboga East County, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I proudly speak on behalf of the people of Kiboga who are law abiding and the makers of NRM. 

Madam Speaker, in Kiboga, we wholeheartedly support the measures that have been put in place to fight COVID-19. As leaders, we are engaged in mobilising people for behavioural change to ensure that that can be achieved. 

I welcome your speech. However, I have two concerns. One, you did not tell us about testing, which is at the heart of the matter in this whole crisis. With testing, you can have contact tracing and do self-isolation. What you did not tell us is what our capacity is at the moment, as a county, regarding testing for coronavirus? I am somehow worried that the limited numbers that we are seeing could be because we do not have the capacity to test enough people in a day.

The second issue, Madam Speaker, is balancing the two tensions that are growing. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, your emphasis is on prevention of coronavirus and you seem to be neglecting the other tension that is growing and that is people’s concern about how they will be surviving.

I was disappointed when you mentioned the six kilogrammes of maize flour. For how long do you think we will be having this tension? Should - (Member timed out.)

1.26
MS IDAH NABAYIGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the Prime Minister for the report he presented yesterday. 

I would like to thank the enforcement officers who were put in place by the Government for the work well done. However, you find that some of them have misinterpreted the directive of the President. The curfew is supposed to start at 7.00 p.m. to 6.30 a.m. However, you know the setting of our islands; people live like they are in camps. Our latrines are outside the shelters and if an LDU person or police officer finds someone going to the latrine, they will be asked, “Where are you going?” If they find a student on the veranda reading a book, they will tell the student to go inside the house. 

Therefore, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we need clarification on that issue. Our people are being beaten for nothing. Our settlements are different from those of Kampala; our buildings are open. 

Madam Speaker, our major economic activity on the islands is fishing. We all depend on fishing and as we fish, we sell to the Chinese and Indians. Now, our major economic activity is closed because the Chinese and Indian factories are already closed. We do not have anywhere to sell the fish. Therefore, the owners of the boats have decided to put the boats up and we are starving.

I beg the Prime Minister to consider the islands in the distributing of food because our people - (Member timed out.)
 
1.28
MR GIDEON ONYANGO (Independent, Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My first concern is about our travel to Parliament. This afternoon, as I was coming here, I was stopped somewhere and cautioned against using my ID as a permit to get to this place.

Secondly, I am from a border district. The situation at the border is worse than it is in Kampala and Wakiso where the Prime Minister yesterday told us that the food distribution will be launched. When you go particularly to Busia and Tororo areas, people survive from hand to mouth; what they work for is what they eat. People are badly off and the situation is worse there.

Making matters worse, our trading centres are not like those in Kampala, Wakiso or Mukono. People reside at their places of business. Now the situation dictates that by 7.00 p.m. you are supposed to be indoors. The LDUs and other security operatives are very tough on the ordinary wananchi. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I request that you address this matter as fast as possible. Our people are being beaten when they are actually at home and not roaming out –(Member timed out.)

1.30
MS JULIET KYINYAMATAMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, due to the lockdown, AIDS patients can no longer receive their ARVs. I would like to request that the health workers at health centres deliver these ARVs to our patients.

As you also know, there is a problem of lack of access to clean water in the majority of settings in Uganda, particularly in Rakai District. Therefore, when you start telling people to wash their hands with clean water and soap when they have no access to clean water, it is as if the campaign is not being implemented.

It is high time that there is equitable distribution of services in this country. When you look at the food supply that you are considering only for Kampala and Wakiso, it takes us back to the history of this country - lack of equal distribution of services like clean water. You only find it in Kampala and Wakiso and you cannot access it in Rakai. Therefore, when such pandemics come, it is us to suffer.

There is lack of facilitation of our health workers. Look at the Shs 13 billion that is earmarked for the billboards, and our health workers and local leaders are left out yet they are the first point of contact by those that have coronavirus. That should also be revised.

There is a problem of transportation of people who are discharged. A lot of people who were in hospitals are calling us in Kampala and Masaka after they are discharged. They cannot move to their homes and yet they are discharged from hospitals. They are just on the streets and that puts them at risk.

There is a problem of facilitating the cars that were put at the districts and the ambulances that we, Members of Parliament, gave. Our drivers are not paid, there is no fuel and we are catering for - (Member timed out.)

1.32
MS RUKIYA CHEKAMONDO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have only two issues to raise. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the issue of expectant mothers is very serious. If a mother woke up and the baby’s head is engaged, ready to come out into this earth, going to look for the RDC or calling an ambulance will be too late. That means that the mother and the baby will go, especially our young girls who are delivering for the first time. It becomes very difficult when the baby is out and she does not know what to do. Therefore, mothers should be exempted, especially regarding their movement. Let them be allowed to move. If a boda boda or any other private car is taking an expectant mother, it should be given an opportunity.

My second issue of concern is water. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Sebei sub region is a mountainous area. Our water is got by gravity - no electricity is used - and the water is not purified. Therefore, when we want to use this water, we find that it is very expensive. The taps are not well placed. Even if the water is not there and you just turn on the tap, it still counts the units. Can we have at least a flat rate for the payment of water for the people of Sebei? This is because we are not using electricity but we are using gravity.

Madam Speaker, Sebei is also a border area. People move from the other side of Kenya into Sebei. Last time, the honourable Member of Parliament had –(Member timed out.)

1.35
MS CAROLINE KAMUSIIME (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukiga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me take the opportunity to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for the report yesterday. 

My concern is the distribution of food. Yes, we thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, and there is always a beginning for everything. However, my suggestion is that if the food is going to be distributed all over the country, we need to give our farmers an opportunity because all shops are closed. Instead of buying food from this side, we can do it in regions. Let them have the opportunity to sell food in their regions. In the first place, this will decrease on the cost of transport. It will be much cheaper than taking trucks from Kampala to Rukiga or Kabale. First give them an opportunity. 

Maybe this can be done through the leaders in our districts, so that we are able to buy the food. We have food, Madam Speaker, and you know it. Give the farmers an opportunity because the food is getting rotten in their shops. Let us strive to see how our people can gain out of this. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I have talked about this issue of water and it is serious. We lack water even in health centres. How are our people going to wash hands without water? 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we have a problem with our health centres. I can tell you that in Rukiga, we only have two thermometers. There is one for taking temperature using the arm. They are only two in the whole district. Everyone coming up here is talking about health centres being equipped. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this is –(Member timed out.) 

1.37
MR GENENSIO TURYAMURYAME (NRM, Kashongi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a question for the Prime Minister. Our health facilities in this country are not enough and more so, they are not well equipped in terms of medicines and equipment, in particular those in Kashongi County. How will the patients get access? 

Most of these facilities have been identified for the management of COVID-19. I request that the Government considers buying milk, because our places have plenty of milk, which they can supply free of charge to the patients or those who are locked out. 

I request that Government considers employing more health workers. Yesterday, you told us that the Government is going to recruit 250 health workers. I believe those numbers are not enough to be able to sustain many people in the health facilities. I request that Government considers recruiting many more health workers to be able to distribute them to other health centres, particularly in Kashongi County where we have few health workers in our health centres III. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

1.39
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. 

All of us are aware that we do not know when COVID-19 is going to end. Since we do not know, one of the most important items in the market right now is food. Even after the end of the COVID-19 pandemic, people will still demand for a lot of food both within and outside the country. 

I would like to know the strategy that you have put in place to ensure that amidst the spread of COVID-19, we continue to produce food. Since we have enough rain now, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we should be able to supply food to ourselves and mitigate hunger and also supply to other people to get money in. 

Secondly, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I listened to the President very well when he said the food items will only be distributed to those who live from hand to mouth or live per day - if they do not work, they cannot eat. I would like to challenge the decision of distributing food in Kampala and Wakiso. I also believe that there are people who live per day in other parts of the country, like the boda bodas, those who wash cars and those ones who work in the saloon. Why are we not considering them? I think you should look into that. In Tororo, a lady was already complaining that she is frustrated. She has many children but she has no food. I think we need to look into this and put aside money so that all those groups around the country are considered. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we have allowed supermarkets to operate in towns but I have parishes where there are only shops in the trading centres and no supermarkets. Are we considering the option of at least allowing one or two shops in those places in the villages to operate so that people can get essential commodities? 

Finally, Madam Speaker, when I was coming here, the police asked me to park and after that, I produced my ID –(Member timed out.) 

1.42
MR PAUL AMORU (NRM, Dokolo North County, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the Prime Minister and indeed Government so far for the leadership offered in this fight. However, I have three issues to comment on. 

On the formation of the national taskforce, I think the concern at this point should be having a bench of experts – medical practitioners, scientists and economists – to project short-term and long-term interventions. We expect that Government is continuing to maintain a sound fiscal policy that will help us to remain stable even post COVID-19. These interventions should clearly be articulated at this point so that we know where we are going. 

On the issue of food distribution, I have two ideas here. We need to decentralise, especially the purchase of these foods, so that the economic impact can trickle down but we can also cut down on the logistics of having a centralised purchase and then you have to distribute and deploy manpower. If you did these at the decentralised level, you are going to save on money that goes into logistics and much of this will go to our people. 

I think Government could study the proposal to use mobile money to reach our people. This is also able to reduce on the risks of corruption – (Member timed out.) 

1.43
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (Independent, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would also like to join colleagues in thanking Government for the initiatives that they have put in place. 

I would like to start on the issue of the porous borders as my colleague, the honourable member from Kapchorwa, has mentioned. In Sebei sub region, we have a lot of porous points that are not being checked. I would like to give an example of Kween. Right now, there are some people who we are looking for. We got reports that there are two people - a lady and a gentleman - who came from Kenya and they entered Kween from the lower side, bordering Amudat. Residents are trying to look for these people but they have not got them. 

Yesterday, there was a car that entered, again through the lower side of the district, and this car was intercepted. It had three people. In the morning, the health team went to that lower side to try to test these people. Now, they have called and told me that they want to quarantine them. I would like to find out what support Government gives. They are telling me that there is a room but there is nothing completely.

Secondly, much as you are telling us that you are going to prepare the hospitals and health centres IV, Kween District does not –(Member timed out.)   

1.46
MS JANET OKORI-MOE (NRM, Woman Representative, Abim): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. 

Like others, I am of the persons who is very disappointed with the way the food is going to be distributed, starting from Kampala. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are aware that recently, Uganda was struggling with the problem of locusts and there are areas in this country, which were affected by these locusts. I thought that those would be the areas you would have started with. 

Secondly, I also want to find out from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister the level of preparedness of the Ministry of Information, Communications Technology (ICT) and National Guidance, well knowing that some parts of this country do not access any telephone network. Therefore, even the directives of His Excellency the President do not reach these areas. How prepared is the ministry of ICT?

Thirdly, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, as Members of Parliament, we are not among those the directives are targeting. We want to know whether it is safe for us to continue interfacing with our constituents, especially on weekends, and pass on the messages about COVID-19. We want to know whether we are safe from these LDUs who are beating everybody including people who are in leadership positions.

Finally, honourable colleagues, if you are able to get seeds from anywhere - you know what I mean - please, pick the seeds and plant. Thank you very much.

1.48
MR PIUS WAKABI (NRM, Bugahya County, Hoima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to appreciate the efforts being instituted by Government in the fight against this pandemic. I also appeal to Government and fellow countrymen to unite and fight against other killer diseases, like we have united in the fight against coronavirus.

Let us be realistic as Members of Parliament. We know the capacity of the Government; the Government has no capacity to distribute food to the whole country at the same time. I know the problem started from Kampala and Wakiso. I would like to appeal to the Government that we start with those districts already hit by coronavirus. People of Hoima cannot even move outside their houses because of the two confirmed coronavirus victims. 

The major source of income for the people of West Nile and the people of Bunyoro is selling tobacco. The Government has promised for long to pay these people. I think that this is the right time to pay them. We should pass a supplementary budget of about Shs 15 billion and we clear these people because that is their only source of income. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, some authorities in Government –(Member timed out.)   

1.50
MR SAM CHEPTORIS (NRM, Kapchorwa Municipality, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for this opportunity. I join my colleagues to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for yesterday’s presentation. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the Prime Minister that Elgon sub region, which is among those areas that has porous borders, has a lot of challenges. In that region, we grow only highland seed, which is not produced locally here. We do not produce highland seed in the whole of this country. Now, we have a challenge of getting seed, which we normally get from Kenya. We cannot access seed because we have to adhere to the restrictions that the country has put in place. Therefore, that makes us vulnerable. 

Secondly, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the level of vulnerability should be clear. When we say priority goes to vulnerability, what is the level of vulnerability that country is going to use as a method of effectively distributing the emergency food that we are talking about?

Yesterday, we asked the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to tell us why funds had not been released for immediate facilitation in the rural areas of the country. They talked about a delay in forwarding the requisitions or the work plans. When we followed up with our districts –(Member timed out.)

1.53
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the border community and the fishing community, we appreciate the Government’s efforts and the efforts of all the front liners. However, we request for a special programme for the border and fishing communities, who can no longer go to the lake at night, yet that is when they have the best catch on the lake.

I would like to appeal to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, whom I talked to 10 days ago, to make three major interventions. 

The first was that Uganda is a republic and so we cannot have this as a Kampala and Entebbe affair. Can we regionalise all efforts, starting from the regional referral hospitals, regional interventions and regional procurements? 

As earlier mentioned, regions have already unconstitutionally missed out on efforts on the youth fund and other efforts. Can we regionalise all these efforts? I request that we get a report next week on the preparedness and equipment at every region.

The second prayer to the Prime Minister is that we can no longer continue operating as if this is just a public health disaster. It has now reached the level of a state of emergency. It is my prayer that on Tuesday, the Prime Minister comes back here with a proposal on a state of emergency. 

Honourable colleagues, you may not know that we are operating at the mercy of the Speaker’s assertiveness. Very soon, the army and Cabinet will run alone without you. Therefore, we need a state of emergency proposal to be brought here with a Bill for approval of Parliament –(Member timed out.)

1.55
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a few issues in regard to the Prime Minister’s statement. I would like to start with the issue of the President’s directive to have all donations handed over to the national taskforce. Somebody raised it here that he saw on social media, the Vice President distributing rice to his constituents. The Vice President is holding the portfolio, which is national in nature. 

I would like to assume that ministers have also been receiving donations. These donations are not handed over to these individuals as individuals but by virtue of the positions they hold. Therefore, whatever the Vice President receives – and he is distributing to his constituents – needs to be declared.

The second issue concerns students from foreign countries. For those of you who watched NBS TV last evening, there was a story of a student who was expressing her concerns from Italy. When I got in touch with her, she told me that they are 31 and the Government of Italy is giving support to its citizens, disregarding the citizens of other countries. 

Therefore, Rt Prime Minister, you need to put in place a mechanism to respond to these issues. We have students in India. We helped those in China. It is time to help those in India and Italy.

Thirdly, Madam Speaker, the criteria for discharging those who have been in quarantine needs to be well stipulated. We have those who have finished the mandatory quarantine and have not been attended to. It is high time you responded to this. They are bearing a cost –(Member timed out.)

1.57
MS SARAH NAKAWUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Prime Minister for the statement.  I have three concerns. The first is about food distribution. Right now, our villages are overwhelmed by people from Kampala because of the extraordinary situation. This means people in the villages are more vulnerable and should not be left out. My prayer is that food is distributed in the whole country.

My other concern is about health workers. It was raised since the first case was confirmed and we have been talking about it but nothing much has been done. If I may ask: what is the status of protective equipment for our medical workers? What is available versus what is needed?

The third and last issue is that quarantine is a continuous process at all entry points. There is need to observe good hygiene and health conditions in such premises. Thank you.

2.00
MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. A month ago, we identified COVID-19 as a multi-sectoral issue. I would have expected the Prime Minister to have presented a report on what each of the ministries has done. However, in his report yesterday, that was largely missing. For example, we would have wanted to know how the Ministry of Security is helping trace people who have escaped from quarantine and those who are in communities associated with others.

Secondly, interventions in a crisis like this must be based on data. Rt hon. Prime Minister, you have not shown us how you are making your decisions, especially on food distribution. How did you arrive at the decision of food starting with those people in Kampala, leaving out the majority of the people elsewhere? Next time, for us to intervene in such a crisis, we need data.

Thirdly, the global supply chains are getting constrained. We are seeing many countries placing orders for protective gear. You have not shown us how you are going to work out all this in light of our restrictive public procurement laws. Are you going to defer or suspend them? How do you intend to move?

The next issue is about the invoices that are due. The Government is supposed to pay people. The Government owes the people of Uganda over Shs 3 trillion. We would have wanted to understand whether you are going to pay them. Yesterday, there was a directive from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that only salaries must be paid –(Member timed out.)

2.02
MR FRED TURYAMUHWEZA (FDC, Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, I would like to bring to your attention a category of people that you have probably forgotten. In Rujumbura, for example, I support many people who can only access drugs from Kampala. Those drugs are not available in the local pharmacies and now, they have run out of drugs. In the absence of an efficient postal system, how will such drugs be distributed to these people in the entire district?

Secondly, the Government – in offering services – has identified some areas as hard-to-reach but now, they are also hard-to-leave areas. People cannot leave those areas. Therefore, what contingency plans does Government have to reach these people or how can they make their cries to the Government?
Thirdly, I am also here to support the decentralisation of procurement of food items. Why doesn’t Government use the district community development officers to register people in local areas, who can supply food? Give them vouchers so that Government can eventually pay them when everybody has been given food in their local communities. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.03
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, in the East African Region alone, 229 cases have so far been confirmed as of today.

Rt hon. Prime Minister, the Minister of Health has been working throughout but other ministers, especially the Minister for East African Regional Affairs, have been quiet. We want to know why. Do you have a plan in place, as Government –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Let us go to the next Member. Hon. Asiku. I am sorry but when you go for preambles, this is what happens. All Members have two minutes.

2.05
MR ELIAS ASIKU (NRM, Koboko County North, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two issues to raise. Rt hon. Prime Minister, I have been closely following what is happening in the entire world. In fact, right now, the whole world is in a state of war against COVID-19.

My greatest challenge has been and is still whether we have in place efficient planning systems to ensure that we are able to respond to this challenge effectively. I am sure many of the issues that are being raised point to one factor; that some of the decisions that we have so far taken may not have come from a comprehensive and holistic picture. 

Therefore, I would like to say that it is very important that we put our planning machinery in a state that will give us the right directions to take.

Secondly, I do not condone brutality but let us face facts. You can observe, as you drive home, that our people are not taking heed to the social distancing. To me, this is a very important challenge. It requires all of us to put our –(Member timed out.)

2.07 
MR MAURICE KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Members who contributed yesterday do not come back. No, I think hon. Kibalya rose on a point of procedure.

MR KIBALYA: Thank you. Madam Speaker, my mzee has just been taken to the hospital but they refused to receive him because there was no letter from the RDC. We have been processing a letter from the RDC to make sure he is treated. That is the situation now, it is not a rumour. He was taken to the hospital but they said they cannot treat him unless he has a letter from the RDC.

THE SPEAKER: Why?

MR KIBALYA: I have received that message. I, therefore, need the Prime Minister to take note of that.

Secondly, this morning –(Interjections) 

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members.

MR KIBALYA: This morning, NBS TV had a programme with Victoria Bagaya and Kagwanjala. They were showing us what is happening in Kalerwe. Madam Speaker, I wish Government and the Prime Minister could take interest in what is happening. Otherwise, what we are after may, at the end of the day, fail us.

Madam Speaker, there was nothing like social distancing and no one was washing hands. There was nothing that could reflect what we are going through. Government should take interest in what NBS was showing us.

Thirdly, every Member of Parliament has cried foul about security and check points concerning the stickers. Rt hon. Prime Minister, we do not have to continue begging for stickers. Can we know from here whether the stickers are there or not?

Those security officers at the check points have no gadgets. Can Government think about them?

2.09
MS LOY KATALI (NRM, Woman Representative, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity.

I will focus on the LDUs. I know everyone has been talking about them. Rt hon. Prime Minister, we have a case in Jinja where an LDU went at 7.30 p.m. - a lady was cooking - he beat up the lady and took everything. He went inside the house and beat up the old woman. The old woman is right now hospitalised. It is my prayer that Government meets her medical costs. I also pray that these LDUS should be tamed. Otherwise, citizens are going to tame them.

The other case concerns a lady from Walukuba, Masese who had a C-Section. She was on a boda boda and they were taking her back home with her baby. However, it seems when they saw the police vehicle, they increased speed. What happened was that the lady and the baby fell and police left them there. It was one of the vehicles for the media houses that took the lady to the hospital. I beg to submit. Thank you.

2.10
MR DAVID MUTEBI (NRM, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker and the Prime Minister for the effort you are making to deal with this challenge.

I would like to get some clarification from the Rt hon. Prime Minister with regard to the ICU facilities that you have engaged, especially from the private health care providers. I know Government does not have enough but some of these facilities have started closing. I do not know if you are making any efforts to engage them.

Secondly, on protective gear, I would like to know if you have made any effort to facilitate those who have domestic capacity to provide protective gears that the Uganda Industrial Research Institute -

Madam Speaker, as we map out the risky areas, we need to scale up surveillance operations on the Lake Victoria shoreline, which is prone to people that are coming in from Kenya and Tanzania.

Finally, we need to keep track of how we are going to do best with current problem areas like HIV/AIDS, among others. Rt hon. Prime Minister, we need to work on a system that will ensure and maximise the provision of services to the current aliments that we have. They are on a high scale and we are getting problems reported from everywhere. (Member timed out.)

2.12
MS RUTH KATUSHABE (NRM, Bukomansimbi County North, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, I would like to thank you for the statement and I thank Government for the timely response to save the lives of Ugandans.

Rt hon. Prime Minister, on 31st March, the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Water and Environment wrote to all Chief Administrative Officers (CAOS) directing them to use the district water grant to repair the non functional boreholes.

I took it on and contacted my CAO and it seems that is the same situation in all districts. The money was already used and even the balance that was not yet used is already committed.

What is Government going to do to work on the same issue that they had directed the CAOs? I would also want to know if the LCIs of Kampala and Wakiso where you are going to start distributing food have already identified the vulnerable people and have written the list of people to benefit.

I would request that on that list, we include the teachers of private schools who are not paid monthly salaries and the religious institutions especially those that are staying in their parishes. There are some religious institutions where people stay in parishes, like the Catholics. (Member timed out.)

2.15
MS LUCY ACHIRO(Independent, Aruu County North, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker and the Prime Minister for the statement you gave us yesterday. In a special way, I take this opportunity to appreciate the Government and the President of Uganda for the work they have been doing to see that up to now, we do not have any single Ugandan who has died from COVID-19.

Two weeks ago, I was very scared and thought that by now, we would have a million Ugandans dead. I appreciate Government. Thank you. 

Secondly, I would like to interest Government to re-appeal to corporate companies, NGOs and investors because Uganda gave that very beautiful environment for people to do their business.

It is high time they came in to give us more money and posho because we do not have these things and we are in need. This is the time for Government to re-echo this need on TV so that these companies can support.

Lastly, on the issue of the LDUs, four days ago, these people went to one of our sub counties in Pader –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it appears that hon. Mugume was timed out. I will just give him one minute. At least, you spoke on the time of the other Member.

MR MUGUME: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, my second point is about the isolation centres in the districts. Right now, some of the isolation centres are secondary schools and we do not know whether they are gazetted to do that.

I got information that some of the testing kits are old especially the temperature guns. Some of them were used for Ebola a long time ago. Please, clarify on that.

Lastly, the issue of Uganda Christian University, Mukono is very important because exams are starting tomorrow and everybody is complaining. We would like you to tell us exactly whether it is going to be solved by Government. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, a number of Members have taken the Floor on this issue. We have other business, which is equally important.

I do not know how much time the Prime Minister needs. I propose that we suspend briefly so that the Hansard team can also take a rest. We shall resume at exactly 3.00 p.m. to pick up the other work of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and get response from the Prime Minister.

I am aware that the canteen is closed and that is why I am saying that we suspend for some time. We started late because Government was late. I was in my office at 9.30 a.m. I waited and when I came down here, there was only one minister and so, we lost 30 minutes.

This afternoon, I do not want to waste any time because we have exactly two hours to do our Business and close. May be, you could come in the afternoon, honourable Leader of the Opposition. The task force report will also be given in the afternoon.

2.21
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, I will try to use about 45 minutes and I would like to ask for your permission so that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development can specifically respond to questions dealing with Finance and Minister of Health responds to the specific health related questions, so that we use this session for gathering knowledge, being educated and getting facts to use to fight and reinforce the war against COVID-19.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. I am sure the Prime Minister has benefited as Government from this debate. Can I invite the Attorney-General -  there were issues we wanted you to handle quickly?

2.23
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This morning, my colleague laid on the Table three of the statutory instruments that the Minister of Health has already passed in furtherance of the presidential directives.

I only come here to bring to this House the last set of statutory instruments that were a direct result of the President’s last directives. These were gazetted on the 31st of March and were the instruments that pertained to the imposition of curfew, the prohibition of selling of non-food items in markets, the closure of certain places and premises and the prohibition of use of some motor vehicles.

Madam Speaker, as you are all aware, with the outbreak of this virus, His Excellency the President, on several days in the month of March – that was 18th, 21st, 25th and 30th – addressed the public on the status of the pandemic in Uganda and issued several measures for the control of the spread of this virus in Uganda.

Following the President’s addresses, the honourable Minister of Health, being supported by my ministry, issued the following statutory instruments, all under the Public Health Act, Cap.281. These were meant to give legal effect to the measures and directives, as contained in the President’s addresses to the public.

This was all in order to control the spread of the virus and preserve public health in Uganda;

    1. The Public Health (Notification of COVID-19) Order, 2020;
    2. The Public Health (Control of COVID-19) Rules, 2020;
    3. The Public Health (Prevention of COVID-19) Order, 2020; 
    4. The Public Health (Prohibition of Entry into Uganda) Order, 2020, when we closed the airports;
    5. The Public Health (Control of COVID-19) (No.2) Rules, 2020. It is the last one that he gave a few days ago. That was the one that imposed curfews and the final control of private vehicles from coming into the city.

Madam Speaker, the instruments have been laid and I am going to lay the one that had not yet been laid. I am made to understand that hon. Basalirwa spoke about a state of emergency.

I would like to speak a little bit about this state of emergency and whether this is the opportune time to declare it, bearing in mind its consequences. The state of emergency is in Article 110 of our Constitution. Generally, it gives the President powers, in consultation with Cabinet. He may, by proclamation, declare a state of emergency to exist in Uganda or any part of Uganda, if he is satisfied that the circumstances exist in Uganda or that part of Uganda.

In this case, were he to declare a state of emergency, he would be going under Article 110(1)(b), which reads as follows:

“…in which the security or economic life of the country or that part is threatened by either internal insurgency or natural disaster;”

Were he to do so, he would also proceed under Article 110(1)(c), which says that:
“…..which render necessary the taking of measures, which are required for securing the public safety, the defence of Uganda and the maintenance of public order and supplies and services essential to the life of the community.”

Those would have been the two under which the President would proceed. However, the President, as the head of the Executive, has had this discussion in Cabinet several times. All the measures that he has taken in trying to contain the spread of this virus have been made incrementally in the context of trying to see how much we can curb the virus and yet, not disrupt the lives of ordinary Ugandans.

Everybody here has told us that they have watched television and have listened to very many international radio stations that have been discussing this virus. It is not new to tell everybody that this is the first time a pandemic of this nature and magnitude has invaded the world.

It is a process that is progressing by learning on the job. We tried to limit the entry of private cars to three but this was abused. So, we are moving incrementally. When the President forms the view that the strict enforcement of these statutory instruments, which have hitherto been issued by the Ministry of Health, are not effectively containing the spread of the virus, then, there shall be a consideration of whether to declare a state of emergency or not.

However, it is his view, together with Cabinet, that the current circumstances do not yet – I  repeat – do not yet justify the need to declare a state of emergency, which, in any case, is entirely his prerogative. It must only be declared - if one was to be responsible - in the most stringent of conditions.

Madam Speaker, as you are all aware, declaring a state of emergency will result in the suspension of certain rights and freedoms and you are all aware of them. So, the President is waiting to exercise his judgement on this matter when he thinks that the time is right and that some extreme measures would have to be undertaken. 

These measures may extend to commandeering private vehicles. It may extend to, for example, turning warehouses into hospitals, turning stadiums into hospitals, turning some people’s apartments into hospitals. All of you will agree with me that these are very extreme measures.

It is the view of His Excellency, together with Cabinet who are mandated under the Constitution, that we have not yet reached that point. 

I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Attorney-General. I think we know that it is your responsibility but you can take advice from other leaders in the country. Having said that, Prime Minister, when you come, we shall want to know what the role of members of Parliament is in this campaign. (Applause) Are they spectators? We would like to know that and also, the issue of the exams, which are being set. 

Honourable members, let me suspend the House for 30 minutes. We will reconvene at 3 o’clock to continue with the rest of the work. I have not seen any instruments. Where are the instruments? What has he laid?

Attorney-General, where are the instruments? You have not laid anything. 

MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, I would now beg to lay Statutory Instrument No. 55 of 2020. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I hope they will be available for Members to look at after the small lunch break. House suspended.

(The House was suspended at 2.30 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.24 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the meeting is called to order. We shall start by receiving the report of the taskforce of this House on the economic impact.

REPORT OF THE TASKFORCE OF PARLIAMENT ON THE EFFECTS OF COVID-19 ON THE ECONOMY

3.26
THE CHAIRPERSON, TASKFORCE OF PARLIAMENT ON THE EFFECTS OF COVID-19 ON THE ECONOMY (Mr Elijah Okupa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to lay on Table, a report of the taskforce that the Parliament set up, on the economic effects of COVID-19 on our economy. 

This report was uploaded yesterday on the iPads.  On 19 March 2020, Parliament set up a taskforce of seven Members of Parliament to study and report back on the economic impact of the COVID-19 on Uganda’s economy. Our report is 29 pages. I am going to summarise the background first before getting into the details at the end.

Madam Speaker, the taskforce came into existence after the House debated a statement of the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the economic impacts of the COVID-19 on Uganda’s economy. This statement had generated a debate thus leading to the setting up of this taskforce. 

The taskforce constitutes hon. Okupa as elected Chairperson, hon. Justin Khainza, hon. Maj. David Guma, hon. Joy Atim, hon. Muhammad Nsereko, hon. Winfred Kiiza and hon. Silas Aogon. 

The terms of reference included: 

    1. To review the statement of the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development;
    2. To assess the economic impact and propose practical solutions and measures to counter the economic effects of COVID-19 on our economy;
    3. To prescribe solutions to mitigate the economic effects of COVID-19; and
    4. To move a motion for a resolution of Parliament based on the findings.

Madam Speaker, we also have prepared a motion that captures what we feel the Members will debate and possibly, add or subtract. We have identified 18 recommendations.

The scope and method of work
This report provides a description of various features of the virus outbreak with the view to better understand and appreciate how COVID-19 is affecting our economy. 

The taskforce reviewed international, regional and national economic indicators and measures for mitigating the economic impacts of COVID-19.

Madam Speaker, I will bring to your attention – in the file I have given you and the Prime Minister, there is information to show that this is not the first time we are experiencing a pandemic of this nature. If Members will be interested, they can go on the website.  You will notice that over the years, there have been a number of pandemics that have affected the economies and the country at large. The time they have spent to get off varies from year to year. 

Needless to say, there was the Plague of the Justinian in 1441. It took the lives of 50 million people. It lasted for about three years. There was another one called the Black Death, which led to the invention of the word quarantine, from 1918 to 1920. Members, you may also wish to know we are fond of using the phrase “God bless you.” This was a response by Pope Gregory VII to whenever someone sneezed. It was as a result of that pandemic that killed 200 million people. 

There was the Great Plague of London, between 1348 and 1645, which took the lives of 100,000 people within seven months. We had Small Pox and Cholera. Those are the ones, which took great numbers of lives of people in the world.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, this is not the first pandemic. That is why we need to take COVID-19 seriously. The economic impact of these viruses is very immense. As at 11 a.m., at least for Ugandans, we are still lucky that we only had 44 cases. However, world over, by 11.30 a.m. of today, the number of the people affected by COVID-19 stood at 938,348 and the number of the dead is now 47,286.

Madam Speaker, it should be noted that while the number of cases reported first peaked in china, cases have now been reported in 203 countries and territories on six continents. In addition, countries such as USA and Italy have recorded more confirmed cases than China. Whereas Spain was also today, by 1 O’clock - it is now taking over from Italy in terms of infections.

Over 70 countries have instituted travel restrictions. The main initial battle to control the pandemic has been in China, where heroic public health measures have bought the rest of the world time and may have reduced the effective reproduction numbers in that country.

However, the rest of the world needs to maintain high vigilance as this virus is highly transmissible and can cause severe disease and death as has been seen in countries such as South Korea, Iran, Spain, China, United Kingdom and Italy. Indeed, the number of new cases is highest in the USA.

Containment through case findings, isolation, contact tracing and social distancing remain the key public health approaches to controlling the pandemic in all parts of the world. This is particularly important for countries in Sub-Saharan Africa, some part of South and Central America and Asia that are well prepared for the outbreak. 

Global solidarity and support are essential as infectious diseases can easily cross borders. As John Nkengasong from the Africa Centre for Disease Control and Prevention put it, “The global health chain is only as strong as its weakest link.  So, a disease threat anywhere can quickly become a threat everywhere.”

Preparedness to respond to outbreaks is weak in many countries. Of the 45 low-income countries that have undertaken a national preparedness assessment, none has been deemed ready to respond, making them particularly vulnerable to outbreaks. 

There are many reasons for this including poor health and nutrition exacerbated by high rate of concomitant human immunodeficiency viruses and Tuberculosis, low influenza vaccination rates, poor quality of healthcare, resource constraints, vulnerable supply chains and weak medicine procurement procedures. 

Low-income countries spend, on average, annually only $247 per person on health while up to 30 per cent of the medicines are substandard or falsified.

In addition, the World Health Organisation (WHO) has, in the last fortnight, mobilised $ 108 million from 203,000 individuals and organisations for the COVID-19. A Solidarity Fund has been set up to augment countries’ responses to the pandemic. The IMF has offered a fund accessible by countries affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. Therefore, our country should take advantage of this and see how to access this fund.

The threat posed by COVID-19 has cast a spotlight on the shortcomings of health systems in all countries requiring them to invest in emergency preparedness. This is worthwhile considering the cost of responding to outbreaks, which for the 2014-2016 West Africa Ebola outbreaks was estimated at close to a tune of $ 3 billion. A long term solution might be to establish a Global Health Security Fund that provides incentives for countries to make capital investments to close the preparedness gap.

There are already some preparedness efforts in place that are paying off with COVID-19. For instance, investments in Ebola preparedness for the nine countries neighbouring the Democratic Republic of Congo, such as Uganda, have ensured partner coordination structures are in place, points of entry screening has been strengthened, particularly, at major airports and isolation units have been upgraded to manage suspected cases. 

Over the years, the WHO has developed a national influenza network of laboratories and health facilities, which have been able to scale up their diagnostic capacity quickly in order to monitor severe acute respiratory infections and influenza-like illnesses. This has provided a useful interim surveillance mechanism, while awaiting the scaling up of specific diagnostic tests.

The Ministry of Health, national public health institutes, universities and other public health agencies are working in many ways to fight this new public health threat across the globe. However, this pandemic is not only a medical emergency and human tragedy. It has affected economic activities and without urgent action, the socio-economic effects could have wide implications for trade, travel, provision of aid, economic markets, supply chains and ultimately, the daily lives of people living around the world.
Madam Speaker, Uganda has, to a great extent, been prepared. I will leave that to the Ministry of Health to tell us how Uganda has prepared itself to deal with this situation because we know that - We picked some from write-ups and also through consultations. However, I know the Minister of Health should be in a better position to give a detailed preparedness of the Ministry of Health and the Government of Uganda to deal with this.

Uganda’s Response To COVID-19

Of course, a number of measures have been put in place, which the Minister of Health can add on. These include:

    1. Mandatory screening for all persons entering the country. This screening now extends to persons entering the country with cargo and persons accessing business premises and offices.
    2. Closure of all schools and institutions of learning.
    3. Suspension of all religious gatherings;
    4.  Suspension of all political and cultural meetings. 
    5. An initial partial ban of Uganda travel to all affected countries.
    6.  A ban on all wedding gatherings exceeding 10 persons.
    7.  Funerals limited to 10 attendees only.
    8.  Suspension of discos, bars, concerts.
    9.  A ban on all public transport including the boda-bodas.
    10.  Aggressive tracking of contacts, screening, testing, institutional quarantine and self-isolation. 
    11.  Reduction of banking hours and stopping weekend operations and of course, the recent one of;
    12. Lockdown.

Madam Speaker, these are some of the things we picked and the Minister of Health will add on.

While many businesses have been closed and individuals have been encouraged to work from home, it is unclear whether the country will adopt extreme measures such as military enforcement through what we were discussing this morning, a state of emergency as seen in China, Italy and the United Kingdom. These are all aimed at curbing the spread of the virus.

Short of declaring extreme measures, the measures currently in place also require strict enforcement if the spread of the virus is to be curbed. Whatever the case, these measures will have an effect on the economy as the taskforce has demonstrated.

Madam Speaker, on the global scene, the global economic growth rate is expected to drop to 1.6 per cent, down from the 2.9 per cent recorded in 2019 as a result of the economic effects of COVID-19 due to demand and supply shock within the economy. A long lasting and more intensive outbreak could see many advanced economies, including USA and China, register negative growth as they suspend economic activity and workers stay at home to contain the virus.

It has been recorded that due to the lockdown, travel restrictions and social distancing, many production centres in China and other countries have slumped, dropping by 17 per cent in January and February 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019.

We have a table below of the projected growth for selected economies like USA. It is projected that the economy will have a negative growth of 0.4 per cent, Japan -2.5 per cent, China - 0.2 per cent from 6.1 per cent last year, Germany -1.2 per cent, France - 0.8 per cent, Italy - 1.9 per cent, Euro Zone -0.8 per cent, Netherlands -2.5 per cent. That is what is now projected.

However, given the magnitude, it may even draw further than that. You can get this from the source of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) countries. We have also showed this information in tabular and graphical forms to enable you understand it better.


Madam Speaker, domestically, Uganda’s Real GDP gross, that is the annual gross for the Financial Year 2017/2018 stood at 6.2 per cent, 2018/2019 stood at 6.5 per cent, 2019/2020 we had expected to grow at 2.7 per cent. We could not get the figure for agriculture and fishing from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Bank of Uganda. May be, the minister here will give us the figures.

The service industry from quarter one of 2019/2020 stood at 9.5 per cent. However, this is expected to drop because we are now in the third quarter. We were not able to get figures from those institutions but they can be able to get to us.

Taxes on products showed a negative growth of 3.9 per cent. This, therefore, means that our revenue collections, even before the COVID-19 had started, were in deficit. Therefore, we are headed to a more dangerous situation because this negative growth was before COVID-19 even started. By the time COVID-19 started, it had dropped to about 2 per cent. Therefore, for this quarter, we are yet to get the figures. The source of these figures is Uganda Bureau of Statistics.

Whereas the macro economic outlook for the Yinancial Year and the medium term had been projected to grow by 6.3 per cent in Financial Year 2019/2020, this is very unlikely due to the wide-spread economic effects arising from the COVID-19 pandemic and measures adopted globally and domestically to curb the crisis.

During the first quarter of the Financial Year 2019/2020, the economy performed at 2.7 per cent, lower than its level of 6 per cent recorded in the same period last year. With the effects of COVID-19, the economic performance is projected to be much weaker than earlier projected at 6.3 per cent. Already, there is a supply shortage of capital and intermediate goods for domestic manufacturers that rely on supply from China and Europe. This, in the end, will severely affect industrial output and therefore, factory shut down.
In China, where the coronavirus first appeared, industrial production, sales and investment all fell in the first two months of the year, compared to the same period in 2019. China makes up a third of manufacturing globally and is the world’s largest exporter of goods.

The tourism earnings have declined greatly. Madam Speaker, we were not able to get up to-date figures from the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities or Uganda Tourism Board (UTB). However, the little that we got can be a pointer. Uganda Tourism Board was able to give us the impact to Uganda Wildlife Economic Centre, where they were able to get from the visitors that have been going there.

During the same period last year, they registered 41,000 visitors but about the same period this year, from January to date, they have registered only 23,000. You can see that it is half of what we registered last year. 

The arrivals at Entebbe have dropped by minus 26 per cent by the time we closed, as compared to the last year. 

The tourism earnings, as already stated, are expected to shrink due to the declining demand, expanded global travel restrictions for major tourism centres, which are a source of markets that have been severely hit by the pandemic. The services sector, especially hospitality, will not be spared either and hotel occupancy rates have been projected to fall sharply. Madam Speaker, as we speak today, they are at near zero levels. 

Growth will further be affected by the underutilisation of domestic financial and human capital (laying off of workers and utilisation of shifts by firms/institutions). This may result into increased levels of unemployment, as the investment to promote a balanced growth strategy geared towards all sectors of the economy will be affected like agriculture, industry, nurturing the potential of the tourism, oil and gas and the minerals sub-sectors.

Madam Speaker, on that table, I do not want to go into details but it shows that the inflation developments on the domestic scene are annual. Headline inflation, which takes into account changes in prices of all goods and services in the basket and remained subdued, recording an average of 2.8 per cent for the period July 2019 to February 2020. This was only on account of low inflation under the core and food crop inflation categories, which averaged to 2.9 and 0.9 respectively.

Despite this positive development, annual electricity, fuel and utilities increased modestly from 7.7 per cent recorded in January 2020 to 8 per cent by the end of February 2020. To date, for March, this all dropped down, Madam Speaker. Table 3 shows the figures. 

On a monthly basis, headline inflation for the first two months of January and February was recorded at 0.1 and 0.2 per cent respectively. This implies that demand and supply pressures arising from measures announced to control the spread of COVID- 19 had not yet impacted on the markets.

However, there is a likely increase in inflation due to depreciation of the exchange rate coupled with supply disruptions and the recently observed hoarding and speculative practices with effect from March 2020. 

We have a diagram there that shows us the headline inflation, the one for food crops and related items and the core. You will see that there is already a trend showing that the inflation rate is starting to take an upward shape. 

We have also looked at the regional level and it is on that table. The region is also not equally doing well. The inflation is already starting to take its course. 

Uganda and Burundi recorded the lowest headline inflation, which takes into account prices of all goods and services in the basket) well below their respective policy targets. Low headline inflation in Uganda is attributed to low inflation levels under the core and food crop categories. On the contrary, Rwanda and South Sudan recorded headline inflation within 2-digit as shown on the table. 

It should be noted that with global decline in production arising from closure of production lines and shutdown of international borders across the globe, demand and supply pressures have started to mount, as shown on that graph, Madam Speaker. 

Monetary Sector 

Interest rates 

Bank of Uganda had projected lending rates to decline as a result of banks leveraging on efficient gains from investment in technology as well as gains from the Government's measure to reduce on structural rigidities through the enactment of the immovable property law that gives borrowers alternate collateral to land and property. 

In addition, the Central Bank continued with its monetary policy easing stance premised on stable inflation, which has been recorded over the past five years.

Consequently, the Central Bank Rate (CBR) has been maintained in the bounds of 10 since June 20l7 until the month of September 2019 when the CBR was reduced to 9 per cent. This remains the rate to date. 

For the period July 2019 to January 2020, the lending rate average interest rate was at 19.8 per cent. However, arising from the looming shortage of liquidity of loanable funds, lending rates are destined to rise, thus affecting our economy. 

The movement of the CBR and commercial lending banking lending rates are as shown on that graph. The lending rates are only showing an upper trend, which shows that it is going to affect, if we are to continue this way. The source of those documents is the Bank of Uganda. 

The Foreign Exchange Movement

For the larger part of the first half of the Financial Year 2019/2020, the shilling maintained resilience against the United States dollar, appreciating on average by 0.2 percentage points on a month on month comparison (July 2019 to January 2020). This was supported partly by fairly large inflows from commodity exports, reduced donor inflows as shown in table 5 and subdued demand for the dollar during the review period.

However, arising from the looming shortage of foreign exchange due to economic effects of COVID-19, we are destined to experience a weakening shilling against major currencies of Uganda's trading partners. This is expected to have a ripple effects on Uganda's current account position. Consequently, Bank of Uganda needs to intervene in the market to minimise the likely impacts.

Madam Speaker, if you looked at the exchange rate today, it is standing at 3,900. Last week, it had even reached 4,000 but today when I crosschecked, it had reached that level. This is all because of the shortage of foreign exchange and the inflows, which have dwindled. The tourists are not coming in and a number of other factors. We have shown that in a graph. 

Private sector Developments

Table 6 shows the private sector credit and the net credit to Government.

Credit to the private sector, which is a leading indicator of the financial sector's contribution to economic activity, remains critical in boosting private sector investment as an engine of growth. For the period July 2019 to January 2020, the private sector credit growth was recorded at an average of 12.7 per cent compared to 11.6 per cent registered in the same period a year ago. It should be noted that private sector credit is projected to grow at an average of 15 per cent over the NDP III period as shown on table 6. However, due to the COVID-19 effects, we are not going to realise this. 

With the effects of the COVID-19, it is anticipated that private sector credit, which is the loanable funds that are available to the private sector from the banks, will be further curtailed as banks grapple with the looming liquidity shortages, partly due to an expected rise in lending rates and reduced asset quality, arising from failure to meet loan servicing agreements and increased domestic borrowing by Government to finance revenue shortfalls as the measures put in place to minimise the spread of the virus continue to bite.

The private sector investment is likely to decline. There is likely to be a decline in fixed assets investments (Machinery and Infrastructure) and tight credit conditions in the banking sector amid rising private sector borrowing when financial institutions suspect that consumers and firms may be unable to repay their loans on a timely basis. This may definitely affect the asset quality. 

The graph is there together with a chart showing the shares in total private sector credit between the month of June 2019 and January 2020. 

Developments in the fiscal sector 

Domestic revenue performance

Again, on the table, you will see those figures. The domestic revenue targets for the Financial Year 2019/2020 are not likely to be met or will not be met.

Indirect and consumption taxes - Trade, VAT, Excise taxes are likely to be the most hit. In the Financial Year 2018/2019, this contributed 65 per cent of net revenue. In the Financial Year 2018/2019, consumption and trade taxes contributed 5.3 per cent and 3.1 per cent of the GDP. 

In addition, increased expenditure by Government to fight COVID-19 is likely to reduce Government resources available for the key development priorities especially in education and non COVID-l9 health interventions. Analysis of the revenue performance for the first half of the Financial Year 20l9/2020, reveals that a total of Shs 9,042 billion was realised against the target of Shs 9,739 billion resulting into a tax deficit of Shs 697.3 billion. 

So, before COVID-19 started, we had already experienced a deficit in the first half of the year.  With the effects from COVID-19 materialising, the deficit has increased within the period of January to February 2020, registering nearly 50 per cent of the deficit recorded in the first six months at Shs 335.29 billion.

Madam Speaker, if I may explain further, in the last six months, from July last year to December, the deficit that was realised was Shs 697.3 billion. From January to February, a deficit of Shs 335.29 billion was recorded. So, if we project that, we are going to register a deficit of almost Shs 1 trillion.

It should be noted that international trade taxes were projected to raise 38.1 per cent of the total net tax revenue for Financial Year 2019/2020. The measures so far adopted by Government to minimise the spread of COVID-19 such as suspension of international travels and closure of borders to human traffic, will further have a huge impact on the international trade tax collections.

Indeed, for the last six months ending December 2019, international trade taxes registered a deficit of Shs 260.69 billion. While in the months of January and February 2020 only, international trade taxes amounted to Shs 39.53 billion.
Domestically, measures such as travel restrictions will affect revenues from the income tax category, VAT and Excise Duty arising from reduced consumption and demand for goods and services.

Under the Non-Tax Revenue (NTR) category, big contributors like passport and immigration fees will be critically affected as travels are curtailed. These two items alone accounted for 33.6 per cent of the total NTR revenue estimates of Shs 218.53 billion out of Shs 651.28 billion. On the other hand, university tuition fees were anticipated to contribute 46.7 per cent of the total appropriation in aid of the revenue collection. It should be noted that indirect domestic taxes contribute 24.7 per cent of the net revenue collections and these items continue to under-perform as evidenced by the Uganda Revenue Authority data by the end of the first half of 20l9/2020. The graph illustrates this correctly on page 20.

Budget and project support

Externally, a total of Shs 559 billion had been projected as external budget support for the Financial Year 2019/2020. By the end of the first six months, from July to December 20l9, Shs 62.2 billion had been realised out of the Shs 559 billion, translating into an under-performance of Shs 6.3 billion.

However, in the months of January and February 2020, out of the total projection of Shs 22.31 billion, only Shs 16.91 billion was realised, translating into a shortfall of Shs 5.4 billion.

In addition, during the first half of 2019/2020, out of Shs 940.7 billion projected for external project funding, only Shs 442.3 billion was realised. This translates into a shortfall of Shs 498.4 billion. However, in months of January and February 2020, out of the total projection of Shs 260.47 billion, only Shs 124.88 billion was realised translating into a shortfall of Shs 135.59 billion. The graphs illustrate it further.

On the external sector developments, evidence from analysis of the performance of the external sector reveals an improvement in the trade balance from a deficit of $222.9 million recorded in December 2019, to $205.6 million, on account of improved export earnings. There was an improvement although the deficit was less than the previous year. The current account balance, which takes both goods and services trade worsened to $291.2 million in January 2020 from $25O million recorded at the end of December 20l9. The graphs and charts demonstrate those details. The source is Bank of Uganda. (Interruption)

MR AGABA: Madam Speaker, thank you, for the opportunity. Painfully, I raise a point of procedure to interrupt the Floor of the debate by my very senior colleague. I have perused the terms of reference of the task force and if I may read them, it would guide the point of procedure I am raising. The terms of reference of the task force were to:

    i. Review the statement of the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the views of the members of Parliament that emerged during the debate as recorded in the Hansard of 19 March 2020; 
    ii. To propose practical solutions or measures to counter the economic effect of COVID-19 on Uganda; 
    iii. To prescribe solutions to mitigate the economic effects of COVID-19 on Uganda; 
    iv. To move a motion for a resolution of Parliament based on their findings.

Madam Speaker, I thought that the report of the taskforce would flow in relation to the terms of reference because the taskforce was put in place after the minister presented his paper and it was meant for us to appreciate the current situation and the effects of COVID-19, partly as presented by the minister and also partly, as we see it among the people. 

Therefore, it was to help us to respond to the paper of the minister and propose practical solutions.

Madam Speaker, the point of procedure I am raising is, given the way the report is flowing, we have taken sometime on it but I keep reading the report flowing with the presenter but coming back to the terms of reference and I get lost. Would it be procedurally right that the committee continuously refers back to the terms of reference such that our debate is guided well in order to be able to achieve out of what we expected of the taskforce? Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think that if you identify an area in which you are interested, you focus on that. If you are interested in terms of reference, you focus on that. (Laughter)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the wise ruling, and honourable colleague, as he specialised on points of procedures, when Members raised the matters. It is very important to know where you are coming from in order for you to know where you are going. That is why we are giving the background to that information. Based on the diagnosis, you should be able to prescribe the solution to administer it. 

During the month of January 2020, United Arab Emirates (UAE) was the major destination for Uganda's exports. Exports to UAE grew by 66 per cent from $65 million to $1O7.86 million. In addition, 29 per cent of Uganda’s exports went to the Middle East, which contributes 29 per cent to the EAC, 18 per cent went to the rest of Africa, 14 per cent went to EU, 8 per cent to Asia and 3 per cent to the Americas.

It is evident that with the COVID-l9 pandemic, affecting Uganda’s major trading partners leading to the lockdown of many production centres, travel restrictions and cancellation of orders for exports and imports, the current account balance is destined to worse. These are countries we export to and if they are closed, we cannot export, which leads to low foreign exchange. 

In addition, there has been a decline in investment in Government securities of approximately Shs 130 billion, lost between February and March 2020. This is attributed to off-shore investors exiting the Government securities market for safer havens.

Stock of reserve

Evidence from current Government statistics reveals that since January 2018, Uganda’s stock of foreign reserves has been maintained at an average of $3,249.81 million, equivalent to an average of 4.2 months of import cover. It should be noted that whereas IMF recommends a reserve of at least 3.5 months of import cover, Uganda’s target has always been at least five months of import cover while that of EAC stands at least 4.13 months. 

Arising from the visible economic effects of COVID-19, the current level of reserves could be too overstretched to guarantee economic stability through both monetary and fiscal policy adjustments that Government must adopt. The reserve that we have now can only take us for about 4.2 months yet, as we may know COVID-19 might last for more than four months. 

You need to look at the summary of what I am saying in this chart. It show you how the COVID-19 has affected international demand, how it has led to store closures, deliberate restrictions, travel bans, affected consumer spending as well as taxes and how it has led to bankruptcies, layoffs and bank crises in the business sector. 

Domestic supply chains have been affected. International supply chains have also been affected as well as the buying and transfers. This chart explains all these details in summary.

Madam Speaker, let us look at the measures that were proposed, which we have looked at, to mitigate the economic risks from COVID-19. Hon. Agaba, I think we are now together.

On the monetary sector, the committee urges Bank of Uganda to adopt expansionary monetary policy to promote output and employment while ensuring stable prices, in light of Bank of Uganda’s independence. This may include a combination of measures, including the CBR, open market operations and minimum reserve requirements. Undertaking quantitative easing would boost liquidity in the financial system and increase aggregate demand by:

    a) Reducing the bank and lending rate to the extent possible; and

    b) Allowing for rescheduling of repayments for loans, including mortgages by banks, microfinance institutions and SACCOs for a period of, say, six months.

The committee recommends that the Central Bank considers relaxing capital and legal reserve requirements as liquidity buffers as a means of improving loanable funds to the private sector for a period of six months. 

Madam Speaker, the legal reserve requirement is the amount of money that the Central Bank requires commercial banks to always deposit with them. China has done it – they have reduced the amount of money that their Central Bank requires the commercial banks to keep with them.  They are doing this to increase the liquidity to enable people access money at a better rate. 

This policy can be reviewed from time to time to guarantee financial sector soundness and stability. Bank of Uganda should consider adopting policies that boost confidence and assist with the recovery of aggregate demand once the pandemic eases and travel restrictions are removed. 

Central banks in many countries, including the United Kingdom have slashed interest rates. This, in theory, is meant to make borrowing cheaper, encourage spending and in turn boost the economy. Bank of Uganda may have to intervene in the foreign exchange market to smoothen volatility, while letting the shilling adjust to external pressure.

On the Government sector, one of the European Union ministers said: “The fiscal policy response in the health sector needs to treat this like a war and nothing less, converting facilities to temporary hospitals, factories to making respiratory and face masks.” 

Similarly, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should come up with a comprehensive economic stimulus programme that should be passed by Parliament of Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, we demand that the Government of Uganda, like other countries have done, proposes economic stimuli for this country. The programme would cover both the short-run and medium-term. The programme would include measures to increase aggregate demand, production at household and firm level, reduce on imports and boost exports and provide social security for all Ugandans. It also means formalising those in the informal sector and ensuring food security, among others.

Possible measures include:

1. 	Government recapitalising the Uganda Development Bank (UDB) and offer loans at near zero interest rate to support the implementation of the import substitution strategy. This would boost private sector credit and domestic investment and

2. 	Government undertakes budget adjustments through:	
a) 	Budget virements within sectors and re-allocations across sectors;
b) 	Re-alignment of the 2020/2021 budget to reflect the changing priorities. Madam Speaker, the assumptions on which our proposed budget was based, has changed because of COVID-19. I think there is need for the Government to recast and adjust the budget to reflect the realities of today;
c) 	Providing detailed budget allocations for loan support, focusing on health and agriculture sector;
d) 	Lowering or even suspending some taxes, including reducing income taxes and value added tax. Kenya has done it. We can also do it in consultation with the East African countries. The Government should engage its partner states so that they are able to adjust. Kenya reduced its VAT from 18 per cent to 14 per cent. What is Uganda saying?
e) 	Suspending mobile money levy. Here, we would like to applaud MTN but I think it is not enough. They have already issued a statement that those sending money below Shs 30,000 will not be charged. However, I think they need to increase that threshold.  Our other telecommunication companies should also join. The Over-The-Top tax (OTT) and taxes on essential commodities should also be suspended; and
f) 	Cutting back on wasteful expenditure on non-critical activities to save funds to deal with COVID-19. The savings should be put on a Contingency Fund and spent with parliamentary approval on critical activities aimed at salvaging the economy and managing the COVID-19 pandemic.

Madam Speaker, allow me give these figures. In this country, we have 142 ICU gadgets but only 55 are functional. The Minister of Health, will correct me if I am wrong. This is where we urgently need money.

On the ambulances that honourable colleagues were talking about, I would like to give the figures. I do not have them in the report because I got them late. This country has only 444 ambulances. Out of those 444 ambulances, 176 belong to the Government and half of them are not functional. The functional ones are in Kampala. Private-for-profit ambulances are 96. A total of 172 ambulances belong to the Members of Parliament, Non-Governmental Organisations and churches. This is how terrible our situation is. We need money to provide for water ambulances to help people in the islands. Madam Speaker, this is the only country in East Africa, which does not have air ambulances. 

We do not have facilities to test the victims. If we get a case in Kisoro - if we had air ambulances, we would fly them from Kisoro and bring them to Kampala.

Madam Speaker, at one time, we proposed that Government gets money and provides ambulances to every constituency. We have only 256 constituencies. I think Government is able to avail ambulances to these constituencies. We are saying, cut expenditure on other things like workshops, travels and meetings and move it to help us address this. Otherwise, there is nothing more important than having life. The other things can be sorted out later but life is very important since there are no spare parts for it.

Government should provide quantifiable resources, including human and financial resources, to ensure that it controls the spread of COVID-l9 while taking care of those who have been affected.

Government should institute mechanisms of reducing the informal sector by instituting measures to attract or even compel firms and individuals to formalise their activities. This may include strengthening the labour agencies to compel all employers to register workers and contribute to pension and NSSF. 

Madam Speaker, colleagues here raised the issue of NSSF. We would like to thank the Managing Director of NSSF for the statement he issued yesterday that they are deferring the payment of NSSF by employers. They had proposed for one month but I think we should propose six months or more, depending on the situation. This is very important because the employers are not making any money at this time. We would like to propose that – there are those in ailing conditions. We need the law to be amended so that people can be given a percentage of that money should this condition continue.

Deliberate efforts to support medium and small scale enterprises in all sectors, including agriculture, that demonstrate that they would create more than five enterprises should be developed. The activities of these enterprises should be formalised through licensing, mandatory pension contributions and basic book keeping.

Government should work with the private sector to devise practical ways of ensuring timely payment of taxes. For defaulters, extension of tax payment deadlines and relaxation of penalties should be considered in order to achieve a low incidence of tax arrears.

Where households are distressed and unable to afford basic needs, Government, in partnership with the private sector, development partners and civil society organisations should consider supporting households in critical need with basic needs such as food, soap, salt, paraffin etc. to enable them go through this difficult time.

Government should adequately provide for and actualise the strategy on import substitution by supporting indigenous companies with cheap and accessible credit through the Uganda Development Bank. This will boost private sector credit growth and domestic investment to spur production of otherwise imported goods such as textile products, edible oils, alcoholic and soft drinks, cosmetics and perfumes, furniture and motor vehicles assembling, among others.

Government should provide relief to smal1 and medium enterprises (SMEs) through extension of timelines for filing payment of income tax, corporation tax, Pay-As-You Earn (PAYE) and other forms of taxes. This measure will help provide hard-hit businesses with liquidity and space to survive the reduction in the economic activity, especially in the tourism and hospitality sectors. 

Government should prioritise clearance of existing verified stock of domestic arrears as a means of improving liquidity to enable private sector companies continue operations during this period of economic downturn. Madam Speaker, Government owes over Shs 3 trillion. How do you expect these businesses to survive? We propose that Government considers paying them to enable them to continue. 

In addition, Government should undertake to pay SAGE money promptly as well as clearing SAGE arrears. There are some old people who have not got their money and you know, with COVID-19, the elderly and those who have pre-existing conditions are more vulnerable. In time of difficulties like this, Government should speed up the process of paying this little money to them. 

This business of asking them to provide their national identity cards - you know the challenges we have with the National Information Technology Authority-Uganda (NITA-U). These should be suspended so that these elderly people can get their money. 

Real Sector

Government should adopt a balanced sector growth strategy aiming at boosting productivity in all sectors of the economy. Investment in agro-business processing and value-addition, financing of micro and macro irrigation schemes and water for production, support to Small Scale Enterprises (SMEs) will require immediate prioritisation. This should be something that Government can bring on board. Today, I read that the World Bank is providing US$ 14 billion to the 45 affected countries as stimuli. So, Government should take advantage of that.

To avert the looming inflation arising from the current speculative and hoarding practices, Government should review its role and that of the market in a free market. I thought I should bring this issue of escalating food prices to the attention of the Prime Minister. You know very well that malaria is one of killer diseases.

Madam Speaker, because of the rumour that went around that chloroquine can cure COVID-19, you cannot believe that a dose of chloroquine today is going for between Shs 120,000-150,000 in the pharmacies from Shs 26,000. I think the Prime Minister and the Government needs to take this up otherwise, people are going to die because of malaria. Prices of locally manufactured goods should not be allowed to escalate without any justification.

Government should ensure that there are adequate fuel reserves to mitigate the looming rise in the cost of transport. Madam Speaker, we have left the issue of fuel reserves to the private sector. When we tried to cross check the fuel that we have today, if Kenya closed, it can only last for six days. The fuel reserves in Jinja and Nakasongola can only last for six days. That is how bad the matter is. That is why we ask the Government to provide money for fuel reserves and silos for food, if we are survive.  

Government should work with the private sector to devise practical ways of stabilising the supply chain. Manufacturers need to define the extent and the likely duration of their supply chain exposure in the face of the restart mode that most Chinese plants are in.

External Sector

Government needs to adopt the export diversification strategy. This is long term. This will be achieved through deliberate efforts to support local industries in key sectors to ensure faster production of goods, which are currently imported. This will guarantee foreign exchange inflows and improve the current account, hence boosting Uganda's level of foreign reserve cover.

Madam Speaker, on the public debt, we were already doing badly. With this economy being hit by COVID-19, our public debt is going to increase because Government must borrow since we are not going to meet our budget. We must also be prepared for that.

As I conclude, we have only looked at the economic impact. I think Government should come back and provide the political and social impact of COVID-19 to this country. It is very important.

This country is faced with a challenge, unlike any other ever encountered in our history. The next steps we take as a country daily and for the next few weeks or months are critical in ensuring the difference between a total collapse of the economy, the citizenry and possible redemption.

We urge the Government of Uganda and all of us to say, as the Germany Economic Minister Mr Peter said, “We promised that we will not fail because of lack of money and political will but we will reload our weapons if necessary to deal with the economic challenges.” 

Another quote is from the President of Ghana, His Excellency Nana Kufuor Ado, who said, “While he we know how to bring the economy back to life, we do not know how to bring people back to life.” We, therefore, must prioritise saving lives by all means necessary. 

That is the end of our submission but as we stated in the terms of reference, we were supposed to prepare a motion. We have also prepared a motion to that effect, which this House can adopt and forward to Government. 

We have extracted point 18 from the motion and I do not know whether I should read it now or after the Prime Minister and the Minister of Finance, as we conclude it. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, our task force. We now invite the Minister of Finance, Planni and Economic Development, the Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition to respond and then see how to deal with the motion. We have only one hour to do all these. 

4.27 
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia KASAIJA): Let me try to be as brief as possible. First of all, I would like to thank the committee. It is good that I did not present the statement because what the committee of Parliament has done has given me more areas to examine. However, we shall still come at an appropriate time next week with the means. 

The reason I cannot present today is that there are other very interested parties who said that they must look at that statement before I can bring it to Parliament. 

Indeed, as a blessing, what has been presented has added more meat and more information to me and my team. We shall come with a full package of the medicine that we need to put in the economy in order to make it viable. 

Let me first answer a few questions, which you raised during the debate about the Prime Minister’s statement. He said that those that touch the economy and money, I should reply to them. 

To give out money instead of food; - it is very interesting but it seems that you do not agree. There was a Member of Parliament who said that the husband will take the money and the children and wives will ‘taste’ it. So, I need your agreement on this. 

To me it looks a much more practical solution, it is easier and cheaper to send this money to the beneficiaries. However, the biggest problem is whether every beneficiary will have it the way we want.

Secondly, on provision of food planting materials –(Interjection)– when the others were speaking, I kept quiet; so, Madam Speaker, through you, I beg that we listen to each other. 

There was a very pertinent point that was made that Government should think of providing food planting material, absolutely for two reasons; one, in Uganda, we cannot afford to import food for the survival of our ordinary people. We can import luxuries but we must grow the basic foods here in Uganda. The season is on now and those who do farming, like I do, this is a very good point, which I shall pursue vehemently with the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to provide food planting materials. 

Arrears to the private businesses

As part of the medicine, which has also been prescribed to us by hon. Okupa today, we want to offload back into the economy this money that Government froze by taking credit from the private sector and not paying back. We have provided about Shs 400 billion in the coming budget - I am not 100 per cent certain of that figure - to clear the backlog. 

The intention is to push liquidity into the economy but more so, to enable businesses to begin running again. So, we are handling that. 

Assisting businesses that have got loans with banks

If you read the statement from the Governor, Bank of Uganda about a week ago. We are appealing to the private banks not to auction or foreclose on their customers and if possible, freeze the interest rate as we go through this difficult period. We shall adjust it within next month. 

I am about to finish commenting on the points that you raised. On the future plans to shield the country from economic social political consequences, as a result, give me a chance and when I return here, I will tell you what has been designed to get to that. 

Buying milk for the sick, including the victims of coronavirus; again, this is a budget case that we shall look at it because in western Uganda, we have a big problem of milk production - for those of you who know – so, may be this could be another outlet. If Government can find money to buy some of that milk and provide it to our sick people, it would creating demand. 

Assisting our students in foreign countries such as India and
Italy. I will leave that for the Prime Minister to make a comment. 

This one is very pertinent; facilitating MPs to join the fight – 

THE SPEAKER: No. 

MR KASAIJA: Colleagues, I thank you very much for rejecting this because we would be seen as a group of people who do not seem to understand the situation of our economy -  (Interjections) - but one of you mentioned it.

Lastly –(Interjections)– I have understood you and have agreed with you. Madam Speaker, can I be protected so that I can be heard?

THE SPEAKER: Order! Honourable minister, that is how the Government blackmails members of Parliament by saying the kind of thing you have said. What we asked is, what is the role of MPs in this campaign? That is we want to know. Should we spectate? Should we simply cheer you as we pass? (Applause) It was not about funding us.

MR KASAIJA: Maybe I misunderstood, Madam Speaker. I may have misunderstood the point but I am sure that someone said what the role of Parliament is in this fight; I am sure.

THE SPEAKER: It was not about money, honourable minister. Please withdraw it.

MR KASAIJA: I withdraw and my apologies if I got it wrong. (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members!

MR KASAIJA: There is another big point - and I think it was raised by hon. Nakawunde - on making arrangements to feed the vulnerable across the country. It is a very valid point. However, let me also ask a question because this means going to the Treasury to look for money. 

I would like to use this opportunity and I will repeat it next week. Your Treasury is under great pressure because we are currently not getting the taxes which we usually get for reasons you know. When we propose an expenditure – and I am begging you very kindly – also think about where Government will get the money from. 

I know the World Bank and the IMF have opened up a credit facility for us. I would like to inform this House that actually, we have already applied for $200 million as budget support. You cannot always fall back on those people because they would definitely not listen to you. 

Therefore, while you debate the issue of the need to help every vulnerable Ugandan across the country, which we will also consider, I will need your wisdom – (Interjection) – Yes, I need your wisdom on how we will be able to generate sufficient revenue to handle what we have. We are now going to allocate Shs 284 billion in the fight against this disease. Therefore, I wish that you guide me and give me that wisdom on how we can collect revenue in order to meet some of these expenses.

Lastly, according to the motion; hon. Okupa, thank you very much for the report. At an appropriate time, as I said, we will be able to give our reaction. We have already got some of the ideas – some are new - so, we thank you for those new ideas. I do not have time because we wanted to get them in detail.

However, since we have agreed with the Speaker to give me an opportunity next week when I will give my full reaction. For those that we think are actionable and possible, we shall definitely buy into them and put them in our programme, which we are going to draw on how to revive this economy during the difficult days after we have got out of this challenge.

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Before I invite the Prime Minister, let me ask the Minister of Health to address a few issues. However, finance minister, I think it is very unfortunate when you say that you have money to feed Kampala and Wakiso but you want us to tell you where to get the money to feed the rest of Uganda. 

MR KASAIJA: Please hold on. Madam Speaker – (Interjection) – No, no, no. I think my Prime Minister will speak about this. What did we say? Listen, colleagues – (Interjections) – Please hold on. What did we say? There is a reason; it is not just guess work. It has nothing to do with politics at all – (Interjections) - Shall I be protected to make my point, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think you have not understood the rationale for that issue. Many programmes of Uganda have ended in Wakiso and Kampala only. (Applause) There is the money for the youth, the skilling programme and now the food. It is a pattern, which is becoming regular, and we do not accept it.

MR KASAIJA: I have understood the point. Can I reserve it for the Prime Minister to explain how we shall also go upcountry? 

4.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank honourable colleagues for the questions, concerns and clarifications they have raised. 

I stand here to summarise the health issues that have been raised, following the comprehensive presentation that the Prime Minister made yesterday.

Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue of food will be resolved when the supplementary comes. We are simply telling him where we want to go. Do not worry.

DR MORIKU: Madam Speaker, to start with the issue of laboratory testing; colleagues have asked about the issue of testing –

THE SPEAKER: Order! Order!

DR MORIKU: Colleagues have asked about the issue of laboratory testing. I wish to respond that the testing that we are right now performing is the PCR, which is called Berlin Protocol. This is an international recommended protocol that we are using and it tests the virus itself. I would like to make this clear that this is the recommended gold standard test. 

It is done at the Uganda Virus Research Institute and its capacity can test up to 500 plus tests in a day. In the event that the test goes up to 1,000, we already have a provision to use the Central Public Health Laboratory and the Joint Clinical Research Centre (JCRC) laboratory.

Concerning the amount of money per test, basically, it tests for three genes and the range is from $16 to $30 dollars per test; that is if it is negative. However, once it has tested positive, the additional specific test doubles the price. That is why the range goes up to $65.

The $4.5 that colleagues have talked about is for a rapid test. The rapid test is an anti-body test that has not been validated by the World Health Organisation. Once it is validated, we should be able to have it in our country and put it to use.

Madam Speaker, concerning the isolation centres, we have provided guidelines. This is in line with the cases that we have graded according to the severity. As we are aware, 80 per cent of the cases that present with coronavirus are mild to moderate while 15 per cent are severe and 5 per cent goes into life threatening, requiring the Intensive Care Unit. 

Therefore, the isolation centres we provided - all the districts will have isolation centres because mild cases will be in general hospitals and in health centres IV. Severe cases will go to referral hospitals and life threatening cases will go to Intensive Care Units. That goes with the question that was asked on the ICUs. 

Madam Speaker, we have a total of 146 intensive care unit beds in the country and 55 are functional. I have to say, however, that at this particular point in time, we have already, under the committee set by the Prime Minister, put a provision to ensure that all the referral hospitals in the country have Intensive Care Units of a minimum of 15 beds; that provision has already been taken care of. We are hopeful that with the budget that is going to be approved, this is going to work for our country.

Concerning the healthcare service delivery most especially for mothers during delivery, the health committee, under the Prime Minister’s chairmanship, is deliberating on this matter because an emergency is an emergency. Delivery is an emergency. So, they are discussing all possible ways to ensure these emergencies are handled timely including some commodities like blood transfusion for the mothers; we shall ensure there is adequate blood in stock. 

On the staffing level, already positions have been advertised. We are very hopeful that part of this budget will take care of the critical staff that we need; the laboratory cadres and nurses including the staff that we need for Intensive Care Units. 

On protective wear for our staff, Madam Speaker, the healthcare workers are the very important resources that we have. Already, given the Shs 5 billion that has been advanced to our ministry, provisions have been made to the Joint Medical Stores for protective wear. We are very hopeful that early next week, we will get the personal protective wear. We are hopeful they will be adequate for the next two months for the entire country.

Our healthcare workers are going to get risk allowance too because this is going to subject them to very many risks. We are very mindful of the health of our healthcare workers. 

Madam Speaker, there was a question on the thermometers. The infrared thermometers for scanners are very safe. They only need batteries to be replaced and normally, they do not touch your skin. They are also disinfected. Therefore, there is no need to worry about them; they are safe. Once the batteries are done, we replace them and they can be used again. 

There was a question on how the people with chronic conditions can get their treatment, for example patients of HIV/AIDS, hypertension, diabetes, sickle cell, epilepsy, TB and the rest. Madam Speaker, provision has been put in place for these people. Already, discussions are going on to ensure these people do not miss their treatment. 

This morning, we even discussed the options for Kalangala and other hard-to-reach areas. I would like to assure Members that the committee, under the leadership of the Prime Minister, is making sure that our people are on their treatment according to the timeframe.

Madam Speaker, we have the boreholes committee in the villages. Through the RDCs, we would like to make the LCIs take charge of the boreholes such that they are ring-fenced; so that people can wash hands but the handles are washed after. 

Last but not least, on the issue of repair of the boreholes, following a formal communication from the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Water and Environment, our ministry is discussing that option. I may not be in position to give a comprehensive response but the permanent secretary, following his letter –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: There is a point of clarification on the medication. 

MR NSEREKO: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. You have informed us that you are taking care of people with underlying sicknesses who have to get their medication regularly. Some of the people are cancer patients, while others have different ailments. 

If you witnessed yesterday on TV, the queue of people going to seek permission from the Resident District Commissioners was alarming. There was a lady who said she had moved about 30 kilometres just to go to the Resident District Commissioner’s office to get a letter but that the CAO could not be available by 6 O’clock. She had to walk back. Do you envisage such a situation where a person moves 20 kilometres to get a letter of clearance to go and get his or her medication for cancer? 

The clarification I would like to seek from you is, what measures have you put in place to transport these patients to the RDCs and DHOs to get these clearances because this is a cumbersome process? It is not tenable during this period. 

DR MORIKU: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to make this categorically clear – you have realised most of the treatment has been –(Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We know that the disease attacks the lungs and the lungs are not functional until there are ventilators. How many ventilators do you have in the country? Are you bringing in more ventilators for the patients?

MR MWIRU: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, you have alluded to the fact that you have done purchases of medicines and medical supplies. The clarification that I seek from you, however, is, are you aware that medicines and medical supplies are supposed to be purchased by the National Medical Stores? Even as we talk, you are stuck with some of the medical supplies you have bought yet you have no stores. How are you going to deal with that situation?

THE SPEAKER: Let us have hon. Jovah Kamateeka and then the minister. Honourable members, you know we have less than 40 minutes to leave this place; there is a curfew.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, when the Prime Minister was here, he said that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development had told him that the money had not gone to the districts because they were waiting for the districts to put in their requisitions. In short, the money is still with the ministry of finance.

Madam Speaker, the Minister of Health has said that from the Shs 5 billion that they have, the health centres will not be able to get the emergency supplies like face masks, hand sanitisers and other supplies until after two weeks. As we talk, patients are presenting themselves at the health centres but they are being shunned by the medical workers because the healthcare providers do not have protective gears.

Madam Speaker, I thought we were dealing with an emergency and the money given to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was to handle that. Why would we not disburse the money to the districts with specifications as to what they should buy and then demand accountability rather than sit with the money and wait for them to make requisitions in this difficult situation? 

Whereas as Parliament we are saying that we will pass the Budget in two weeks because it is an emergency, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is sitting with the money and waiting for requisitions and procedures. 

MR KEEFA KIWANUKA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am glad that the minister has mentioned the question of boreholes. I would like to draw the attention of members of Parliament to the crisis we have around boreholes and funding for them.

At the end of last year, as a result of suppression of their budget, they had a deficit of Shs 12 billion. In the Financial Year 2019/2020, as a result of reallocation, Shs 20 billion was provided by the Budget committee. Unfortunately, that has also been suppressed to Shs 10 billion. Remember, we had a deficit of Shs 12 billion and now this money has also been cut to Shs 10 billion; so as it stands, it is a big crisis. 

They have several call orders that they had issued, which they cannot pay and actually, the contractors are on the verge of striking. I think that is a very serious matter and Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you need to see how best it can be addressed in view of how it is being prioritised. 

DR MORIKU: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I have mentioned very clearly that this is an emergency and personal protective equipment, which have been purchased under this emergency, comes from the Joint Medical Stores and other suppliers. These are going to be released early next week. 

I have made it clear that the orders that we placed should be in position to take us, as a country, for the next two to three months. I did not mention that we are going to wait until after two weeks. This is for the entire country, including the districts. 

Madam Speaker, you are aware that cargo has not been stopped. Some of our medications like drugs come from outside the country through cargo. Others are supplied locally in the country; so, I would like to inform you that we are in a crisis but we have already planned to ensure that we get this medication, both essential and others, that are needed for our people and it is going to be delivered by cargo into the country. 

Madam Speaker, regarding the issue of the districts, I have made it clear that these supplies will come and go up to the district because it is an emergency. Most of the regional referral hospitals have received protective gear. It may not be adequate but they have received something in their facilities. 


Lastly, Madam Speaker, there was a question that was asked directly to the Minister of Health about her travel. I would like to inform this House that indeed, it is true that at the beginning of March, the honourable Minister of Health and the Permanent Secretary travelled for official duty to South Africa. On 3rd March, I made a statement concerning coronavirus and the measures that the Government had put in place. 

I am not in position to talk much about when she came back but I recall that she returned on 6th March. The Minister of Health will be in position to come and give a statement and her position to you concerning her travel to South Africa. I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Minister, we were not so much concerned about her travel. We are concerned that people who are related to those who travelled with her were rejected from the Cabinet. The people who were on the same flight with her had their spouses rejected from the Cabinet but she remained there. That is the question. 

MS MORIKU: I was also informed that one of the minister’s spouse travelled back with her on 6th March. That was the day South Africa declared her first case of coronavirus and of course, I do not really know the details as to why the spouse was quarantined and the minister and the PS are not in quarantine –

THE SPEAKER: I think that is an issue of double standards in this country. If they were on the same flight and by proxy, a minister is ejected from Cabinet because her husband was on the flight and the minister and the PS are still busy working in the Cabinet, those are double standards. 

5.00
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, although we have said that this is an emergency, it looks like we are not treating it that way. When you talk about recruitment of health workers, by now the 220 health workers should have been recruited.

I remember when we attended the installation of the Archbishop, preparations for his installation were really in high gear. Why did you bring it down? By now, we would not be talking about recruiting health workers. We would be talking about 220 health workers recruited, already trained, well equipped and ready for work or already deployed; given a short term contract. This should have been done a long time ago.

Madam Speaker, as women in the Eighth Parliament, we decided to put our feet down regarding reproductive health that if women continued to die without being given enough attention, we would not allow – but since the day before yesterday, very many members of Parliament have risen to say, women die while trying to bring life into this world. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, an emergency is an emergency. The RDC is not an institution, it is a personality. My feeling is that we do not want – if anything, we would have asked tomorrow – I am asking again, are we part of Africa’s strategy of fighting coronavirus? If we are part of it, I have seen in Botswana that there were only three cases and yet they declared a state of emergency. Can you explain to us why we do not want to declare a state of emergency?

Madam Speaker, I had a lot to say but because of time, I thank you.

5.03
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I just want to make only two comments. One, the members of Parliament are at the frontline. While everybody else is in their homes and people are away from duty, members of Parliament are here working. 

However, the members of Parliament have been virtually begging for stickers. We have just intercepted a message from the Commander, Kampala Metropolitan and I would like to read it. It is to commanders and it reads, “If a private vehicle is still moving in your area, you will be arrested. Enough is enough. Why do you allow them? We have warned you enough and I cannot keep answering questions on your behalf. RPCs, arrest any commander where a private vehicle is seen moving in his or her area of operation.”

Madam Speaker, this is a message to all commanders and I do not have to continue reading it. It ends by saying, “RCCs and RPCs, unless these vehicles are for medical emergency, do not allow them on the road. Other vehicles allowed are only those with stickers from the Ministry of Works and Transport or security vehicles on command.”

Madam Speaker, before the Rt Hon. Prime Minister leaves, he should direct his security commanders on the issue of members of Parliament. 

Finally, is an issue you talked about yesterday of the LDUs. A hungry man is an angry man. These LDUs are working 24 hours day and night. We do not know who is paying them or whether they are being paid. From the way they are beating people, you can think it is because they are annoyed and are not being paid. We would also like to know if they are being paid or they are voluntarily working. They have guns and may end up robbing people because they want to survive. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.06
MR DAVID GUMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Madam Speaker, I have a Chinese friend who told me that, we, Ugandans, talk too much. He said Ugandans talk a lot but there is nothing much on the ground. 

We have been here since 10.00 or 10.30 a.m. in the morning and it is already past 5.00 p.m. We have a situation in the country and all of us know it. I do not want to lecture anybody. 

Fundamentally, the reason I left my house was to come here and listen to the supplementary budget from the Government, presented by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development so that we arrest the situation as it is. Majority of the members of Parliament here are raising issues of insufficient supply of drugs, protective gear such as masks and the food that the Prime Minister has promised will be distributed tomorrow. 

Nevertheless, we are politicians and we are supposed to speak. Why can’t we limit discussions within the confines of the obtaining situation and become more practical rather than talking for a whole day? Why don’t we pass the urgent supplementary budget as soon as possible in order to address health issues and pay all these security agents in the country? -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not know whether you were here yesterday. The supplementary budget was presented yesterday and it has been referred to our committee, for which we are awaiting a report. We are not going to do things we have not read. No way. 

DR MORIKU: Madam Speaker, I would like to clarify that I am not in position to comment on the issue of the minister coming back on 6th or 15th March. I request that she comes and comments on it. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: No, we do not want you to comment on it. We want you to tellher that we need answers. Prime Minister, we have 20 minutes. 

5.09
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, the question of stickers is clear and straight. I have discussed the matter with the Rt Hon. Speaker and the Minister of Works and Transport, Gen. Katumba. The office of the Speaker has submitted names to the Minister of Works and Transport and he has processed the stickers, in accordance with the names submitted by the Speaker. They will be ready today at 5.00 p.m. 

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, I would like to make an amendment. Those names were for particular committees. However, Members still have to come here to accomplish work and they must move. They have been told that their private cars are going to be impounded. We want stickers for all the Members because they are on duty. 

DR RUGUNDA: The information I have given you is what hon. Gen. Katumba told me. If there are any outstanding issues, they will be sorted out. There is no way stickers can stop essential work from being done –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what the Ministry of Works and Transport did is to only send stickers to the chairpersons and vice chairpersons. Can they do the work alone without the Members? We are breaking off today until next week on Tuesday. Suppose you are have an emergency and Members are supposed to come here; how will they handle that? 

Madam Speaker, I think the Prime Minister should direct the Minister of Works and Transport, like the Speaker said, to avail all Members stickers. If today is too late, then the Members can come back tomorrow and pick them. That should be corrected. Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: The Prime Minister does not work by directives; so, Madam Speaker, allow me make my second point. This issue of stickers is going to be solved. 

On the question of the virus, there are a few comments that I would like to make. I would like to thank the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Minister of State for Health for the answer; and hon. Okupa for presenting a good paper, I must say, which will supplement the Government efforts in order to have a holistic national response to this problem.

Madam Speaker, one of the problems we have about this virus and why it is difficult to fight it is that there is stigma attached to it. When people suspect somebody of carrying the virus, they literally haunt him or her. In turn, the suspected person hides hence making it more difficult to fight. 

Therefore, we, as leaders and members of Parliament have a major responsibility, apart from our legislative work, to internalise all the issues concerning the public health aspect of this disease. 

Secondly, to sensitise the population that chasing people who may be suspected to have this problem complicates the fight against the virus. Therefore, the population should be able to assist and properly report people who are thought to have the virus so that the medical workers who are qualified can then deal with this matter. 

So, please, use your advantaged position as leaders, use the radios and televisions to sensitise the population and this will mobilise the whole country to fight against this disease. 

The third point is the question of utilities. This morning, the Managing Director of National Water and Sewerage Corporation, Eng. Silver Mugisha, called me and said he is about to close. I asked why and he said, “It is because people are not paying bills and yet we must buy some chemicals in order to clean the water before – (Interjection) – we must have some chemicals to treat the water so that water can be distributed to the wananchi. 

Therefore, my appeal to the country is that as many of us as possible should pay the bills of all utilities so that the utilities are able to serve us better. Now, in the event of those who have problems with paying their bills, then the utilities will be in position to use other means of persuasion rather than cutting off people. Therefore, let us support the utilities to be able to do their work and to be in position not to use other methods to force people to pay. 

Madam Speaker, the next point I would like to talk about –(Interjection)– I am glad there is no contradiction at all. My message is simple, encouraging people to pay their bills to enable corporations to work. Those who cannot, the corporation can give them some time to pay but they should be able to run their services. 

The question of food has been discussed extensively. It has actually taken about 30 per cent of the time. Why Kampala? Madam Speaker, this issue we are dealing with is not directly related to the poverty index in our respective areas. This is a direct response by the country to deal with an emergency created by COVID-19. 

The measures Government has taken have made it difficult for normal law abiding citizens to continue doing their work. For example, people who do many of these responsibilities are unable to do so because of the fact that they cannot move because of the regulations and guidelines that have been made. 

Therefore, that is why Government has said that these people in Uganda who are affected by this problem should be assisted. This is a national programme, which must start somewhere and Kampala was selected because it has the highest concentration of the category of vulnerable people. 

The other question that was raised concerned patients living with HIV/AIDS, pregnant women and people with disabilities. Guidelines are being sent out to all Resident District Commissioners to give special attention to vulnerable groups, especially to people who are sick, pregnant women and people with disabilities. 

Our brother, hon. Ssengo, raised a question of corruption. I agree with him that some people who did not handle the quarantine centres properly or the entry points properly may have let in people who should have spent some time in the quarantine centres. Some of those people may, therefore, have gone into the country and interacted with others and spread the disease. As you already know, there have been a substantial number of people who tested positive for the disease and were quarantined. However, we are all vigilant and I am sure those incidents will no longer be tolerated. 

The Government policy is to use this period, difficult as it may be, to intensively increase production, especially of food because the farms will not be adversely affected by what will be happening in Kampala or other municipalities. Farmers will be able to work on their plantations or gardens and produce as much as they can to support the country. 

Secondly, there is also deliberate effort to encourage our industries to produce as much as possible so that many of the things we have been importing from outside countries can no longer be imported here because we will be making them ourselves. That is why we are happy that Nytil is producing masks and a number of other factories are coming up to supply and produce commodities that the people of Uganda require for their daily use.  

For Ugandans abroad, this is a matter I have been discussing with the Leader of the Opposition for quite some time, especially those in India and a number of other countries. The Ministry of Education and Sports and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs are following up this matter to see how best we can support and alleviate the difficult conditions of our people. 

My sister Karungi suggested that some vehicles should be hired per parish. It is not a very practical proposition. Let us endeavor to use the Government vehicles available or community vehicles, if approved, so that we can minimise the expenses involved in managing this situation. 

There have been some issues raised that some patients have been discharged and they are now stranded. This is a matter that we are going to urgently address. 

On the question of the donation by Alibaba, the Minister of Health already answered that it is already with us.

On the question of Uganda Christian University, when we had a lunch break, I called but we were unable to reach the minister in charge of higher education, Ndugu Dr Muyingo. However, I left a message and we are going to follow it up so that the matter can be properly handled by the responsible authorities. 

Hon. Kasumba raised the question of the mafias. I think if anyone has information that there are mafias and they are negative, bring it to the police so that they can be dealt with. (Laughter) I am getting close. 

A point has been made that some of the security personnel have been mishandling people. It is well known that the UPDF and police do not just beat up people. Those breaking the law will be punished in accordance with the law. The security leadership will deal with those who have violated the law while carrying out their duties. We are telling them not to beat people. 

There was a question that while in hospitals, one needs a letter from the RDC. I expect letters from the RDCs to just authorise transportation – that so and so is pregnant and is authorised to go in this vehicle to the hospital. However, when at the hospital, issues are not in the hands of the RDC but in the hands of the doctors and nurses who are in charge of that facility. 

Madam Speaker, you said that we should ensure that the markets where people have been asked to stay have essential sanitary facilities? I fully concur with your position. 

A question was also raised that the Government intends to withdraw the Health Insurance Bill. Actually, what Government wants to do is to look at some clauses - and there is no problem with the Government looking at clauses - before the Bill passes. The Government will respect the procedures of Parliament but nothing stops the Government from looking at any clause of any Bill. Indeed, we will do so in close harmony with the Speaker and other organs of Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, we are in the early stages of fighting this pandemic. Let us work closely together. Let us have no doubts at all about the role of Members of Parliament in fighting this pandemic. We expect to work very closely with you so that together, we can defeat this disease. 

As I said in the paper yesterday, we salute Parliament because it has already selected some Members – hon. Rwakajara, hon. Atiku, hon. Mwijukye and hon. Anyakun – to be members of the national taskforce and I must say, they are doing an excellent job. (Applause) I think, hon. Mwijukye, you should report to the Members of this august House what you are doing and collect views from them. It seems they are not aware that you are doing great work. (Laughter) 

Somebody has given me a paper about the closure of mobile money kiosks. Well, there is no doubt that we will need mobile money services, especially during this time. Therefore, if this has been done, it is a matter that we are going to examine and get it corrected.

Madam Speaker, that is the summary of some of the issues. There are many issues that I may not have answered. However, let me say that my colleagues and I are at your disposal to respond to any question at any time. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Prime Minister, there are areas where we shall not agree with you, especially on the issue of feeding. The lockdown is not in Wakiso and Kampala only. The lockdown is national. (Applause) 

There are boda-boda people in Arua, Gulu, Masaka and Jinja. Taxi operators have all parked throughout the country. Second-hand clothes dealers are everywhere. Therefore, we shall not accept the question of supporting Wakiso and Kampala only. In fact, we invite you to stop the food distribution until you have addressed the needs of the entire country. (Applause)

Secondly, it seems you are planning to spend without informing us. We have not yet passed this supplementary budget request but you have already gone ahead; that is a mistake. Therefore, Prime Minister, address the issue in the whole country, not selectively.

On the issue of Members’ travel to and from Parliament – you want them to support you and you want them to go to the constituencies and talk to the people but how will they go? You must instruct the police to allow Members free access because they are on duty.

Finally, honourable members, I just want to clarify how we are going to move on with the budget. I had communicated, on 19th March, about how we are going to operate. However, I would like to give further guidelines. 

The Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development will meet the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development here tomorrow on the tax Bills. Members of the public shall electronically submit their views on the BillS between now and Tuesday, 7 April 2020, to clerk@parliament.go.ug 

I know sectoral committees have been doing some work. They shall lay on Table their reports on the policy statements on Tuesday next week. 

The House will consider the suspension of rules to move straight to the Budget Committee. The House will go on Easter recess on Wednesday, 8th April and return on 14th April. 

The Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development will meet on Wednesday, 8th April and Thursday, 9th April - I am sorry that you will have to meet during the Easter recess - to consider the tax Bills. Therefore, I am permitting the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to sit during the Easter recess to consider the Bills. I will be writing to that effect.

The House will consider the tax Bills on Tuesday, 14th April and Wednesday, 15th April, to get the report from the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

We expect the Budget Committee to present their report on the budget on Thursday, 16 April 2020 and thereafter, we shall proceed to the Committee of Supply. 

We are discussing the mode of signing the report because we do not want every Member to touch the report. We want to avoid that. We shall design a way of signing that report without everyone touching it.

I propose that the Whips of the different parties give us one member of the Committee on Budget. The Leader of the Opposition will give us one member of the Committee on Budget and the Independents will also give us one Member to sign that report on behalf of others.

The nominee should be available to sign the report by 14 April 2020. We shall have the Appropriation Bill on 17 April 2020 so that we can arrange to give money to the country. In case the lockdown continues, we shall have done our work of supplying money to the country.

Honourable members, House adjourned to Tuesday next week at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.34 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 7 April 2020 at 2.00 p.m.)














