Wednesday, 3 April 2012

Parliament met at 2.53 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I do not have much to communicate, except to inform you of the death of Mr Kigere, the father of hon. Florence Kintu, the Member of Parliament for Kalungu. He will be buried on Saturday. The details will be communicated to you.

LAYING OF PAPERS

2.53
MR AHMED AWONGO (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Madam Speaker, I am here to present financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011, together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General, for the following local governments:
a) Serere District Local Government
b) Serere Town Council 
c) Amuria Town District Local Government 
d) Amuria Town Council 
e) Lugazi Town Council 
f) Buikwe District Local Government
g) Buikwe Town Council 
h) Amudat District Local Government
i) Amudat Town Council
j) Namayingo District Local Government 
k) Namayingo Town Council 
l) Soroti District Local Government
m) Soroti Town Council
n) Busia District Local Government 
o) Busia Municipal Council 
p) Kampala City Council, Nakawa Division

MR XAVIER KYOMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable member is presenting the reports for the financial year ended 30 June 2011 and these reports relate to local governments. However, (p) is Kampala City Council and to my understanding, by 30 June 2011 KCC was already KCCA and I think that, actually, it would fall under COSASE. I am seeking your guidance as to whether it is proper for the financial statements relating to KCCA to be laid on the Table by the chairperson of the Local Government Accounts Committee. I seek your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, those reports are mine. The Auditor-General writes to me and I decide who presents them here because I cannot do it myself.

MR AWONGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this wonderful ruling. The next financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011, together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General are for: 
a) KCC, Central Division 
b) KCC, headquarters 
c) KCC, Makindye Division 
d) KCC, Kawempe Division -

MS NAUWAT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When the honourable member laying the financial statements on the Table reached the Kampala reports, he read them as “KCC” then he continued to read “KCC” throughout. However, on our Order Paper they have specified; for example, (q) is KCC, Central Division. I do not know whether it is proper for the honourable member to leave out some of the specific areas.

THE SPEAKER: What areas has he left out?
MS NAUWAT: Under (q), for example, we have KCC, Central Division and then the next is KCC, headquarters, which has not been captured on the Hansard.

THE SPEAKER: Read the title fully and the year of accounting.

MR AWONGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have been reading each and every word that appears in this document. There is nothing I have left out. I think there must be a problem with the one complaining. The next reports are:

t) KCC, Kawempe Division financial statement for the year ended 30 June 2011, together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General.

u) Kibaale Town Council accounts for the year ended 30 June 2011.
v) Mpondwe Lhubiriha Town Council accounts for the year ended 30 June 2011.
w) Buliisa Town Council accounts for the year ended 30 June 2011.
x) Kibuku District Local Government accounts for the year ended 30 June 2011.
y) Kyenjojo District Local Government accounts for the year ended 30 June 2011.
z) Otuke District Local Government accounts for the year ended 30 June 2011.
aa) Buvuma District Local Government accounts for the year ended 30 June 2011. 
bb) Bundibugyo Town Council accounts for the year ended 30 June 2011.
cc) Masindi District Local Government accounts for the year ended 30 June 2011.
dd) Maracha District Local Government accounts for the year ended 30 June 2011. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. All those reports are sent to the Committee on Local Government Accounts to peruse and report back to the House.
 
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am seeking for your guidance. This is the Local Government Accounts Committee presenting the reports and that is where you have forwarded these reports. As we talk now, Kampala ceased to be under local government. Are we sending these reports from divisions in Kampala to the Local Government Accounts Committee or the Committee on Presidential Affairs?

THE SPEAKER: We shall update you on that. For now, they are in our possession.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PUBLIC ORDER MANAGEMENT BILL, 2011

(Debate continued)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday we had a lengthy debate and we were due to hear from the Leader of the Opposition.

3.03
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Before I make my presentation, I have some papers I want to lay on the Table for the Members’ consumption. The first one is the UN Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1994. It is very important for Members to read it. 

The other one is the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights. It is important because it reaffirms the adherence to the principles of human rights contained in the declarations, conventions and other instruments adopted by the Organisation of African Unity, the Movement of Non-aligned countries and the United Nations. What I am trying to say is that this one also follows the UN Declaration Charter.

I also want to lay on the Table the ruling in the case of Muwanga Kivumbi v. the Attorney-General. It is very good for consumption and I will refer to it in my presentation. 

Madam Speaker, in the same light, I want to tell Members that as we are discussing this Bill, we should look at two Acts, the Police Act and the Penal Code Act. If you look at clause 13 of the Bill, it is a replica of Section 40 of the Police Act. Clause 15 is a replica of the Police Act, Section 35. Clause 6 is a replica of Section 65 of the Penal Code Act. Clause 8 is a replica of the Police Act, Section 32(2), which was quashed by the Court of Appeal. Clause 6, which I am talking about, is also a replica of Section 34 of the Police Act. This section of the Police Act makes reference to the Penal Code Act but in this one, they do not make reference to anything.

If you go through the whole Bill, the person who was in charge of drafting should be arrested because he took our money for nothing. He was picking clauses from the existing laws and he wants us to pass them. (Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): I would like to raise a matter of procedure. Why are these issues being presented now and not before the committee when it was considering the Bill?
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the committee reported but Members are entitled to comment on the report. (Applause) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, when I was growing up, they told me that old people have wisdom. (Laughter) 

If it is true that this is a replica of some sections of the Police Act and the Penal Code Act, the wise thing to do would be to amend the Police Act or the Penal Code Act. It would be wrong for us as the Ninth Parliament, who have advanced from the First Parliament, to make laws that are disjointed instead of joining them. However, the reason is very clear to the Government; they want to apply the principle of infection and affection. They want to use this law to amend some sections in some laws. I propose that at an appropriate time, Government should amend the Police Act and the Penal Code Act but not this law.

We have been around for 27 years and we have never felt the necessity for this law. It is only now that we are seeing it. In fact, the only such repressive law on public order that I know of is in Zimbabwe, and it was also made recently. The moment you see a repressive law coming in, which was not foreseen earlier on, then there must be ill motive. What is good is that there is no permanent situation. They will always – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I gave you seven minutes. I give the others only three. Okay, I give you another five minutes. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, in the case of Kivumbi v. the Attorney-General, I want to read you the ruling of the judges of the court, the learned people. It says on page 4, “There is no convincing reason for restricting or stopping convening rallies or assembly or demonstrations. As already pointed out, the Police have powers under other provisions of the law to maintain law and order or deal with any situation, for instance, the one envisaged under section 32(2) of the Police Act. The Police will not be powerless without the powers under subsection (2); they can deploy more security men. Further, they have powers to stop the breach of peace where it has occurred by taking appropriate action including arresting suspects. 

I am, therefore, in agreement with my sisters and brother on this Coram that to interpret and uphold section 32(2) of the Police Act as authorising the Police to prohibit assemblies including public rallies or demonstrations would be unconstitutional. Clearly, it would be giving the Police powers to impose conditions which are inconsistent with the provisions of Article 29(1) (d) of the Constitution which guarantee enjoyment of the freedom to assemble and demonstrate.” 

Madam Speaker, if you look at clause 8, notification by an authorising officer, they changed the heading from the Police Act which says, “Power to regulate assemblies and processions”. They changed it here by saying, “notification by authorised officer”. They only changed the language so that they can make another law to circumvent the ruling of the Constitutional Court in the case of Muwanga Kivumbi v. the Attorney-General.   

As we talk, there is a petition in the Constitutional Court about this issue of the Public Order Management Bill. It will be very bad for us to make a law, which will be challenged. The public will detest Parliament for making a law, which was bad. 

We are in the 21st Century; how can we seek to make a law to give policemen guns to shoot our people yet we have better methods of handling the situation? We have given them teargas before, we have given them yellow and pink water, rubber bullets, and so on. So, why do you want to shoot the people of Uganda especially now that we are a developed country? In 1980, we went to the bush to remove a bad government; we went together in 1980. (Laughter) Now, why should we come back and practice what they were doing? What does that call for in this century? 

Madam Speaker, I call on my colleagues to totally reject this law. Clause 4 talks about the Police directing a meeting or assembly. That means the Police will come and direct the agenda - decide how you should pray and how to conduct the meeting. But their job is to regulate – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You will come in later at the other stages. Honourable members, Attorney-General and the Minister, you have been listening to the submissions for the last two days. You have also heard from the Leader of the Opposition. Can we have your response to the debate before the chairman can wind up.

3.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Members for their contributions on this Bill and to say that many of the comments, observations and issues raised will be taken care of at Committee Stage. 

For some of the concerns, for example the issue raised by the Leader of the Opposition, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, where Police has to direct,  an amendment has been proposed by the committee and the minister in charge does not have any problem with that. So, there are many amendments, which are coming and which will take care of the concerns you raised.

Yesterday’s debate was very important in the sense that it indicated how deeply Members have understood this Bill. If, for instance, you take the case of hon. Ronah Ninsiima who responded to a clause in the Bill that relates to the responsibilities of the organisers, participants, agents and so on; she was certainly right because culpability in law should go to the person who contravenes that law. It should not be of an umbrella nature. So, that too has been proposed for amendment and certainly, culpability will be on the person who contravenes the law.

Madam Speaker, allow me to also say something about the judgement that the Leader of the Opposition has referred to. I too have a copy of this judgement and I now lay a copy on the Table - (Interjections) - Okay, if he has already done, I do not have to. 

The most important thing is that when you look at page 6 of that judgement, you realise that learned counsel, Mr Rwakafunzi, who represented hon. Muwanga Kivumbi in court, also submitted that the petitioner had no quarrel with the whole of Section 32. The complaint, according to counsel, was against subsection (2). The contested part of that section was (2) and not (1), the one that relates to regulation – (Interjections) – I am still developing my argument. Subsection (1) of Section 32 deals with regulation and it says thus: “Any officer in charge of police may issue orders for the purpose of...” (Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. With due respect to the Attorney-General and pursuant to the Constitution of Uganda, there are limitations under Article 119. So, is he in order to speak as if he is giving a binding decision? I am saying this because under Article 119, whatever you deliver here is limited to the ruling government of Uganda and not the entire spectrum of governance. So, is he in order to quote the obiter dicta in a judgement as if the obiter dicta is constitutionally and legally binding? What is he talking about?
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Attorney-General is the legal advisor of the whole country. He is just giving us his view as the Attorney-General. Please continue.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for that very wise ruling. Certainly, reading for you a section of the law is not obiter. I was only reading to you Section 32 (1) of the Police Act, which is not obiter. It is lifted from the ruling and it reads as follows: “Any officer in charge of police may issue orders for the purpose of- 
(a) regulating the extent to which music, drumming or a public address system may be used on public roads or streets or at occasion of festivals or ceremonies; 
(b) directing the conduct of assemblies and processions on public roads or streets or at places of public resort and the route by which and the times at which any procession may pass.”

What this Bill intends to do is not to supplant this provision but to supplement its application and hence the need for clause 8 of the Bill. In ensuring that is attained, I also wish to refer you to the content of the same judgement at page 11. The lead judge, Justice Byamugisha, refers to a case at page 11, Mark Gova & Another v. Minister of Home Affairs & Another: [S.C.36/200: Civil Application No. 156/99]. It says, “The Supreme Court of Zimbabwe formulated the following summary criteria, with which I agree for justification of law imposing limitation on guaranteed rights…”

Criteria No.1 says, “the legislative objective which the limitation is designed to promote must be sufficiently important to warrant overriding a fundamental right.” 

Criteria No. 2 was, “the measures designed to meet the objective must be rationally connected to it and not arbitrary, unfair or based on irrational considerations.”

Criteria No.3 was, “the means used to impair the right of freedom must be more than necessary to accomplish the objective.”

The thrust of this case was on the Police Act, Section 32 (2) because it gave very wide powers to the Inspector-General of Police using reasonable grounds to prohibit an assembly or rally but without benchmarks, which would ordinarily fall in the ambit of Section 32 (1) of the Police Act. This is because if they tell you to regulate and show the people where to pass so that they do not actually cause unnecessary traffic jams or demonstrate in other people’s property in accordance with Article 43 of the Constitution, that certainly is regulation. It is prohibition which was not sustained. Otherwise, regulation was sustained as far this judgement is concerned.

Madam Speaker, I thought I should put this matter in its proper perspective so that people do not move as if we are legislating against a decision of court; we are not. On the contrary, we are legislating to give effect and meaning to the decision of the Constitutional Court. Thank you very much.

3.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to begin by acknowledging and appreciating the contributions and comments made by the honourable members on the second reading of this Bill, the Public Order Management Bill. I also want to appreciate some of the constructive contributions made by a number of honourable members in support of the amendments made by the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. 

One of the key proposals made by the committee, and which many Members commented about, was on the powers of the IGP in clause 4. (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Is it in order for the minister to even be allowed to talk before this Parliament especially when the law he is to uphold is being abrogated by them? As I talk now, in my constituency a Member of Parliament has been detained for one week in a police cells without even police bond; a whole Member of Parliament - (Interjections) - For whatever reasons. 

Is it in order for the Minister of Internal Affairs to come and talk in this Parliament yet we have flagrant cases of human rights violations of a colleague who has been arrested at a police station since Thursday last week and he has not been produced in court, contrary to what the Constitution says - 48 hours? Madam Speaker, are we in order to continue listening to the violator of the law? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you have that Member of Parliament in your possession? 

MR BABA: Madam Speaker, I am not aware of this case. It has never been reported to me. Just before we came to this House, I found hon. Samuel Odonga Otto and he greeted me very warmly. He went on to ask me how my Easter was without raising this concern to me. So, I am not aware of this case but I will investigate and report back to you.

MR ODONGA OTTO: The MP is in my constituency, in Aruu County. Hon. Cyrus Amodoi has been in police cells since Thursday last week. I talked to the DPC, I talked to the Regional Police Commander, I talked to the head of the VIP Protection Unit and they said the Inspector-General of Police is in Australia and they cannot release the MP. 

I went to the Deputy Speaker’s Office because the Speaker was out of the country. I was informed that they are attending to the matter but as I talk, the MP has been conned of Shs 20 million. The information they are giving the world – He has been conned of Shs 20 million and he has instead been arrested and the conmen are at large. So, he has been at the police cells for six days today and he has not been produced before court and he is on hunger strike. So, what are you talking about, honourable minister? Can I move a motion that you may never be heard in this House? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, now that we know that the Member for Toroma is in custody, can you cause his production in court?

MR BABA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. I will undertake to look into the matter and report back. I am very sorry for what happened and I do not know why he was arrested. (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Order, order, Members.

MR BABA: Madam Speaker, one of the proposals made and which members commented on a great deal was on clause 4, relating to the powers of the IGP. We do accept the committee’s proposal that the powers of the IGP vis-à-vis the decision of the High Court in the Muwanga Kivumbi case was absolutely right, and we are supporting that proposal. The IGP will only have powers to regulate but not to direct. Section 32(2) previously was at the discretion of the IGP. This is no longer going to be the case if we pass this Bill as per the proposals by the committee. 

Secondly, there were concerns raised about Article 6 on freedom of expression and making criticism of Government policies and so forth. In my opening statement at the second reading of the Bill, I made reference to “let a thousand flowers bloom, let a thousand flowers contend”, and I meant precisely that, that we will dispense with the requirement of that section of the Bill so that Ugandans will be free to express themselves, provided this is exercised in absolute peace and without infringing on the rights of others. The freedom to exercise this should not be abused to cause chaos for others in infringement of Article 43 of our Constitution.

Also, honourable members raised concerns about going to their constituencies, meeting their constituents and when they stop along the highway, constituency members come to greet them; they also have family meetings, wedding meetings, kwanjulas. This is going to be outside the law so long as this is not held in a public place which is described under the law. An MP will not be expected to hold a meeting in the middle of a highway- (Interruption)

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Bill we are dealing with has a number of clauses. The Leader of the Opposition expounded on a number of clauses that are taken care of in other laws -  the Penal Code Act and the Police Act. But as of now, the Ministers are still referring to the very clauses that are already taken care of in the other laws. Now, if we do away with those clauses, this whole Bill really, in our opinion, is taken care of by other laws. 

The regulation of assembly and rallies has actually been ongoing. We do not see anything new. Besides that, by yesterday there was an argument whether we may not be proceeding with injuring the sub judice rule since there is a case in the Constitutional Court petitioning against this very Bill. I really wonder whether we are spending our time usefully by debating even clauses already taken care of in other laws. May I be guided, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Are they the only provisions of that Bill? 

DR EPETAIT: Madam Speaker, there are a number of provisions which are taken care of in other laws. The one that the Minister is referring to about powers of the Inspector-General of Police to regulate is in the law and we are wondering what new thing we are dealing with. In any case, the IGP has actually been regulating rallies and assemblies even without this law. There is nothing new that we are adding. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, then I think we should go to the Committee Stage; that is when we shall deal with them one by one and decide what we want and what we do not want. About sub judice, I do not know what is in the courts. I cannot speculate about what is in the courts. Maybe let us hear from the former Vice-President. He wants to say something. 

PROF. GILBERT BUKENYA: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have been reading this Bill and have seen a figure three as the minimum for a public assembly – one, two, three people! (Laughter)

I want to know how you derived the figure three instead of maybe ten. Are we not putting a rope around our necks, because we are all politicians? I am reading this with a lot of care and I predict a rope around our necks when we are standing up a tree and a rope is tied on one of the branches and the tree is slippery. So, I want to know, how did you derive or come up with three.

MR BABA: I thank His Excellency the former Vice-President and my former boss. (Laughter) Honourable member, we shall be dealing with that when we come to dealing with clause by clause. However, we will not be going back to the number three; we are coming up with a new proposal.

Fundamentally, what hon. Epetait raised, and before that the Leader of the Opposition, it is true that the Bill borrows from a number of laws that have already been passed, but all these laws are scattered in the Penal Code Act and the Police Act. What we are now trying to do – (Interruption)  

MR MWIRU: I thank you, Madam Speaker. Actually, we are consolidating, repealing or replacing laws. The minister has conceded in his own speech that actually, the laws exist and that they are getting these sections from the various laws and creating another law. So, the clarification I seek is: don’t you think that you are just duplicating the laws, because you are saying that you are just getting the sections from other existing laws? Maybe what should have been done was for you to consolidate and then we see what to do other than just bringing in another law.

MR BABA: What we are doing is supplementing the existing laws. Secondly, what is not in the laws available now is the responsibility of organisers and participants, which the Bill is trying to address. So, there are two things; we are supplementing the existing laws that are scattered and which the law is able to refer to and then, secondly, the responsibility of organisers and participants had not been taken care of, which this Bill is taking care of.

Finally, the concerns raised about clause 8 – (Interruption)

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, we are governed by our rules on the issues of sub judice and that is rule 64. I have in my possession a letter where you have been served in the petition that has been taken to the Constitutional Court. Wouldn’t it be violating this important rule if we continued discussing this Bill? I have it and I can lay it on the Table. You have been served.

THE SPEAKER: When?

MR SABIITI: This is dated 3rd April.

THE SPEAKER: Please, stop these gymnastics. I have been in my office since morning up to the time I came here.  No, no, no, I have not been served. You do not serve me on the Floor. You do not serve me from here. 

MR SABIITI: May I lay it on the Table, please, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: What are you laying?

MR SABIITI: I will explain when I have finished.

THE SPEAKER: No.

MR SABIITI: I am laying a letter written to you by Alaka and Company Advocates. You have been served, drawing your attention to this petition in the Constitutional Court. Rule 64 is clear that once such issues are in the Constitutional Court or any other courts, surely we should not be discussing them on this Floor of Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: How did you get my letter before I got it? I am not going to discuss it in the plenary. No.

MR SABIITI: Well, but may I please –

THE SPEAKER: No. 

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Madam Speaker, is the Member holding the Floor, who has served the order, in order to insist after the Speaker has indicated to us that she has been in office since morning? He has a letter addressed to the Speaker and not to you and he insists on serving the Speaker on the Floor; is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was not aware that in this place we have special servers sitting in this Chamber. 

MR FRED RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, you have ruled on this matter and I respect your decision. However, for purposes of Members refreshing our minds, particularly hon. Jack Sabiiti, who is making reference to this very important rule, in sub clause (3) thereof, it says “In determining whether a criminal or civil proceeding is active…” - that is for purposes of determining whether it is active for purposes of the sub judice rule – “…the following shall apply- (c) civil proceedings shall be deemed to be active when arrangements for hearing, such as setting down matters for hearing have been made, until the proceedings are ended by judgment or settlement or withdrawal.”

Lawyers in this Chamber know very well that arrangements for hearing commence when counsel and parties on both sides come together in a conferencing meeting before the registrar. This has not taken place as far as the Attorney-General’s Chambers is concerned. So, this cannot be deemed to be an active civil proceeding for purposes of rule 64. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want to seek clarification from the Attorney-General. You are aware that currently, the Judiciary does not have enough judges and the Constitutional Court is the worst hit and the person responsible for this is the Attorney-General. The clarification I want to seek is: did you do it intentionally so that the Constitutional Court cannot sit so that you can come here and say that the courts are not active? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, are you still submitting? 

MR JAMES BABA: Just to wind up, the fulcrum of this Bill is on notification and regulation. Clause 8 relates to regulation and the powers of the Police, as well as the requirement for notification - (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I listened to hon. Bukenya, the former Vice-President. He asked the minister to explain the figure three in the Bill and the minister simply said it is borrowed from other laws. I thought that he should have been specific. If it were from the Penal Code Act, he should educate us because it is a very serious matter to explain to the many hundreds of Ugandans who will gather in their threes in future after this House has passed this. The minister has not been specific as to allay our fears. 

Is the honourable minister in order to downplay such a serious question from the former Vice-President of the Republic of Uganda, his boss, and also from many other voters who are waiting? Is he in order, Madam Speaker? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you answer your former boss?

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Speaker, the former Vice-President and my former boss, H.E. Gilbert Bukenya, was in Cabinet when this Bill was approved before it came to this House. Why is he raising it now when he was in position to raise it then?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the answers to the questions from the Vice-President will come in at Committee Stage. We talked about this yesterday and in the week before we went for recess. The answers are available. I put the question that the Bill be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PUBLIC ORDER MANAGEMENT BILL, 2011

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 stand part of the Bill.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Chairperson, I stand on a point of procedure. I would like to seek your advice in view of the magnitude of this problem in front of us. A member has raised a point of public concern, namely that as we speak there are no judges in the Constitutional Court to hear any perceived petition. That notwithstanding, judges are appointed by the President. There are several petitions, which are being taken to court, including the John Ken-Lukyamuzi v. the Attorney-General case, demanding that the President appoints judges. 

Aware of that catastrophe, is it proper for us to rush into the matter as if we are going to the moon? This is our country and a point of public importance has been raised. The Attorney-General does not have an answer, the minister concerned has no answer; we are in a stalemate and we are rushing to go ahead as if we are going to the moon. I need your advice on that. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, all the laws we make ultimately go to the courts. Are you suggesting that we should close Parliament because the Constitutional Court is not well constituted?

I put the question that Clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. The committee proposes amendments to clause 2, the interpretation clause.
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: Why don’t we leave interpretation until the end? Let us stand over interpretation until the end. 

Clause 3

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, in clause 3, I want us to delete the word “partnership” and replace it with “co-operation”. In partnership, people bring shares, which are known, in form of money or whatever. So, in this case, it should be done in co-operation and not in partnership because in a partnership, there is investment of physical amounts to this matter. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Does the minister have an objection to substituting partnership with co-operation in clause 3? 

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Chair person, under clause 3, we wish to propose the following reformulation: “The underlying principle of managing public order is to regulate the exercise of the freedom to assemble and to demonstrate together with others peacefully and unarmed and to petition as provided for under Article 29(1)(d) of the Constitution.” 

The justification is: to clearly provide for the purpose of the Bill and the constitutional spirit in which the Bill is entrenched, namely Article 29(1) (d). I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you deleting the present proposal?

MR JAMES BABA: In respect, I am rephrasing it. I beg to move.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, if he is changing the position, we need a write-up because we want to read what he is proposing. You are saying we should delete something, yet we were in the committee; why didn’t you propose it there? If you did not, give us the write-up first so that we can look at it and then we can move on. Otherwise, he is confusing us.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that something new? Chairperson, did you receive that in the committee?

MR TASHOBYA: I thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Personally, I see no problem with the proposal being moved by the minister.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: But where are the proposals? We want them.

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chairperson, hon. Nandala-Mafabi also proposed an amendment and he did not even submit a written proposal. I think it would not be fair for him to demand that he be given a written copy of the amendment when he did not give one himself.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I never submitted but I said substitute “partnership” with “co-operation”. Co-operation is an English word and so is partnership. It was a simple thing and not a sentence like his. So why don’t you be fair?

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Chairperson, what we have just reorganised is what is contained in clause 3 of the Bill, in the new proposal. I request that the Committee of the Whole House accepts this proposal.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chairperson, what the minister is saying is under Article 29(1) (d) of the Constitution. It reads, “Every person shall have a right to- (d) freedom to assemble and to demonstrate together with others peacefully and unarmed...” If I heard the minister well, he is saying that we could say, “The underlying principle of managing public order is to regulate freedom to assemble and to demonstrate together with others peacefully...” 

I want the learned Attorney-General to make a comment because what is in the Constitution is a right but what the minister is saying is that you want to regulate those rights. So, it is unconstitutional. The Constitution has given rights and the minister - I do not know which profession he belongs to - wants to regulate those rights in a Bill. It does not make sense. Maybe the learned Attorney-General could help. You do not give with one hand and remove with the other. That is not the spirit of the Constitution. Actually, you would be wasting your time. It would be a matter, which the Constitutional Court would throw out.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, I also do not know what your proposal is in full. So, I do not know what I am going to put the question to. If you have come with your support staff, can they draft it because I also do not know what we are going to vote on? If it was one word, that would be simple but three sentences are very long. Can we stand it over and your officers produce the text? Okay, we stand over clause 3.

Clause 4

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. The committee proposes an amendment in clause 4 by redrafting the clause to read as follows: “The Inspector-General of Police shall have the power to regulate the conduct of all public meetings in accordance with the law.” That removes directing. The justification is: to remove the restrictions that were found unconstitutional in the Muwanga Kivumbi v. the Attorney-General of Uganda constitutional petition No. 09 of 2005.

MR SABIITI: I am raising this under rule 23, which demands that the voting number of Parliament should be a third. This being a very important Bill, I do not think we have quorum.

MS KARUNGI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. A few minutes back, we had a good number of Members of Parliament in this House. Members have been leaving one by one, which means they are nearby. If we roll-called, it would make these people come back because they are in their offices. Let us roll-call; they will come back and we shall have quorum as we cannot stop business because of this.

MRS MUSEVENI: Madam Chairperson, thank you very much. I just wanted to say that the members of the Opposition sometimes forget that this is the only country that all of us will ever call home and we need to come together to create a peaceful environment in this- (Interruption)

MS BAKO: Madam Chairperson, is the honourable Member of Parliament for Ruhama, who is also the First Lady of this country, in order to misinform the entire country that we, in the Opposition, do forget that this is the only country we have yet we know for sure that we are here not by accident but by virtue of the fact that we are born here, that this country belongs to all of us? Is she in order to insinuate that we are incapable of understanding that we have one country called Uganda? We are here as a matter of right, not by choice. (Applause)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, she had not completed saying what she wanted to say. I do not even know what she was to going to say. Let her speak and then you can comment.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we respect the First Lady and we are happy that for this Bill she has been attentive from day one and she is present. For the other Bills we have been passing, she would not appear. In fact, I have noticed that there are two Bills she is interested in, the oil Bill and the Public Order Management Bill. I want to advise her that the Bible says that you must always say what you feel inside your heart, not to say something outside yet inside you mean something else. I believe – (Interruption)

MRS MUSEVENI: Thank you, Madam Chair. I still want to finish what I was saying. I think it is your right to be in the Opposition but what I was saying is that whether you are in the Opposition or in Government, this is the home we have on the face of the globe and we have a duty to make Uganda a peaceful and orderly nation. 

This Public Order Management Bill is not only being introduced by Uganda. All nations with organised and peaceful societies have public order management laws. If we fail to do this for our own country, we risk having no peace and orderliness in our country. That will force us to run to foreign embassies to look for asylum in nations that are peaceful and orderly. I think it is the duty of Uganda’s leaders today to ensure that this Bill becomes law so that we can have peace and orderliness in Uganda. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, can I put the question on clause 4 - 

MR ODONGA OTTO: No, there is an amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: From this side?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Yes. Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The committee chairperson, hon. Tashobya – for the sake of other Members who have just come in like hon. Syda Bbumba – (Laughter) - had recommended that instead of saying, “The Inspector General of Police shall have powers to direct”, which is in the Bill, we should say, “The Inspector-General of Police shall have powers to regulate…” That is if I got him right. 

Now, I have two submissions to make, which Members should consider. In relation to the committee chairperson’s submission, I would suggest that we use the word “ensure” and not “regulate”. We first abandoned “regulate” in clause 3 and we stood over it. So, that section would read, “The Inspector-General of Police shall have power to ensure the conduct of public meetings subject to the law.” (Interjections) The caveat is on “subject to the law” and not on “regulating”. So, whatever he does must be subject to the law. I plead with Members to support this amendment. So, he may not ensure it happens if it is not subject to the law. Let us tie our hands on the law and not on words like “direct” or “regulate” because “regulate” is amorphous. 

Secondly, as of now, in the Opposition we cannot hold a rally anywhere in the country because we have removed powers from the DPCs. If you are in any district, the DPC has to call the RPC and the RPC has to find out from Kampala. Therefore, I was of the opinion that if these are commissioned officers that we trust, we could leave those powers at the district level. Centralising everything to the Inspector-General of Police is one of the reasons why an MP is still in jail for six days now because the IGP is in Australia. So, next time you want to hold a rally in your constituency, whether you belong to the NRM or the Opposition as the First Lady is saying, you will be told that the IGP is out of the country. Why can’t we entrust those DPCs as opposed to centralising everything? These are the two humble submissions I am making. I thought we could get something good out of this already bad situation.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Let me start with the Member’s second concern, in respect of the powers of the IGP and the DPCs he is alluding to. I think that is already taken care of in the definition clause under an authorised officer, and that goes to the DPC he is describing. (Interjections) - The definition clause, authorised officer.

Madam Chairperson, on the first one, he raised the issue of “ensure”, but I can see that my learned friend also seems to have a problem with justifying the proposal he is putting across of “ensuring”; what do you ensure? We are looking at particular provisions of the Constitution like Article 212: “The functions of the Uganda Police Force shall include the following- (a) to protect life and property; (b) to preserve law and order; (c) to prevent and detect crime; and…”

Now you should also look at the proposal by my learned friend; it recognises the power of the Police to regulate and that is exactly what we are trying to put down in this amendment. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: That is where the problem is, Madam Chairperson. If you put on our shoes, the actual problem is that it appears we are not in a multiparty dispensation because there is a very high level of intolerance. That is the reality and we all know. At the last rally we tried to hold in Bwaise, we had hooligans throwing stones and we had to run for our lives. So, practically, it is as though we are not under a multiparty system. 

If you were to put on our shoes, we would be comfortable with a provision that does not give the IGP power to regulate. That is too much power to give to an individual, who is even partisan – for avoidance of doubt – who is a cadre. We are saying, “The Inspector-General of Police shall have powers to ensure the conduct of all public meetings shall be subject to the law”. 

So, if in his wisdom he thinks a meeting is not going to be subject to the law, he can exercise veto. But for you to say “regulate”, the next thing you will hear the IGP saying is, “1000 people are too many, I cannot regulate them; we do not have enough manpower to regulate 1000 people gathering in Kololo.” But when we use the word, “ensure” then even if he has to bring police from Luwero and Pader, he will do it to ensure that the 1000 people are lawful. It is better than “regulate”. I plead with you on that. 

On the issue of giving powers to the Inspector-General of Police, I plead with Members of Parliament that we merge clauses 4 and 5 –(Interjections)- I am not speculating. We should say, “An authorised officer shall have powers...” and not the Inspector General of Police because to give those powers to a partisan individual, who for 27 years was in the bush with another person – (Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Chairperson, I have listened to the honourable member repeat the same thing over and over, that we are talking about the Inspector-General of Police who is partisan. We are making a law for this country and not just for ourselves or an individual. Can we move away from the here and now and talk about an objective law, where all of us can be covered without individual identities being pronounced. So, is he in order?  

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Speaker, there is concern about the Inspector-General of Police being used instead of “authorised officer”. We stood over the definition clause but in the definition clause, we have tried to redefine the Inspector-General of Police to include the different levels of officers authorised to act on his or her behalf. That is the new definition we are going to bring of the Inspector-General of Police, but we stood over the definition clause.

On the issue of “ensuring”, I would like to say that we are borrowing from the law, Article 212 on the powers of the Police to regulate. That is what the chairman of the committee read. It is in the Constitution among the powers of the Police. You cannot take that away from the Police because it is granted by the Constitution. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, supposing in clause 4 you said, “Inspector-General of Police and all authorised officers”, wouldn’t that solve the problem? 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Chairperson, I need clarification. The Police Act, Section 32, says “Power to regulate assemblies and processions. (1) Any officer in charge of police may issue orders for the purpose of- (a) regulating the extent to which music, drumming or a public address system...” So, it is already provided for in the Police Act. So, I need clarification on what the minister and the chairperson are trying to address in this case. Why do we need to redo it in this law?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Franca Akello, you said in that provision, “any officer”; so, even a constable can regulate? 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Chairperson, it is provided for here. Let me read all of it: “Power to regulate assemblies and processions. (1) Any officer in charge of police may issue orders for the purposes of-
(a) regulating the extent to which music, drumming or a public address systems may be used on public roads or streets or at occasion of festivals and ceremonies; 

(b) directing the conduct of assemblies and processions on public roads and streets...”

“(2) If it comes to the knowledge of the Inspector General that it is intended to convene any assembly or form any procession on any public road or street at any place of public resort, and the Inspector General has reasonable grounds for believing that the assembly or procession is likely to cause a breach of peace...” 

So, it actually provides that he regulates, when you read it up to the end. Therefore, I wonder whether we are amending the Police Act or something else. 

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to clarify that in the armed forces, the chain of command is followed. When a lower officer acts, he acts on behalf of the commander –(Interjections) – Yes, Police is an armed force. So, those people who are uncomfortable with the Inspector-General of Police, it is a constitutional matter and we cannot do away with it. 

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, we have stood over clause 3 which says, “Principle of managing public order”. To me, “principle” means the generally accepted standard of managing public order. Now, the generally accepted standard must go to even the standard of conduct by different parties involved in the course of public order management. 

So, if we have stood over this particular clause, that means proceeding with other clauses is immaterial because the main principle is not clear. They were here fumbling with principles and so on. That is why we are now getting into difficulties because the principle itself is not clear. So, I seek your guidance as to whether it is right for us to proceed with other clauses when the principle of managing public order is not clear. 

Also, as a matter of constitutionalism, recently Obama made a statement and said, “It is painful to hear the awful things people say about me day by day but as the President and the Commander in Chief, I have to protect the rights of those people who say the awful things about me.” So, Madam Chairperson, if we do not get this principle clear, I do not think it will be proper for us to proceed. Thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the object of the Bill is clear; it is on the first page and it is in the title. 

MS ALUM: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Still on the issue of the authorised person, I buy the idea that any officer in charge of a police station should be responsible rather than an authorised person. We always entrust the officers in charge of police stations with handling aggravated murder, safety, robberies and so many other crimes –(Interjections) – yes, even rape. So, if we have been able to entrust them with handling such serious crimes, why can’t we entrust them with handling issues to do with public order management?

I feel that it is important for us to delete the personality of the IGP from authorised persons so that we can only deal with the person in charge of a police unit. That will help us take services nearer to the people.

LT GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA: Madam Chairperson, if you allow, I can give clarification. First of all, in the Bill the definition of an authorised person is properly provided for in clause 2, the interpretation clause. It reads: “‘authorised officer’ means the Inspector-General of Police, the Commander of Kampala Metropolitan Police, a Regional Police Commander, a District Police Commander or other police officer authorised by the Inspector-General of Police.”

Second, the Police Act talks about any officer in charge of police being authorised to issue order for those purposes. It does not talk about any police officer. So, a constable who is alone cannot be in charge of police because they are a single police officer. In that case, that constable cannot issue such orders. For such a constable to issue such orders, they must be in charge of a police unit.

MS NTABAZI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I think as we make these laws, there is need to reflect on the supreme law, which is the Constitution according to Article 2. That means the laws we make must comply with this law.

When you look at Article 213, which establishes the office of Inspector-General of Police, it is said that the Uganda Police Force shall be under the command of the Inspector-General of Police. It goes on to say that the Inspector-General of Police shall be assisted by the Deputy Inspector-General of Police. Among the functions is the one on directing. So, if we are to amend this Bill to say any police officer, it means there will be a need to amend the Constitution to reduce the powers of the Inspector-General of Police, but remember we are not here to amend the Constitution – (Interjections) – I am teaching you the law though you know it. (Laughter) As I was saying, we are not here to amend but to protect the Constitution.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, to satisfy all the Members of the House and the public, I had proposed that we add the words “authorised officer” after the words “Inspector-General” so that power is not just in one place.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, in substance that is okay, but in terms of drafting and neatness, that will mean that wherever there is the expression “Inspector-General of Police”, you have to add the words “or an authorised officer”. The essence should be to capture that only in the definition clause, so that one does not have to keep on repeating themselves. 

The minister proposed that we include the definition of the word “Inspector-General of Police” and that proposal reads: “Inspector General of Police includes the different levels of officers authorised to act on his or her behalf.” I am sure that will capture the element you are referring to, Madam Chair.

Also, I want to comment on the use of the expression “regulate” as proposed by the committee within the same clause 4. I think the powers of the Police under the different laws including the Constitution under Article 212 are really to regulate. When you look at the judgement that has been cited by my colleagues on the case of Muwanga Kivumbi v. the Attorney-General, you realise that what comes out is the expression “regulation”. On page 13, for example, the paragraph below says, “In the matter now before us, there is no doubt that the power given to the Inspector-General of Police is prohibitive… - we have already discussed that – …rather than regulatory”, which is acceptable.

So, really, to be in tandem with the law and the constitutional interpretation of the powers of the Police, the expression “regulation” or “regulate” is better than the expression “ensuring”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, how do you want clause 4 to read?

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. It appears that hon. Odonga Otto has now agreed that we should use the words “to regulate” as proposed and we stand by that position.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chair, given what hon. Franca Akello read, it is clear that the entire Police Act uses the expression “regulate”.  So, it would be a little redundant to try to delete that word. 

However, on the submission of the learned Attorney-General that we define the IGP to include an authorised officer in the definition section, I think the issue here is not about neatness. My sense is that when you are in a constituency, say in Sebei, and you have a situation to solve, at least you can persuade the district police commander in that place that the law gives them the mandate and powers. It would be very difficult, and even subversive, for them to believe that they have been defined to include Inspector-General of Police. 

Let us follow the guidance of the Speaker. Let us have the Inspector-General of Police and the authorised officer move concurrently. Otherwise, when you are in a district, the district police commander will not help you and they will just refer you to the law that only talks about the IGP. He will even say, “Don’t cause me problems.” So, I would really plead with you on that one. You never know what may come out when you throw a stone in the bush.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister of Internal Affairs, I am sure you want to facilitate.

MR JAMES BABA: I concede to that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, I put the question that clause 4 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I think clause 5 answers what the former Vice-President raised as a concern on the number of people.

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, given the amendment presented by hon. Odonga Otto, clause 5 becomes redundant because we were trying to define the powers that the Inspector-General of Police delegates to the authorised officers.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 5 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, deleted.

Clause 6

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you so much, Madam Chair. Clause 6 takes into account, I think, the concerns that have been raised before and that were also raised by the committee. We propose that in sub-clause (1) we delete the words “of three or more persons in or” appearing on line 2 and the words “premises wholly or partly open to air.” 

Madam Chair, the justification is that the numbers are complex and difficult to determine and it is also a difficult provision to enforce as it is. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So what are you proposing? 

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chair, in essence, clause 6 sub-clause (1) would read “Public meeting means a gathering, assembly, concourse, procession or demonstration in or on any public road as defined in the Traffic and Road Safety Act or other public place.”

We are removing the numbers, Madam Chair, for the reason that has been expounded by many people including the former Vice-President. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: There are no numbers now? 

MR JAMES BABA: I think we go along with the proposal by the chairman of the committee on the new formulation. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, under the Penal Code, this law talks about how such a thing can take place when people are gathering with the intent to commit a crime. But in this case, there is no intent to commit a crime. Why are you creating this clause 6? It is my proposal that clause 6 should be deleted because if you are talking about assemblies which are unlawful they are covered under the Penal Code section 65. They are already there. So you do not need to have this in the law. 

MR TASHOBYA: I would like to thank the Leader of the Opposition but I think the point he is advancing is different from what the law is providing. They are talking about people with intent to commit a crime, but here we are talking about regulating a public meeting. We are not talking about criminality but regulating the meetings so that the people are safe, so that the motorists can pass, so that a meeting or procession can take place without inconveniencing others and the security of all those involved in the procession. We are not talking about criminality in the manner you are describing.

MS KIBOIJANA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I am on clause 6 because the title is: Meaning of public meeting. Madam Chair, why can’t we rephrase and we say, meaning of demonstrations and processions because public meeting is a small meeting? I think the target is not a simple public meeting. Why don’t we come out and define, instead of the meaning of public meeting, the meaning of public demonstrations and public processions? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, throughout this debate that question has come up that if you just stroll into a trading centre to buy some bananas and then 30 people surround you, does that become a public meeting? And nobody has answered that question. You have not invited them but they have found you there and they want to be near you.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Madam Chair, as the Minister is making effort to get up, if you relate this to a normal meeting of an MP in a constituency, you just stop in the trading centre, you lower the tinted glasses and 50 people gather; that says something to us. Now here you are saying someone must notify the IGP seven days in advance as if he knew he would stop in that trading centre, or as if he knew that his tyre would give way. Because it can just be a small accident and our people greet us and say, “We have taken long without seeing you.” Aren’t you tying your own legs the way the former Vice-President had addressed you to?

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Chair, this issue about a public meeting is very important. I want to give an example of constituencies around Kampala which are predominantly urban. The moment you show up in Nateete, you cannot imagine how many people will come to you. If they come in very large numbers, can you be taken to be a wrongdoer because around you there are many people? 

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Chair, the point hon. Otto raised, if you go to your constituency and stop in the town and people gather around you and you are on the highway, the honourable member will know that this is not proper; he will tell his members, “Please let us move aside out of the main road so that we can consult.” You do not hold a meeting in the middle of the road –(Interjections)– a responsible person will tell them, “Please let us move aside.” Yeah, to me it is a meeting but it is not affected by this so long as it is not on the highway or a public road – (Interjections)– yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Minister, I want you to read your proposal, after the public roads there is another lane or other public place or premises wholly or partly open to the air. 

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Chair, that was removed. “For purposes of this Act, public meeting means a gathering, assembly, concourse, procession or demonstration of persons in or any public place or public premise.” And it stops there. It does not go beyond that. And that is the amendment we have accepted. Let me read it again.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You are reading your amendment? 

MR JAMES BABA: That is the chairman’s amendment. 


THE CHAIRPERSON: Maybe chairman, read your amendment again and we see -

MR JAMES BABA: And which we concur with.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let the chairperson read his amendment.

MR TASHOBYA: I thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. Our proposed amendment is to delete the words “…of three or more persons in or” appearing in line two and the words “or premises wholly or partly to the air.” 

The essence of that is the new reading will be as follows: “Public meeting means a gathering, assembly, concourse, procession or demonstration in or on any public road as defined in the Traffic and Road Safety Act or other public place.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: But you know, hon. Chair, you are still talking about a public place. That is a market;that is a bus park; that is a school. That is everywhere else.

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Chair, as a member of the committee, I am not permitted to debate and I do not intend to. But I think the solution would lie - because originally we had proposed to delete this. If there are those insistences then the option would be to create an exception for those spontaneous occasions that we normally witness. 

I vividly remember when hon. Moses Kasibante won his case, he left the High Court premises walking alone and within a space of 10 metres, he had been carried by over 300 people and the result was tear gas. I imagine situations as you rightly raised – I go to Kyengera to buy meat and people want to know something about what we are doing in Parliament. As the minister says, you remove them away from a public road but everywhere you are going to take them by definition is a public place. I think what we need is to create an exception in this definition; “That a public meeting for purposes of this Act shall not include……” and then we go via those spontaneous occasions where I trust hon. Ruhindi can – but you see we are doing a definition that is cutting across the whole Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Okot and then hon. Aleper. 

MR AMOS OKOT: I thank you, Madam Chair. When you consider public meetings, it is going to be very broad and the way the honourable member proposed that we change this public meeting and we call it a public procession and demonstration and then we ignore the words “gathering, assembly - ” and all that. 

Then again we go further and define the word demonstration and in this context, what do we mean? It has got to serve the purpose rather than bringing all this because for avoidance of doubt and then from there, we shall also be in line with the Penal Code -   that if somebody is being suspected - because at this point, somebody can say that you are doing an unlawful act and yet in the real sense, you are not doing any unlawful act. Therefore, if we say, we turn public meeting to public procession or demonstration and then we go further and define demonstration at this point – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chair, do you have a problem with hon. Kiboijana’s proposal because we should be addressing the actual gist of what we want to do. It is demonstrations and not public meetings because you are not restricting public meetings but demonstrations and processions or rather regulating them. Isn’t it?

MR TASHOBYA: I thank you very much, Madam Chair. I do appreciate the contribution of the Members but I think that the spirit of the law is to regulate public meetings in public places. Supposing, for example, you accept them and do not allow them in, does that mean that somebody can come and have a meeting on Kampala Road? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Aleper.

MR ALEPER: I thank you, Madam Chair. I do not know why the chairperson of the committee does not appreciate the proposal from the Members. I want to give a scenario here. In most of our communities, there are moments when you get people seated in groups drinking and without any intention to cause havoc – now if you take this proposal or provision as it is, how are you going to deal with such people who just sit to enjoy their evening since you say this - (Interjections) - time, they are not on the road but the provision is open air. Where is open air? It may not be on the road or wherever but as long as it is in the open air under a tree, it is still under open air.

So, Madam Chair, this is where I can call Members to be very sober when debating this issue. I can assure you that we should not make a law that will be a burden to us. The law must be practical. Yesterday, I was giving some scenarios here that in Zambia, there was a Parliament that was in power – part of the Parliament was in power but when there were elections, there was change of government. Now what happened was that the people who made a certain law happen to be on the Opposition by virtue of elections and there was a change of government. Now they are the ones who are on the run because they made a law not thinking that one time they could leave power. 

So even when we are debating this law, you must be very careful. What does open air mean, Members? Anywhere you sit with your family members may also constrain you and so for me, I would support the proposal brought by honourable colleagues here that we probably go ahead and define procession and demonstration in that context of a public meeting.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chair –(Interjections)- maybe before you come in. Madam Chair, I represent Jinja Municipality East Constituency and actually even as you go to Jinja in my constituency, you find people almost in the road. People always gather once you start talking to them; you cannot disperse them. I am a member of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee but I think that we need to put it in the proper context otherwise, I know that it can be advantageous and I can show the people that the law does not allow me to come and talk to you and I do not go there. But also, I can avoid the entire constituency because like in my constituency, there are people and wherever you go, you find people and they always gather. Madam Chair, you have been to Jinja and you know what I am talking about.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Actually it is not just being in Jinja. When I am going to Kamuli, they first stop me at Kimaka – that is the first group. The second group stops me at “Mile Bbili” and these are in Jinja District and not even Kamuli and by the time I get to Buwenge, they are on the road. 

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Chair, I fully appreciate the concerns of the honourable members. Now one, we stood over the definition under clause 2 where we were going to define what a public body is but under that clause 6 sub-clause (2), we are going to add one more sub-clause to take care precisely of the concerns of the Members right now. I do not know whether I can read it now.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable –

MR JAMES BABA:  Because these will be exceptions where it will not apply.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable minister –

MR JAMES BABA: The exceptions will not apply to this Bill when it becomes law.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, I want to - even if we have not passed clause 2, the definition of a public place is “A highway or any road within the meaning of the Traffic and Road Safety Act and a place which at the material time, the public or a section of the public has access.” That could be a market, playground etcetera. So, this definition here does not relate to what you are saying. It does not.

MR JAMES BABA: First of all, we have clarified that the element of open air and open premises will be left out in the other clause as amended by the committee and we have accepted that.

Now about spontaneous demonstrations, honourable members, this Bill is not about spontaneous demonstrations; this Bill is a requirement for notification. For spontaneous demonstrations, the regular laws applicable to spontaneity will apply.

MR SSEGGONA: May I seek clarification, Madam Chair, from the minister to tell us the law on regulating spontaneous meetings?
 
MR ODONGA-OTTO: Further clarification. As hon. Kiboijana said, I have been involved in processions even “Walk-to-Work”. If that is what you want to stop because it disrupts business, go ahead and stop it but it will not make sense for an innocent MP who wants to have a normal consultation in their constituencies to be stopped it in this law. 

So, I appeal to members to agree with hon. Kiboijana that we regulate demonstrations and processions. Madam Speaker, you helped us to define it better when you said that spontaneous processions should not include people who may be happy to see the Speaker. So, you should revert it and qualify spontaneous processions but what we don’t want is someone going to the streets of Kampala, walking without Police permission and disrupting business. Let us regulate that, but if I have a rally in my village, I notify the IGP seven days in advance, or in the case of hon. Kasibante, he is just walking out of court, people are happy that you have won the case and you were not even sure that you were going to win, and you are covered with teargas. I think we cannot legislate on that. 

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. If you are talking about demonstrations and what hon. Kiboijana talked about, I think we should also recognise that if we are going to have a meeting in a public place, it means it is open to other people. If you are on a public highway, there are also other road users. It is your responsibility to notify the Police so that the people that are coming for your meetings are safe and secure. 

Supposing for purposes of argument on the day you are planning a meeting another person is also planning another meeting, what would happen in that public place? What would happen on that public highway or road? That is why it is in the interest of the organiser and in the interest of the people you are bringing across that you have an orderly meeting and everybody is home and dry. 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Chairperson, my worry is how the chairman is going to allay the fears of Members of Parliament. In circumstances where a Member of Parliament is driving in his constituency and like it is usually done in my case, I am driving, the car is already known to every voter. They will time ahead of you and block the road because they expect you to come and say hello to them. Now in circumstances that you are opening the door of your car and you are greeting them, can’t it be mistaken for a meeting, Madam Chairperson? How can the chairman address this in this case?

GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I may be talking a lot about this but it is because I was on the other side as an Inspector General of Police and I have faced some of this. I think if we widen section 2 of clause 6 to include those spontaneous processions – somebody is on a pot of Malwa and I want to go and talk to them, I think it would be accommodated if we widen section 2, which says, “Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Act, a public meeting does not include the following…” if those said are not enough, then we look at how to widen that.

My concern with holding a rally on a public road is that there are many other road users. Take a scenario where your wife or my wife is going to deliver and they are in the middle of the road and she cannot get to the hospital; even these processions, it is just a matter of logic. Really if they have stopped you, can’t you get aside and let the people use the road? Do we have to block the road? I don’t think so. And with these regulations, if you cooperate - we have ever had incidences, hon. Odonga-Otto is my witness. When Dr Kiiza Besigye was coming back from South Africa, there was a lot of concern that things were not going to work out; we organised them and they moved all the way from Entebbe and we made a route for them and they followed. So, if you cooperate with the Police, these things can be done and I think that was a very big procession. So, it can be done; you need only to cooperate. 

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, I was very much an active participant on those processions when Dr Besigye came back to the country and we were tear-gassed. So, I wonder, is hon. Gen. Katumba Wamala in order to allege that on those processions, like the last one when he came back from hospital in Nairobi, we were badly tear-gassed. Actually, people were shot with live bullets. So, is he in order to allege that on spontaneous processions, there will be no teargas when there are even live bullets. There is a lady up to now who is almost dying; she was shot in the last procession when Dr Besigye was coming from Nairobi Hospital; she lives in Nsambya.

I actually wrote to inform the Police, hon. Cecilia Ogwal even held a meeting with the Inspector-General of Police. So, it doesn’t really follow that on all those processions, you will actually be safe. The Police is prone to abuse the provisions of this law. 

MR ALEPER: Madam Chairperson, thank you. Just from where the General Katumba Wamala stopped, we have been labouring to convince Members to accept the proposals that have already been made about limiting the definition of a public meeting to procession and demonstration. But if the worry now is about the roads as the General Katumba put across, then we can add it and stop there where persons are on the road as defined by –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Chairperson, like I said, I don’t intend to debate but this is a very important programme we are talking about. For example, during the consultations on the Marriage and Divorce Bill, I held a rally at a traditionally known place for rallies in Kyengera by the roadside and we did not have any problem. The roadside - and mark you the definition of a road includes by the way a road reserve. So, what we are talking about is that our colleagues across are imagining a situation that those holding these meetings are so unreasonable that someone can opt to hold a rally or a meeting in the middle of the road; it is not possible.

Secondly –(Interjections)– I wish my colleague would respect me when I am talking about the law. I will take the clarification later. Madam Chairperson, there are laws already regulating this; the Traffic and Road Safety Act regulates those concerns. If you want to hold a procession on the road, the Traffic Police will be there but we are talking about a situation, regulation, and let us agree that whereas there is need to provide security and orderliness, there is also an element of rights. 

We are talking about a man like hon. Mohammed Nsereko who represents Kampala Central. The Kampala Central constituency is not only urban but densely populated. So, when you exclude all those places, you are leaving him out of the consultation process. So, let us agree that we can exclude those places. I am glad the former Inspector-General of Police concedes that we should make certain exceptions in the definition because it does not stop at the definition; it goes through the entire Act. 

MR ALEPER: Thank you for the information and thank you, Madam Chairperson. I was just making an amendment before my colleague gave information that we can limit the definition of public meetings to procession, demonstration and then where persons are gathered on any public road as defined in the Traffic and Road Safety Act. I will stop there so that we delete “Open air, premises”

Madam Chairperson, Members are saying it is already deleted but I do not see this. That is why when you asked the minister and the chairperson to explain, they were fidgeting on making this phrase clear. The problem we are getting is that we are cutting and pasting laws that already exist and that is why we are failing to appreciate that there are certain redundant clauses in this Bill that do not need to be here. If we can appreciate the amendments we are making, that is fine but if the chairperson can also help us to appreciate our proposals, we will be grateful. However, where they are rigid, they will take a lot of our time for nothing. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you very much. Madam Chairperson and honourable colleagues, we are all politicians. Let us not think that we are making this law for other people; we are making this law for ourselves because what we are talking about concerns -(Interjections)- yes, we are also politicians and it will concern us and others. So as we debate this Bill, let us not think that it is for others only. 

I support what hon. Katumba Wamala is saying. For those of us who represent constituencies in urban areas; city, town councils and municipalities, there is no way we are going to consult without breaking this clause. This is because all of us stop at road sides to greet boda-boda cyclists as that is where they park. All of us do this including the President and if the President does it, he is also breaking the law. 

So I support what hon. Katumba is saying that we make some exclusions in this clause. We should widen clause 2 and make exclusions so that we can practice politics on a level field. Let us widen it and include having those consultations. We should not talk about open air. Let us remove the words, “wholly or partly open air” so that Members of Parliament and other politicians can be free to consult people wherever they meet them.  

MR KAKOOZA: I think when you look at the regulation concerning public meetings, what is the reality? Because you should make a law according to what is happening and what you want to cure. For purposes of this Bill, we want to regulate public meetings in an orderly manner. So notwithstanding what is happening, of course we are politicians but there are some who are not interested in the activities that we do. If they are not interested, we must combine both of them and accommodate them here. This is because much as I am practising politics, there is a business person who is not interested in what I am doing. Should I interrupt him or her? 

The best way, therefore, is to put exemptions on those areas that we think cannot infringe on the rights of those people who are not interested in us. I will go with the proposal of Gen. Katumba to widen that clause.

MR SEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, I think what is bothering us is that we did not look at the definitions first. If you want to amend and proceed - I think the definition of “Public space” has been given. Is it enough for us? I think we are saying that we are legislating for ourselves. Is that enough for us or do we still need more space? Do you want to go on the highway? Do you want to use a place, which at that material time has been hired by somebody else, say a market or field where they are playing football? If it is not enough for us, then let us expand the definition but at the end, this clause on public meetings has something to do with a public place. 

We should start with the definition because people are more worried about the instantaneous meetings that they hold when they are going home. If it is also for us, can we expand the definition to create more space for politicians? Otherwise, if we do not expand the definition, we shall not move because public meetings read and include all other public places and the public place has been defined.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hononouble members, there is a difference in the public place defined in the interpretation section because it presumes that you are going to maybe a hall where you pay a fee to enter. It is not talking about open air otherwise as of right or by virtue of express or implied permission - when I go to a market, is that one of the places envisaged under this? That is why it is different from what they are saying in clause 6 because now you are taking me to the market, the football field -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, in our areas people drink Malwa and that is a public meeting. What has brought them there is the Malwa place. Now according to this law, it is saying even those drinking Malwa will be regulated. What is a public place? Please read very well, it is there.

Madam Chairperson, if you have talked about the market, what about the boda-bodas I have mentioned and even a drinking place? Drinking places in town councils are near the roads. I think you were not upcountry and you do not know where we come from. They are near the roads. 

Madam Chairperson, clause 6 should be deleted because if it is about the road, the Traffic and Road Safety Act takes care of it. Maybe if you are talking about processions and demonstrations.

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Chairperson, as hon. Katumba proposed, we could look at the exceptions and see whether some formulations can come up but really, we are addressing the issue of public meetings not when you go to your constituency and people come to say, “Hello”. That is not a meeting. Where you greet people, “Muli mutya; Muna okoba otya” and then you go away, that is not a public meeting at the roadside. That is not what we mean. A public meeting is a serious meeting where people sit and are gathered -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I am raising a point of order. This gentleman called the Minister of Internal Affairs is an ex-officio and he has no constituency. Is he in order to talk on behalf of Members who represent constituencies yet he does not have a constituency and has no experience in that field? Is he in order?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I am sure he has experience in managing other people. But minister, the problem is the words “other public place”. If you were to stop at “Traffic and Road Safety Act”, I think it would be okay but when you add “Other public place”, you are capturing all the places where one can go: the schools, football fields, markets, around hospitals - all these are public places and you are capturing all the other places.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I think what you are saying is right; that if we put other public place –(Interjections)- can I be protected, Madam Chair?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order, order. Honourable members, this is something intricate and we need to understand and agree.

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chair, you are right; when you say that “or other public place”, it includes the markets, playgrounds or any other public places. And that is precisely why the Police should be informed because, if it is a public place, by its very nature and definition, it means another person could have organised a meeting in the same place.

Madam Chair, the people that are coming, depending on the nature – I mean, let us take the worst case scenario – all types of people would come to that meeting; the people need security and so there should be orderliness so that you do not have different people organising meetings in the same place. So whether it is a market or playground, Madam Chair, I think it is important that the Police are notified for the good conduct of these meetings.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: I really appreciate the committee chairperson insisting that “other public place” should remain in the law, contrary to the various views expressed by Members. And his main argument is that supposing I called a rally in Rukungiri Primary School and then another person also calls for a rally in the same venue, he says the Police should be informed so that those two people do not clash. Is that what you mean? However, the problem with that is you still do not address the fears being raised by Members. For example, when the Speaker came back from Canada where she expressed her views on homosexuality, there was a huge number of people to receive her at the airport and those who joined along the road – including the bishops – to welcome her back. How do you take care of such concerns? Why should we make a law that a public gathering for the President at the roadside is not bad but for any other Ugandan it is bad? 

Look at this: We are soon going for the party primary elections. If I want to get you out, I will not allow you to address any rally. Wherever you go, I will say, “This is a public place and the law requires seven days.” Then the entire primary election process will end without you getting to address any rally without police permission. And these police officers are human beings – you may say, “I want to address a rally…” And you know our campaign – you may have three to the end but you realise that there is a small village you should go to. But since the law says you need a seven-day notice, it means you have to end your primary campaigns without going to that village. So what you are trying to solve – (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, I wish to inform hon. Odonga-Otto that some time back, I wanted to hold my thanksgiving ceremony at a public place in Mella sub-county next to a primary school. The DPC just informed the Inspector-General of Police that because there is a nearby primary school and health centre, my ceremony could not be permitted – that I would need to look for another place within the sub-county; and yet for the last many years, since I was born, that is the place where people often gather. I had to call the Minister of Internal Affairs, who had to tell the IGP to allow the meeting to go ahead. You can imagine that level of – suppose I was an NRM candidate and we were three in the race where one person was favoured, my meeting would not have taken place. So we really need to craft this law while considering peace and harmony in this country. This is the information I wanted to give. 

MR ODONGA-OTTO: As I conclude, I would like to persuade the committee chairperson that he considers what the Members are saying: Let us regulate processions and demonstrations – we are civil Ugandans and we know how we do things. But for us to start regulating public meetings, I will use it for bad intentions against the people I do not like. And I can assure you that as sure as day follows night, tomorrow when you go to your constituency, you will be summoned to a police station for addressing a meeting which is in line with the law. I do not think that is what you want to cure. I rest my case.

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Chair, I request that we stand over this for the meantime; we shall consider it later. (Hon. Lukyamuzi rose_)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you have raised intricate points and I think we need to understand how we are going to operate. So let us just stand over this one and then we will hear from the Minister tomorrow.

On clause 7, I put the question – Does the committee chairperson have an amendment? 

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chair, before clause 7, there were also a number of other proposed amendments. I do not know whether they will come together with – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have stood over clause 6 -(Interjections)- let him move his amendment first.

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chair, the committee proposes amendments to clause 7 on page 6. In sub-clause (1), by substituting for the words “at least seven days”, appearing on line three and four the words “at least four days”. The justification is that there is need for the Police to make the necessary arrangements to render sufficient security for the participants of the meeting. In addition, the duration is also necessary for the Police to inform the general public who may be within the neighbouring areas of the meeting. 

Furthermore, the committee proposes amendment in clause 7(2)(b) by substituting for the words “which shall be between 6.00 a.m. and 6.00 p.m.” the words “provided that the political meeting shall not be held beyond 6.00 p.m.” The justification is to put a time limit on when political meetings can be held. 

Madam Chair, the committee further proposes that immediately after clause 7(2), a new sub-clause be introduced to read as follows: “The written notice shall be filed in triplicate and upon immediate completion of part nine thereof, copies shall be given to the applicant and the proprietor of the venue where the public shall be held.” And the justification is to clarify on the procedure after the notice has been served.

The committee further proposes that a new sub-clause be inserted immediately after the new sub-clause (3): “(4) where a public meeting is held, each of the persons organising it is guilty of an offence if (a) the requirements of this section as notice have not been satisfied or the date when it is held, the time when it starts or its route defers from the date, time or route specified in the notice; (5)It is a defence for the accused to prove that he or she did not know or and neither suspected nor had reason to suspect the failure to satisfy the requirements or as the case may be the defence of date, time or route to the extent that an alleged offence stands on a difference of time, date or route; it is a defence for the accused to prove that the difference arose from circumstances beyond his control or from thing done with the agreement of the authorised officer or by his direction.” Justification is for clarity. 

Madam Chair, the committee further proposes an amendment by deleting sub-clause 3 and the justification is to reduce the risk of intimidation of venue users. The committee also proposes renumbering subsequent to the clauses that we have proposed amendments to. 

The committee also proposes amendment on clause 7(5) on page 7 by substituting the word, “Inspector-General of Police” for the words, “An authorised person”. Justification is that the authorised officer is more accessible than the Inspector-General of Police and this is the matter that hon. Otto was raising. 

MR ALEPER: Madam Chair, I need to be guided. Shall we be right to proceed in this manner? We have just stood over clause 6: “Meaning of a public meeting” and now we are talking about “Notice of a public meeting”, yet we have not even agreed upon what a public meeting is. Are we procedurally right?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the amendments are simple. One is to reduce the time from seven-day notice to four days. The other one is to say that meetings must take place between 6 a.m. and 6 p.m. in the evening. Are those harmful?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Chair. Some of the clauses we have stood over are very fundamental and it is very difficult for us to pronounce ourselves on seven or four days unless we know what kind of meeting we are talking about. For instance, the other day, Madam Chair, you adjourned the House for two weeks for us to consult. Some of us just rang radio stations to make announcements and we started our public meetings. So until we have agreed on what we are regulating, it becomes very hard to submit on whether three or four or seven days are enough. 

Some of these clauses we are standing over are very fundamental even for the clauses which we are going to consider. Maybe, it may be important to consider what our honourable member raised that we first sort out the basics, which largely form the other provisions a head. So we are likely to stand over everything else by the end of the day. So I seek your guidance on whether it is not important for us to first clear these important clauses before we proceed?

MS NTABAZI: In line with my colleagues, we have stood over everything. How are we going to know which meetings are supposed to be done and by whom? For example, the Bill says that the time should be from 6 a.m. to 6 p.m. Now is it covering everybody? You cannot stop our dear President from consulting his people – most of his meetings start at 6 p.m. onwards. How can we stop the President from addressing a meeting? So in the previous clause, we should indicate those who are excluded and those who are included before we can proceed with this one. 

MS ALASO: Madam Chair, I wish to concur with the concerns of sorting out ourselves in the definition of what we are seeking to regulate or give notice for. If you do not know what type of meeting is allowed in this Bill, you wouldn’t know how much time the procedure for giving notice requires. 

Go back to that example; you gave us two weeks to do a whole constituency like Arua which has 31 counties. How can you give notice of seven days and then manage Arua in another seven days. If you look at clause 7(b), without knowing which public meeting you are regulating; you even risk regulating meetings of structures - most of our party meetings or meetings with our agents happen after 6 p.m. after you have done rallies the whole day and then you sit down with your agents and then you plan for the following day – (Interruption)

MR SSEGONA: Madam Chair, last time when you gave this House time to go and consult, I called a meeting of my own structures to plan the way of consultation; we were arrested in a hotel by an OC of a police post. The reason was that we had not sought permission from him. Eventually after negotiations, he said, I will sit in this meeting. I said, “But you are not invited; you are not a politician.” I think that element is very fundamental. 

MS ALASO: Thank you, honourable colleague. When you look at clause 7(3), you need a letter from a proprietor. The implied meaning is that we have decided that we will regulate indoor meetings as well. If probably I am renting a place and I am in a hotel and the police needs me to prove that I have sorted out my financial obligations with the owner of that place. So without sorting out the definition of a public meetings, we are going nowhere by trying to deal with notice of public meetings. Until we agree on what we want to regulate, the rest of the exercise is not very constructive. 

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chair, she has spoken exactly what I wanted to bring out. However, I want to say that if we are to continue with clause 7, then instead of saying notice of public meeting, we should have said, “Notice of procession, assembly and so forth” - we should have started from there. 

Adding just a little bit on what hon. Alaso is saying, here we are defining the procedure of how to seek for permission to hold public meetings. And what is a public meeting? We still do not know. I would now suggest that if we are to proceed, the chairperson of this committee and the responsible minister should tell us – in case there is any incidental procession, because for example, in my place, when you go to some place, the youth will tell you to come out of the vehicle and you will do so. If the police find you running with such youth to a place B for which you have given a notice for a meeting, what will be the procedure? That is why we cannot proceed with this clause 7 on giving notice for public meetings.

I am saying this because – I know that hon. James Baba is my senior advisor; we all come from the West Nile, but for heaven’s sake, you are a little bit detached from this chaotic politics of ours. So, let us accept facts. Even hon. Lt Gen. Katumba Wamala, I think your constituency is so disciplined. You just tell those guys to get on the assembly. You will just give a command: “Nyuma geuka” and they will turn around. But I and the honourable Attorney-General – you will recall that sometime in 2003, whenever you came to Naguru go-down when I was still a young boy, we could even lie in the middle of the road and you could not pass until you talked to us . (Laughter) So, how do we provide a procedure under clause 7 for such incidental processions that may occur without preparations? We can only do that after clearly defining a public meeting.

THE CHAIRPERSON: There was a proposal by hon. Lt Gen. Katumba Wamala. I hope the chairperson of the committee and the responsible minister will take it into account.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, a good Samaritan sent me a document written by the Minister of State for Internal Affairs. I know he never intended to give it to us but somehow I got it. The document is your document, Mr Minister, and I am sure, Madam Speaker, you don’t have its copy. Maybe I will give it to you later, but that is where he is reading from.

When you read through this clause 7, you realise that it relates to other clauses that we have stood over. Clause 5 is even worse because it says that whenever a police officer writes to court, that would be enough. But we have a lot of cases where police have lied to court. The best example occurred during Col. Dr Kiiza Besigye’s trial on the defilement case. It was discovered that the then Director of CID, Ms Elizabeth Kutesa was lying to court during cross examination. She had actually falsified the record. So, if we are to make a law, it should be a law that will stand a test of time.

Given the fact that we have not agreed on what a public meeting should be and whether the police have powers to just write out evidence to court because they are very good at lying – I have a practical experience. Recently, a regional police commander came to my petrol station where I do my private business with other policemen; they shot bullets and took money away. When I went to report the matter to the police, they officers refused to record my case.

From that point, I think you can now see how dangerous this clause is. At this stage, Madam Chair, I want to plead with you that it is high time we suspended debate so that we can go and consult before we move on. Failure to do that, we will have nowhere to go. I appeal to the chairperson of the committee and the minister without a constituency together with the Attorney-General to agree with – (Interruption)

MR JAMES BABA: I may be a minister of no consequence,  honourable member, but for someone to sit in this House as an Ex-officio, that person must have something of substance. So, is the honourable Leader of Opposition in order to call me a person of no consequence when I have a record of distinguished service in the foreign service of Uganda with awards honoured by this country after I represented it in the international arena? Is he in order?

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, but honourable minister, the Leader of Opposition was just talking about the issue of elective constituencies. He was not saying that you are of no consequence to us. That is what he talked about.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: So, Madam Speaker – (Interruption)

MR JAMES BABA: Even if I have no constituency, I am in this House because of some substance that I carry.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, if it were only about substance, all the professors at Makerere would be sitting in this House because they have all the experience in the various fields, agriculture, law and so forth. So, that is not the case.
Anyway, what I was saying is that given the fact that we have not yet agreed on the meaning of the term “public meeting” and on exempt, I propose that we stop here. We cannot move ahead without those - I know that even my brother Rt hon. Amama Mbabazi who has just come in will agree with me.

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Madam Chair. Given the fact that clause 6 was very clearly stood over because of the differing opinions on the number of people – (Interjections) – okay, because of the many reasons but at least that being one, I want to make an observation on clause 7. If I have a letter and I am supposed to start the meeting at a certain time – clause 6 affects clause 7 (c) on the proposed site of the public meeting and the estimated number of persons there. So, I feel that if we are to decide, clauses 6 and 7 should move concurrently. Also before we go for consultations, they have to be made consistent. I am saying this because I might not be able to establish the number of people I expect to meet, for example, at a market place. If you ignore the issue of numbers in clause 6, then inevitably, we have to reconsider clause 7 (c). Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we have not resolved on what constitutes a public meeting under clause 6. Also we haven’t agreed on what constitutes a public place. The proposals in clauses 7,8,9,10,11 and 12 all relate to public meetings. In the circumstances, we defer further debate on this matter. I don’t know how much time the minister wants because it seems these things are really intricate. How much time would we need to come back?

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Chair, I agree that we stood over clause 6 to reconsider the meaning of a public meeting. There are also proposals that it impinges on clause 7. But most of the elements of clause 7 can be discussed without really – (Interjections) – that is what I believe – can be discussed and addressed – (Interruption)

MR SSEGONA: Order! Madam Chair, you have just made a ruling to defer further debate on this matter. You only allowed the minister to advise this House on the time he needs. So, is he in order to take us back to the debate without a substantive motion yet you have already made a ruling?

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, the minister cannot now proceed with the Bill because I have already ruled on the deferment of the debate. So, we just want to know how much time you want to resolve the intricacies involved. 

MR JAMES BABA: We will be ready by tomorrow, Madam Chairperson - (Interjections) - we will come back tomorrow –(Interjections)– tomorrow afternoon –(Interjections)– yes. You asked me about time and I am saying tomorrow afternoon. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Minister, really tomorrow? Are you sure? Hon. Minister, I know that maybe you want to complete the Bill but just the time we have spent on these very few clauses means that you may require a bit more than one night. It is already 6 O’clock; I also need the chairperson to-

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Chair, I have heard the concerns of Members about the need to reflect over this and I think it is only reasonable that we give ourselves enough time to do it. My proposal, therefore - and we have agreed about it here - is that  today being Wednesday, we could give ourselves up to next Tuesday to revisit it. And that is what I propose. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, we will resume debate on this matter on Tuesday next week.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, I remember you directed the Minister of Finance that we are behind schedule on the budget process and therefore the time that the Prime Minister is proposing coincides with the time when you ordered that sectoral committees are supposed to be engaged in the budget and we are going to have a very tight schedule. Don’t you think you need to consult with the Prime Minister and Government so that we do not lose time on these matters? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, but the sectoral committees are not really engaged in this Bill. They have got other work they are doing. So, let us defer this to Tuesday and then we can do other work in the meantime. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the bill entitled the Public Order Management Bill 2011 and passed –

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable, you first move the motion for the House to resume before you report. 

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Chair, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House do report thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Public Order Management Bill, 2011” and passed it with some amendments –(Interjections)– and passed it with some amendments. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Order! What is the problem? Yes, hon. Kwagala.

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Whole House has just resumed from committee stage and when we were at committee stage, we were asked to postpone the Bill for record purposes - for debate. Is it procedurally right for the hon. Minister to inform this august House in the process that the House has passed that Bill? Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Members. Although we have not completed the Bill, we have done certain clauses and it is important to report which ones we have done so that it is recorded.

MR JAMES BABA: I apologise, Madam Speaker and hon. Members. I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Public Order and Management Bill, 2011” and passed clause 1 –(Interjections)– yes, clause 1 was passed, clause 3, clause 4 and clauses 6 and 7 were stood over and we stopped there. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: But clause 3 was stood over - that was the interpretation. We stood over the interpretation.

MR JAMES BABA: We stood over clause 2, clause 3, clause 6 and clause 7. Clause 5 was deleted. And clause 4 was amended. I beg to report. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the Whole House regarding clause 1, clause 4, as amended, be adopted. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE MARRIAGE AND DIVORCE BILL, 2009

THE SPEAKER: No, I meant Item 6. Hon. Members we were supposed to receive reports from the party Whips about the consultation; I have not yet received them. So, I want to know whether you will present these reports tomorrow so that we can know what to do. I told you yesterday that I want your Whips to report on the consultation –(Interjections)- well, your whips should report - the NRM whip should report. So we shall go to that matter tomorrow after receiving the reports from all the Whips. Go to Item 6.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY FOR THE PROPOSAL BY THE GOVERNMNET TO BORROW EURO 55 MILLION FROM THE EUROPEAN UNION FOR FINANCING THE WIDENING AND IMPROVEMENT OF THE KAMPALA NORTHERN BYPASS AND THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE MBARARA BYPASS

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Chair, National Economy.

5.59
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Stephen Mukitale): I thank you so much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the Committee on National Economy, I would like to present the report and proposal by Government to borrow Euros 55 million from the European Union for financing the widening and improvement of Kampala Northern Bypass and the construction of the Mbarara Bypass. (Interjections). This is the Northern Corridor to which Uganda is a connecting point; so Kampala and Mbarara, including Jinja - (Interjections) - Tororo is part of the stretch up to the borders. Madam Speaker, I will try as much as possible to summarise given the time pressure. 

The committee did interface with the ministry – 

THE SPEAKER: Order, members. Please let us receive the report. 

MR MUKITALE: And we made reference –

THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, when the chairman was talking of the Northern Corridor, for me I thought Northern Corridor was meaning from Malaba via Soroti up to Sudan. But what I am seeing here is borrowing money for a bypass up to Mbarara – (Interjections) - listen to me; we even got about $150 million.  

Madam Speaker, would it not be procedurally right that the chairman gives us the total borrowings that we are going to incur so that we see if all the corridors are inclusive? I do not know the one from Tororo via Soroti up to Sudan so that we can discuss with a sober mind. Otherwise, in this matter –

THE SPEAKER: Point of order from the honourable minister.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Can you put order on a procedural matter? Which schools did you go to? This is a procedural matter and it is first. Sit down, please! Procedure takes over.

Madam Speaker, would it not be procedurally right for the chairperson to give us the plan of the total borrowing to confirm which bridges and roads are going to be done because given these circumstances, piecemeal handling is going to lead us into a disaster?

THE SPEAKER: My difficulty is that I have not heard what he is going to say. Now if we stop him from saying it, then I do not know whether we shall understand why he is borrowing.
    
MR ODONGA-OTTO: Just a second, Madam Speaker. This is the third time that I am raising this kind of concern. Maybe we should be told which criteria the Government uses for this House to know that the Mbarara-Ntungamo Road is more urgent than that one of Karamoja because we are not just going to rush to consider the committee report. Some of us do not have our people there to consider our roads. So which criteria were used to determine that Mbarara-Ntungamo Road – they are even talking of widening? Which criteria did they use? This is a preliminary point of concern that must be disposed of. Why not Karamoja? Why not Kasese? Why not Terego? 

6.04
THE MINISTER FOR WORKS (Mr Abraham Byandala): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I sincerely thank my brother, hon. Odonga-Otto and the others who are raising concern over this.

There are criteria that we use; we look at the internal rate of return but colleagues, this is an East African project we have in the Community –

THE SPEAKER: Point of order.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the minister has talked about internal rate of return which means that you have a minimum on which to base and say that the project is viable. If you went to Karamoja, the road is very bad and it means that cars will not go there. And if cars will not go there, you will not be able to have a net positive. 

Now, if you are using internal rate of return determine, when will you do Karamoja? So are you in order to use internal rate of return where there are also social benefits on some roads? [MR ODONGA-OTTO: “And the Jinja-Bugiri Road.”]

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether I can rule on that. What is the procedure for deciding how to get a road? Yes, honourable -    

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, Government must use some scientific – some hard reasons and some soft ones. We have done roads which we consider are for the benefit of this country. We are working on a road whose internal rate of return is below 12 percent but we went there for other reasons and we are working on this road –(Interjections) - no, we are working on Karamoja. We just signed a contract to construct a road from Moroto-Nakapiripirit and that is in Karamoja. So, Madam Speaker – (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Just clarification. 

THE SPEAKER: Clarification, hon. Ekanya.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I respect the Minister for Internal Affairs – the Minister for Works –(Interjections)- colleague, I kindly beg you that let us listen to one another –

THE SPEAKER: Order members, please.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, you remember very well the meeting we had in your boardroom. Colleagues, we had a meeting in the Speaker’s Boardroom with officials from the Ministry of Tourism and they said that if this country is to have the internal rate of return that the minister is talking of, we need to do a tourism circuit road and Ministry of Tourism gave us a map of the tourism circuit road that is very vital for tourism to boost the revenue of this economy. 

If you look at the work and investment plan of the Ministry of Works, these roads are not there; there is no money. The question of  Mbarara By-pass is just – I had business in Mbarara, Madam Speaker – you find Boda-Bodas, taxis, special hire but what this economy needs are the tourism circuit roads that traverse this country so that tourism –(Applause)– that tourists - Madam Speaker, I want to ask about the Northern Mbarara Bypass that has not been in the investment plan of the Ministry of Works for the last 10 years but there are roads that have been on the Ministry of Works’ investment plan for the last 15 years but they are not there. (Applause) Is it really proper procedure for this Parliament [MR BYABAGAMBI: “Procedure.”] Let me conclude –[MR BYABAGAMBI: “Procedure, Madam Speaker.”] I am on procedure.

THE SPEAKER: Let him complete.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Further procedure.

THE SPEAKER: No. Let him finish and then I will come to you.

MR EKANYA: Is it proper for this Parliament to be diverted from – we have work plans, we approved Vision 30; we approved the National Development Plan but when it comes to practical allocation of resources, resources are not directed. 

Another important matter, Madam Speaker and honourbale colleagues, this money that you are approving in the middle towards the end of the financial year is for this budget which is ending. Where are we going to put this money or is it for the next budget? There should be a procedure of handling things. Is it part of the coming budget or for this budget that is going to end? So, there are issues of procedure and technicalities that Government needs to sort out before we consider this money. 

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, I thank my brother, hon. Ekanya, for the information he has given but this is not the only programme my sector has. I want to inform hon. Ekanya that I have got, under the Contractor Facilitation Financing, over 200kms of roads and this is part of the programme. Today, dear colleagues, I am here seeking for your support for us to borrow this money to work on the Northern Corridor – (Interruption)

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, the Committee on National Economy is a subordinate committee of this Parliament. This borrowing was brought to the plenary and assigned to the committee and the committee has made a report and before we present the report, I can hear Members presenting issues which are actually in our report. 

As a committee, the matters of internal rates of return and the matters of criteria have been covered in the reports. Madam Speaker, I request that I am given 15 minutes to summarise the report so that what Members are doing can be done in the usual procedural manner. Otherwise, I am worried of the way my honourable colleagues are moving. I would like to ask, are we proceeding right because if you went to the details, we have attached details of internal rate of return, how other projects of our regions should be done and you will be making our committee’s work and efforts really null and void if you don’t allow us 15 minutes to present and then Members can debate. Colleagues, I request that you listen to the committee report and then you will respond. That is my prayer. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know that when we have not been satisfied with the report, we have rejected it in this House and we have done so on a number of occasions. So, I am really appealing to you to listen and when we debate, we shall decide whether we are accepting it or not. Let us hear him. Let us hear the chair.

MR MUKITALE: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. Colleagues, I mentioned earlier that copies have been circulated and I am told more are coming from the printer. The project is intended to contribute to urban development and better road environment, enhance decentralisation of business activities now centralised in the central districts of Kampala and Mbarara, reduce air pollution and noise pollution of the traffic from Mombasa which goes through Kampala and Mbarara. This project is actually additional to the already existing Kampala Bypass which was done single carriage instead of duo carriage – (Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Speaker, this is my second term in Parliament. I have sat in this Parliament and we have passed loans and loans to build roads. For the last seven years that I have been in this Parliament, my district has benefited from not even half a kilometre of tarmac but I keep sitting here in this House to pass loans to build roads for others. 

I want to have a copy of this report so that I can follow word for word so that I am able to see what the chairman is actually saying - that they have included all of us in the report. I want to have it before we proceed. Is it procedurally right for us to follow the report without a copy? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it seems that they are not sufficient copies in the House. So, can we arrange for Members to get copies so that we can receive the report tomorrow when they can read and follow what we are doing? So, can the Clerk please arrange for all the Members to get copies so that they can receive the report tomorrow? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, we want to request through your office that before the chairman presents tomorrow, he should give us a plan of the road network in Uganda - those that are working, those they are going to work on and where the money is going to come from and the resource. If you don’t do that, when we read that report tomorrow we shall say, “The Ayes have it” and when they have it, we will forget about it. We need this report. This government is getting stones from Moroto; they have destroyed even the small road which was in Sironko to Mbale, which was built by Obote and yet the stones are from Moroto. When you go to Moroto, you may think you are in another country. When it rains, it takes five days to reach Moroto. So, Madam Speaker, the chairman should bring us a plan before tomorrow and we debate this report. 

MR MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Madam Speaker, I just want to be heard. First of all, I am the MP for Buliisa, where there is no tarmac like hon. Franca Akello said. So, there is no loan which has gone to Buliisa. I thought I should make this clear but most importantly, this Parliament has sessional committees and standing committees. The Leader of the Opposition is over stretching the mandate of my committee. We have a committee on infrastructure which has a responsibility of looking at the road sector in detail. What this Parliament assigned me was to look at this project of these figures and I am not in the habit of expanding my sphere of influence to take over the role of the infrastructure committee. I would like to restrict myself to my mandate and that is to scrutinise this borrowing and we have done justice to this. Just let us sleep over this document; I am sure tomorrow you will come and agree with us.

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Members, there is nothing to discuss. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: I am just giving information. Madam Speaker, we have two statutory bodies; one covers the Northern transport transit corridor and it is headquartered at Mombasa and this stretches from Mombasa to Burundi. Another one is the central transit corridor which stretches from Dar-es-Salaam to Kampala and it goes to Rwanda and Burundi. These transit corridors are statutory and the roads under these corridors are the national roads and the transport corridor is specifically only being funded by the European Union and the other ones are specifically funded by the World Bank. So, in tomorrow’s debate, keep in mind that the Northern corridor is not imaginary. It is physical and it is a statutory body which is budgeted for by this Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: But now you are pre-empting the report that has not been read. What are you contributing to?

MR KYOOMA: Madam Speaker, I want to raise clarification, which will help us tomorrow because surely we have to thank the government in as far as road network is concerned. However, I think where we have reached, it needs prioritisation. I have seen in this report that they are using factors like economic internal rate of return, NPV - I want to assure you that if we are to use these factors that they are putting here then it will mean that we shall always put roads where they are. 

For example, if you are to get the NPV for Kampala, it will always be higher than other places and this means that other places will not get roads. I think the committee and the minister should help us in prioritisation because if you are moving say from Gulu to Kitgum, you cannot get a road. Instead of concentrating on these roads here - we credit the government for the road network but let us prioritise so that the whole country is networked in terms of roads. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what you are saying is important but we are responding to a report, which has not even been presented. Let us allow the Clerk to distribute enough copies to all the Members and tomorrow we receive the presentation. Then you can raise those very important issues. Honourable members, the House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow.

(The House rose at 6.21 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 4 April 2013 at 2.00 p.m.) 
