Thursday, 21 April 2005  

(Parliament met at 2.32 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala)

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you. I regret to say that last night at 10.00 p.m. I received distressing news of the arrest and remanding of two of our colleagues, hon. Mike Ocula and hon. Okumu Reagan.  It shocked me when I heard on news and I immediately rang the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to find out what had happened.  The Prime Minister equally did not know much about this; he might have heard it on news.  He informed me that he is going to ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to make a statement on the issue.  

This is the little I know about this matter. Yesterday, I think around 10.00 a.m. or so, I received a call from the Director, CID, inquiring about some two letters she had written to the honourable members through the office of the Speaker.  On checking my file, I found that on 15th this month, my office received a letter dated the same day, addressed to the two members.  It was through the hon. Speaker of Parliament.  On receiving it, I just signed it and the copies of letters were sent.  

Therefore, I never followed what happened.  So I said, “Well, as far as I am concerned, the letters were forwarded.”   So I asked her the number, she gave me her telephone No. 259564 to contact her later. So, I contacted hon. Michael Ocula. I said, “Did you receive the letter from CID?  He said, “No, maybe they are in the Pigeon hole, but I will check”.  I said, “Well, this is the number of CID, you can talk to her”.  But hon. Ocula said, “No, I am going there”.    

Then I contacted hon. Reagan Okumu and again asked him about the same question. He said, No he had not received the letter. I said, “Well, you can talk to her, this is the number, but please, let me know later what has happened.”  So I went away. I came here and we proceeded.  

Following the communication we had received from the Pope Nuncio, I had indicated to you that we shall adjourn early to enable those who wanted to go to Lubaga to attend the service.  A number of you were there. I was there, His Excellency the Vice President was there, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, the Deputy and many other ministers were there.  So, I did not know anything about that until 10.00 p.m.  

This morning when I came in the office, I rang the Director CID. I told her that “When you were arresting Members of Parliament you should have informed me.”  She regretted not having done so.  So that is the position and that is the news I received yesterday. 

Honourable members, I understand we have received the Order Paper; there was no indication of the statement by the Minister of Internal Affairs. The Minister of Internal Affairs is ready to make the statement on the matter.  Thank you very much.    

Honourable members, if you want to talk on this issue, I suggest that since the Minister of Internal Affairs is going to make a statement, you rather keep your comments and make them after the statement of the Minister of Internal Affairs. 

 But if you have another issue, for instance, the hon. Bright Rwamirama has approached me, you can say what you want to say.

2.35
MAJ. BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (Isingiro County North, Mbarara):  Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members.  I am rising on a point of concern as a Chairman of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I would like clarification from the Minister of Finance and Minister of Energy about ever increasing fuel prices without explanation.

Mr Speaker, this year alone on 11th March, fuel was increased without notice and people only discovered the increase at pump stations.  Petrol rose from Ugshs.1,720 per litre to Ugshs.1,770 with an increase of Ugshs.50   On 25 March 2005 petrol rose from Ugshs.1,770 and on 7 April 2005 fuel was again increased from Ugshs1,770 to Ugshs1,890.  The net increase in this year for petrol is Ugshs.170.  

Mr Speaker, honourable members, on 11 March 2005 diesel was increased from Ugshs.1, 430 to ugshs1,490, making an increase of Ugshs.60.

On 12 March 2005, a day after, Ugshs10 was added on.  On 25 March 2005 it rose by Ugshs.50 and it went to Ugshs1,550.  On 7th April 2005, Ugshs.90 was added on and the price for diesel now is Ugshs.1,640. The net increase in a spell of two months is Ugshs210.  If we can receive an increase of Ugshs.210 in a period of less than one month, Mr Speaker, without explanation, it is a cause for fear.

Mr Speaker, the fuel is a very valuable in our day today life.  Food is increasingly becoming expensive, transport costs are going up and we need an explanation.  I think Uganda is becoming the only one State where they increase the price of fuel without notice and it goes unnoticed.

It is against this background, Mr Speaker, that we need an explanation. I also like to inform the House through you, that as of yesterday I checked the oil prices they were at the lowest ever in the history.  So, I thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the Minister concerned will make a statement.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Supplementary to that, Mr Speaker.  My impression is that after receiving a very elaborate concern from the Chairperson of Finance Committee, it is important for the Leader of Government Business to tell us when he intends to answer the concern instead of postponing it indefinitely. 

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Last Thursday I raised an issue concerning the indiscriminate eviction and distraction of property on wetland.  The Rt. hon. Prime Minister promised that he would ask the Ministry in charge to come with a statement. But on this Order Paper, Mr Speaker, I do not see where the Minister is going to give us a statement on that. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I want –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But, honorable member, you did not give me notice that you intended to raise that issue.  The issue was raised last week, you did, but now this is a new issue.  If you want to make such a statement, please, you approach me so that I get to know what you want to say.  But if you are talking about something on the Order paper, the Prime Minister has heard and he will order the Minister concern to make a statement.

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Secondly, I want to commend the work done by honorable Rukundo Serapio for this report I have got from the desk.  When he went to India and –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, no, please, let us stick to the Order Paper.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT
2.41
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  This is a statement to Parliament on the arrest of hon. Ronald Reagan Okumu, Member of Parliament for Aswa County, and hon. Michael Nyeko Ocula, Member of Parliament for Kilak County.  

Mr Speaker, on 12 February 2002, one Alfred Bongomin of Pabbo in Gulu District was murdered in cold blood. Police investigations led to the arrest and questioning of a number of suspects.  

Information received from these suspects indicated that the murder of Alfred Bongomin was a planned and premeditated criminal act. In addition, the information suggested that planning of the crime was done in hon. Reagan Okumu’s house in Gulu.  Hon. Okumu and hon. Ocula are said to have participated in the meetings.

When investigations in the crime were completed, the matter was referred to the Director of Public Prosecutions for his decision. The Director of Public Prosecutions noted that there were sufficient grounds to prefer charges against hon. Okumu Reagan and hon. Michael Ocula. 

MRS HOPE MWESIGYE:  Mr Speaker is it in order for hon. Salaamu Musumba and hon. Alice Alaso to raise placards in Parliament, tantamounting to a demonstration.  Is it in order?

THE SPEAKER:  Apparently it appears the Members want to speak and they want to speak that way. (Applause) However, honorable members, this is an honorable House where any member is free to express himself rather than being a venue for demonstration.  But if you think that is the best way, then you will be forfeiting your opportunity to speak when the chance comes and I have noted.  Please, continue with the statement. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, since the two are honorable Members of Parliament the Speaker was, as a matter of protocol, informed by the Police. 

I must quickly add that the Speaker of Parliament has explained the circumstances in which the CID sent a letter or letters to the two honorable members summoning them to the CID headquarters through the Speaker.  So, it was just informing the Speaker that the Police required the two honorable members.  

The honorable Speaker drew the matter to the attention of the honorable members and advised them to report to the Police.  Honorable Okumu Reagan got in touch with the Police ad requested to report at 3.00 p.m. yesterday and indeed this is what he did.  He was received and briefed about the allegations. Charges were read to him; thereafter he was produced in court.   

Hon. Michael Ocula reported shortly before 4.00 p.m. yesterday.  He was similarly treated.  It is worth noting that, their reporting at 3.00 p.m. was their choice. Therefore, the Police could not have arraigned them in court at an earlier hour.

Honorable Speaker, under the Constitution all persons are equal before and under the law.  We all enjoy equal protection of the law.  In addition, anybody suspected of having committed a crime is entitled to a fair hearing in the courts of law. This is the only way that justice can be done and be seen to have been done. It is in pursuit of this fundamental objective that the two honorable members were arrested and charged.  Mr Speaker, this House and general public should let the law take its course.  I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

2.50
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister for coming up with this statement to the House.  But I have some critical issues to note, Mr Speaker. 

From what we have read the murderous act took place on 12 February 2002, which is now more than three years ago. I read that investigations have not yet been concluded on the matter. But most important to note is about the timing of the arrest. More so at this critical transitional period where we also need to note that the peace process that is currently under way in the Northern Uganda needs the painful confidence building. 

I also thought at this point in time to have the leaders from that region. We are aware that Government has sacrificed a lot, has spent so much but choose to carry out the arrest at this point in time. I consider it very unfortunate. It should have been at another time. But when we see the investigations are still under way and we are told that there were apprehended because they killed someone. 

Mr Speaker, I have also read that these allegations to members and the incrimination are being done by an NRA returnee. It is really a matter that we need to take seriously. 

I may take this opportunity to remind members of this House particularly those who were in the bush and those who were in Kampala in the period of 1980s, members will recall the so-called computers, Obote used computers. These were the people who were allegedly caught as rebels but were paraded along the streets of Kampala. If he came to identify or to talk to you briefly, those who were guarding him would immediately arrest you. 

People know Kaluna Sewava from Kikunyu and the havoc he did on the streets of Kampala. Not that he was meeting people he knew to be rebels but anybody he happened to shake hands with, those who were escorting him would immediately arrest you. Even in the panda garis, people were taken to the identification centres and the so-called computers would be brought out to identify. 

Mr Speaker, when I noted this, I really take it exceptionally bad and it does not augur well with this Government. It is aware of all those atrocities and I would not have expected it. The trick that was used, Mr Speaker, because they say that since the two were two Members of Parliament, the Speaker was as a matter of protocol informed by the police. 

I am sure, as the Speaker has mentioned to us, he was not given all those details as to why the Members of Parliament were being required to report to the CID. So, I do not know why the Minister chose to put the Speaker into this whole picture. 

I do not know because the Speaker has just told us that he was not informed about those details. So, my humble appeal to Members of the House, to Cabinet, to Government, let us have the pain it has taken us to build this confidence. Let us seem to be understanding the delicate situation; the delicate path this country is taking. For the sake of peace if we have already gone 99 miles, why not an extra mile?  Why the hurry? We had all the time back, but at this critical point, this is when we are seeing Members being arrested. 

There are many Members who have been having records, who are know, who have not even denied that they killed people, innocent suspects, they are known around this country. But once you see Government choosing to act on one group or on certain people against the other, Mr Speaker, I must tell you, I am a disappointed person and I really feel hurt. I do not know if I am sitting here to legitimise that. This is the time we need to be honest with ourselves and make sure that dark history does not come again. We should all be inpatient with such steps that seem to be taking us back in our dark history. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.55
MR NORBERT MAO (Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When I approached you, Sir, this afternoon telling you that I have a prepared statement, you understood the point and I am grateful for this opportunity. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, yesterday after the close of Parliament, I learnt that hon. Okumu and hon. Ocula had been summoned to the CID and were facing arrest. When I rang hon. Okumu, all he told me was, “we are already under arrest and the police is driving us to court.” 

Outside the main entrance to Parliament, I saw the Minister for Security, hon. Betty Akech. I approached her and informed her of the arrest of the two. She said, “I have not been officially briefed. I am aware that investigations have been going on, but I have not got an official brief”. I then told her that I was surprised that as Security Minister she is not briefed about the arrest of MPs. 

I then drove to Buganda Road in the company of hon. Katuntu and hon. Prof. Ogenga Latigo. In court we listened in shock as murder charges were read out against our two colleagues. They were accused of the murder of Alfred Bongomin who was Movement Chairman in Pabo sub-county in Kilak County, Gulu.

Mr Speaker, I know something about the genesis of this case and with your permission I will share what I know with this House. In 2002 during the LCV election period, hon. Ocula, Okumu and myself campaigned and supported Mr Uma Kerobino, he is the chairman of the Democratic Party in Gulu District and the other candidate who was supported by the Movement was hon. Lt Col Ochola Walter.

One day during the campaign, I learnt from the propriety of Gulu Sun-Set Hotel where I was staying that Alfred Bongomin who happens to be the relative of that propriety of Sun-Set Hotel had been shot dead by some gunmen. Later I heard public statements from Gulu LCV Chairman and the then Lt Col Charles Otema trying to link some of us to the murder of Mr Bongomin. 

I was shocked to learn that statements were made that people like me had jubilated upon hearing of the murder of Mr Bongomin. There were even statements that my car was seen in Pabo late in the night after the murder. All these false statements were intended to suggest that we could be linked to the murder. 

 Needless to say on that fateful night I was away campaigning in Odek sub-county in Omoro, and upon return my car was parked in my parking space at Sun-Set Hotel. I recall issuing a strong statement stating that I could never jubilate over the news of anybody’s death, even my bitterest rival. Like all people of goodwill, I was very sad that once again unknown assailants had murdered a human being.

For the record, Mr Speaker, I have never believed that killing political rivals can yield any good. I have never considered the late Bongomin as a serious political rival and he never once posed a threat to the candidature of Mr Umar Kerobino. 

I also stated that it is preposterous for anyone to suggest that my car was seen leaving Pabbo late at night on the day Bongomin was murdered.  I thought it was insane to try to link me to this gruesome murder.  

I wrote condemning the manner in which the police was being used to harass supporters of former LC V candidate, Uma Kerobino.  Soon after, Mr Speaker, trumped up charges were leveled against two of Mr Uma’s agents: Mr Steven Olanya who is in jail even now and Mr Peter Oloya also known as “Yumbe” who spent days in police custody before being produced in court on 4 March 2002.  

My view then and my view now, Mr Speaker, is that these politically motivated charges intended to harass opposition politicians and intimidate the population into supporting pro-President Museveni politicians.  The two were detained in Gulu prison without an iota of evidence linking them to the murder of the movement chairman.  It became clear that the rules of politics had been changed and pro-NRM politicians had chosen to persecute their opponents using the coercive state institutions.  

I recall we wrote a letter complaining to the Inspector General of Police about Gulu DPC, Mr Alfred Bitwire who was playing a key role in these persecutions and had turned the police into a tool for harassment of opposition politicians.  Soon thereafter, about 20 other political activists were arrested and detained in Gulu Barracks before being taken to court and detained in prison.  These were the victims of the UPDF raid on Gulu Prison, in which Peter Oloya was murdered in cold blood. 

To date, Peter Oloya’s body has not been given to his relatives by the UPDF and the man who ordered his shooting, Col. Otema Charles, remains a high-ranking UPDF official and he is at large.  All our pleas for the Government to act against those who led this operation fell and continues to fall on deaf ears.  Mr Speaker, we consider this a classic case of the Government condoning impunity by its officers.  

After over a year in prison, the accused persons were released because the DPP then saw no sufficient evidence.  Actually, Mr Olanya Steven was cleared on those same charges.  Out of the many who were in prison, some of those who were in treason charges applied for amnesty.  

I know this, Mr Speaker, because I spoke to some of them before they applied.  In particular I spoke to Steven Olanya who is LC I chairman of Green Valley in Gulu, Mr David Penito who is a District Councilor of Lamogi in Kilak County, Mr Lawrence Lukuya and Mr Tonny Kitara LC III Chairman of Bungatira in Aswa.

Mr Speaker, those two told me they were going to apply for amnesty even though they were innocent.  The others, Mr Penito and Mr Olanya who are still in jail told me they would rather die in jail than to accept to be coerced to apply for amnesty.  The two who applied for amnesty were released and are now prominent in NRM politics in Gulu.  Eventually the other two were also released and they resumed their political activities, speaking on radio in favour of their political beliefs.  These two are actually UYD activists.  

Mr Speaker, last month, Olanya and Penito were picked up and detained in Gulu barracks for over two weeks before being brought to Kampala.  Originally, they were being held as treason suspects, then the allegations changed to that of attempted murder of Mr Tonny Kitara, LC III Chairman of Bungatira in Aswa.  These charges could not be sustained and eventually new allegations were brought that they were the ones who had killed Mr JB Ochaya, the late Kitgum RDC.  

But, Mr Speaker, JB Ochaya died following an ambush by LRA.  Also at that time, Penito was still in the seminary and Olanya was actually in jail.  He could not have escaped from jail to commit the murder and come back to prison.  Therefore, those charges could not stand.  When the accused persons met Col. Otema, he told them that all their problems would end if they joined NRM and stop being in the opposition.  

He gave the example of Mr Tony Kitara and Lawrence Lukuya.  He told them that the Government would not risk being sued for wrong arrest.  So, some sort of charges would have to be found.  When they appeared in court they were charged with the murder of Alfred Bongomin; it is the same Bongomin that it is alleged was murdered by our two honourable colleagues.

Mr Speaker, Pabbo is a place that has been a scene of many gruesome murders perpetrated by LRA, UPDF and some unknown thugs.  When I made inquiries in Pabbo, I was told that besides being the Movement Chairman, Mr Bongomin was also an army informer who informed on suspected rebels and their collaborators. 
I was informed also that his information had led to the arrest, torture and detention in fourth division headquarters of many young men.  Some young men reportedly fled to the bush when they learnt that Bongomin had reported them to the army.  It is these kind of people who are suspected to have murdered Bongomin.  Some residents think that the murder of Bongomin could have been a reprisal killing related to his activities as an army informer.  Pabbo seems prone to murders by unknown assailants.  

Just a few days after Bongomin’s murder, I learnt that another person had been murdered.  There have been many such murders.  I only wish all cases were treated with the same vigilance that the case of the late Bongomin is receiving.  I call upon the appropriate authorities to take up these matters and investigate and also to ensure that our people in Pabbo are more secure.  

Mr Speaker, as I end, let me comment on some of the broader issues stemming from these arrests.  One issue relates to LRA returnees that my honourable colleague from Lwemiyaga referred to.  It looks like there are now two types of LRA.  The first is the one we know led by Joseph Kony. The other are those who have either surrendered like Brig. Kolo or captured like Maj. Banya who seem to be under the command of NRM and President Museveni.  

The former continue to commit atrocities against our people, the latter have embraced the political language of the NRM and are being used to promote President Museveni’s third term.  While their victims are hurdled in camps, they stay in hotels, feed well and receive frequent audiences with the President; in fact they get more political audiences than elected political leaders.  

Our Constitution, Mr Speaker, requires that those who are accepted into the UPDF be of good character.  Perhaps it is time to inquire whether those with the bush record of some of these LRA are fit to be in our national army. We protest the fact that these LRAs are now being used as part of a smear campaign to undermine opposition political leaders from Acholi land.  

We also have to consider the significance attached, Mr Speaker, to Parliamentary immunities and privileges.  Should Members of Parliament be arrested like common thieves and felons even when Parliament is sitting?  What is the significance of the Parliamentary Privileges and Immunities Act?  What role should the Speaker play in defending the privileges and immunities of Members of Parliament?  

But, above all, Mr Speaker, we have to agree on the rule of the game of politics. Shall we address issues and present to our people alternative visions in an atmosphere of peace or shall we resort to violence?  Our history shows that oppression and suppression only breeds resentment and resistance.  Days of oppression lead to days of resistance.  As sure as day follows night, so shall resistance follow oppression.  

Those of us, who are in Parliament, Mr Speaker, have chosen peaceful means of articulating political interest over violence. We believe in our country and we believe in the rule of law.  We are not outlaws; that is why we are here.  We pay taxes, we vote; we participate in accordance with the law. We, therefore, protest the fact that we are treated like outlaws with criminal innuendos attached to our names merely because of our political beliefs.  If we believed that violence and armed resistance was the best option, Mr Speaker, we would not need long lectures from anyone before embracing that option. People always have a choice no matter what.  To President Museveni and his Government we have only one message, do not push us too far.

Finally, Mr Speaker, we are citizens of this country and we have rights and we shall not allow intimidation and State terrorism to drive us out of the political arena.  If that is the case then there would rather be no politics in this country.  

We thought the constitutional path to political participation was now open, it seems we were mistaken.  We urgently need reassurance and the starting point is for the Government to release all political prisoners now in jails around the country, starting with our two honourable colleagues –(Applause)  

Mr Speaker, today it is hon. Okumu Reagan and hon. Ocula Nyeko; who knows who will be a victim tomorrow. We all have to stand up irrespective of party affiliation and condemn arbitrariness and State terrorism.  

Mr Speaker, let us reflect on the words of one of the victims of the Germany Nazi regime. He was a pastor called Nimola. He said, “First they came for the communists and I did not speak out because I was not a communist. Then they came for the Jews and I did not speak out because I was not a Jew. Then they came for the trade unionists and I did not speak out because I was not a trade unionist. Next they came for the Catholics and I did not speak out because I was not a catholic. Then they came for me and there was no one left to speak out for me.”

Mr Speaker, let us speak out. Thank you.  

3.10
MR ISSA KIKUNGWE (Kyadondo County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Allow me to borrow the words of one wise man. He said: “This is not a mere change of guards, this is a fundamental change”.  Mr Speaker, Northern Uganda is a place – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Maybe for guidance, let us restrict ourselves to five minutes. Proceed, please.

MR KIKUNGWE: Mr Speaker, Northern Uganda is a very insecure place. Many people have died in northern Uganda, maybe over one million people are dead. I think if we had taken such steps maybe many lives would have been saved.  

Mr Speaker, it is very unfortunate when you look at the circumstances under which our two colleagues have been thrown to jail, and believe me, what has happened disproves whoever said this was a fundamental change; it was never.  A replica of many other things is going to occur in this country.  

If this is to continue, Mr Speaker, it is clear that I would rather die as a bushman myself than languishing in prison. I would die a very comfortable man, if I went to the bush than languishing in the prisons of Uganda.  So, if this is going to continue, Mr Speaker, it looks like this is going to create a lot of insecurity in this country.  The authorities that be, take note and rectify the situation, otherwise where we are heading is really very dark.

Mr Speaker, in my constituency there are people who died as a result of tax collectors and I was shocked. I was even forced to go and meet the Inspector General of Police because these people were released barely four days after and nothing has happened.  You go to a place where it is insecure and you imagine that you can really put sanity.

Mr Speaker, I am of the view that we put a committee or a commission of inquiry to investigate all deaths that have occurred in Northern Uganda to know who has killed these people and why.  I thank you. 

3.15
MR ZACHARY OLUM (Nwoya County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I would like to thank the Minister of Internal Affairs for this statement to the House.  I speak with a very heavy heart on this subject. We represent people who have been traumatized for very many years, people who have suffered and continue to suffer.  Ever since I came out of jail, I have never talked about this subject in this House. I feel compelled, Mr Speaker, to talk about this kind of arrest, which I went through in 1991.  

Mr Speaker, we had this incident of 18 political leaders who were rounded up from the northern part of Uganda. We spent three weeks in a barracks in Lira. We were arrested in Kampala and taken to Lira and we spent there three weeks. When we were brought to Kampala, we were charged with treason.  

The interesting point I want to raise here, Mr Speaker is that the prosecutor said they had sufficient evidence against us to prefer the charges on us. But then when we were taken to Luzira, the police officers who came to take statements from us asked many of us, “Why do you think they have arrested you?”  

This is a very fundamental statement, this brings me to the point where there are two conflicting statements regarding the status of investigation.  I am happy the Minister says the investigations are complete and so did the spokesman of the Police say the investigations are complete.  But the prosecutor - I do not know whether he is quoted correctly - he says the investigations are still on going. 

 Mr Speaker, my request is that if the investigations are complete, we demand a speedy trial.  We demand a speedy trial in order to clear the minds of many people in Uganda who think that these charges are being used as a holding charge to lock out political opponents and keep them out of action.

In the 1960s we had detention law without trial; many Ugandans languished in prison; they were never tried. Even part of the 1980s this law was used.  To date, we are using capital offences which is mandatory that you must spend so many days in jail. 

 I really urge the Minister to ensure that these people are speedily tried if there is evidence against them. This will clear the minds of many Ugandans who believe that during this period of transition, we are trying to use this kind of gymnastics to try peacefully put away your opponents until they are no longer effective politically.  

My people have been ringing me from Gulu from Kitgum from Pader; they are traumatized; they are indignant. They are saying if it is true that these people committed this crime and you have got the evidence and you have completed your investigations, we would like to demand a speedy trial. I think this will clear many peoples’ mind to ensure that really the rule of law does exist.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR JOHN KAWANGA (Masaka Municipality, Masaka):  Mr Speaker Sir, one of the most important things we need most in Government is credibility.  Credibility is the essence of confidence to the population.  I speak here because I have ever seen these things happen.  

I was arrested several times as Member of Parliament under Obote II Government.  So I know the effect of arresting a Member of Parliament and charging him with a crime.  

First of all, the population does not believe that Government is right, whatever you do. In these particular circumstances, it is even worse when these Members of Parliament not so long ago were beaten up and now they are arrested in similar circumstances.  It is very easy to arrest a Member of Parliament, put him in prison but then the Government becomes a prisoner of that Member of Parliament because it puts Government on trial from the time it put him in prison until you release him.  

I want to ask; how many Members of Parliament in the past have been arrested here, charged and found guilty, especially those who have been charged with political crimes.  There is one other member who was charged with murder here.  

So it is very important before you decide to put a Member of Parliament in prison, to be absolutely sure that what you are doing is correct because if it is not, it pollutes the political atmosphere. I am telling you the political atmosphere has now been badly polluted.  The whole process we are putting in place is in danger and to me that is much worse because I had never believed -(Interruption)

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA:  Thank you, hon. Kawanga for giving way.  Mr Speaker, honourable Members of Parliament the information I want to give my colleague- I have been one of the victims of political persecution. I was detained for two and half months over treasonable charge and I know how it feels.  

The next time I was put in prison over a trunk of charges was in the present Government where they put more than six counts of charges on me and one of those was treason.  Therefore, you even see, honourable Member who has given me way, that even the environment now is somber, everybody is crest fallen. So which means, where we are going, we may not realize the transition we are trying to undergo.  Thank you.

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI:  Mr Speaker, I am such an individual who has been terrorized by this Government. I have been charged four times and at no occasion have I ever been guilty. What a shame!  Why labour on me; what did I do? 

MR KAWANGA:  Mr Speaker, all I want to say that we are all equal before the law and if we commit a crime we should be treated that way.  But all I am asking is that Government has a responsibility to know that out there everybody is watching and questioning the spirit within which certain things are being done.  They know very many important people who have committed crimes of all kinds and have not been charged. (Applause) They know those who are untouchables and they also know when somebody is politically arrested.  

Now, I am asking Government to tread carefully, otherwise all the gains you have made can be ruined at this particular point in time. You can challenge somebody politically; you do not have to put him in prison.  I wonder why Governments ever feel that it saves problems by putting rivals in prison; it does not work.  

So, I am asking, please, as I have said, if these people have committed a crime, let them have a speedy trial so that this matter is put to rest quickly.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.25
MR ANANG-ODUR LAKANA (Kwania, County, Apach):  Mr Speaker, I wish to thank you and the Minister for the statement he has made.  But, first, Mr Speaker, I want my mind to be put at rest.  You have just told this House that you were never told details of this case. But on the second page of this statement - the very first statement - it reads: “Since the two are Members of Parliament, the Speaker was as a matter of protocol informed by the police”.  This statement needs to be explained. What was the Speaker informed of, because this is contrary to what the Speaker has just said? This statement to me could put our Speaker to ridicule.  I want the Minister to explain because if the Speaker was indeed informed then I do not know whom we should trust.  Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  No, excuse me; let me explain.   The only communication that I have checked on my file was a letter, which was addressed to these members through the office of the Speaker on 15 April 2005.  I have told you yesterday as I was going to the Late Mulira’s - that is when I got a call from CID inquiring about this letter. The letters are here and, therefore I did not know until 10.00 p.m. and immediately, I told you, I rang the Prime Minister.

MR ANANG-ODUR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Many murders have been committed in this country. But I want to refer you, Mr Speaker, to what happened in 2001 because some of them are very clear.  

In election violence report, which is before this Parliament, investigation shows that one person was killed in Rukungiri and one Capt. Nduhura whom I understand now he has been promoted to Major, and a name of one of the Ministers in this Government were named in this matter. In fact the wife of this Minister was supposed to have been the one who commanded the soldiers who shot this person to death. I can give more details to that. But, Mr Speaker, this matter, which is in Police in Rukingiri, up to now, no action has been taken.

Mr Speaker, in 2001, during campaigns, a vehicle of Maj. Oula drove through peaceful people who were walking and supporting their candidate and killed many people.  This vehicle, Mr Speaker, was known and is known, the driver of this vehicle is known, Maj. Oula has been promoted and I am told this driver also has been promoted.  He killed many people during that time.

Mr Speaker, in the same year, Mr Oppo Omolo and many others were beaten.  The case is in Police in Lira, it has been brought to this House, in fact, discussed.  The people who did this are known, and no action has been taken. 

 Mr Speaker, I am very surprised that our Government can be so efficient, arresting Members of Parliament who are alleged to have participated in the planning of this murder while the murderers and their commanders who are known are walking at large.

Mr Speaker, this is our country.  The honourable Minister of Internal Affairs is assuring us on page two that we all enjoy equal protection of the law.  Mr Speaker, what is he talking about?  What equality is there?  When we known murderers are walking scot-free and people are suspected and there is no proper evidence linking to any murderer arrested.  

Mr Speaker, let me tell Government this. I think we in the north have suffered enough.  Opposition has suffered let Government take note that it is better when they are dealing with human beings to have a limit.  

It is not going to help this country, Mr Speaker, to harass opposition Members of Parliament, to put them up in prison on trump up charges and hope that you are going to kill the spirit for freedom.  We are going to look for our freedom, we shall merge; we shall not be deterred by whatever face of persecution of intimidation.  I think it is very important for Government to know this.  Please do not waste your time because our freedom is much sweeter than the harassment and intimidation you are revisiting on us.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.30
MAJ. JOHN KAZOORA (Kashari County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Yesterday when you adjourned the House, I was preparing to go to Lubaga for prayers and I was informed that our colleagues had been arrested and they were at Buganda road court.  I rushed there and indeed I found them there.  The whole process took about five minutes and I was in a shock.  I asked hon. Katuntu what this meant. 

When I went there I thought it was a simple offence like traffic or what and we could stand surety.  Hon. Katuntu told me, “Kazoora, this is a capital offence only bailable by High Court on two main considerations: Advanced age and serious illness.  Otherwise, it may take up to 365 days without bail, and when they are over the High Court may not be in session and this may take long”.  

I would like to appeal to honourable members to imagine yourselves in that situation young as hon. Okumu and hon. Ocula with a family and a young one.  Also to echo what my colleague from Lwemiyaga said. In this political transition you cannot even be considered for any elections and the timing.  

Mr Speaker, this brings me to some of the statements made by our leaders.  The other day, the President meeting leaders, said, “I hate Mao; I hate Okumu; I hate Ogwal”.  This is a leader holding our fountain of honour and these things happen.  

Surely, Mr Speaker, why don’t you think people are bound to be suspicious when these things happen?  Hon. Okumu, hon. Ocula, after that they were beaten and a few months they are arrested.  Certainly, there is a level of suspicion, which is, I think very unfortunate, made by some of our leaders, making careless statements to fellow leaders.

Mr Speaker, what hon. Norbert Mao said touches me and I am worried.  These days, His Excellency the President likes Kashari very much and visits it almost every month.  On one occasion on the 26th of March, this year, while attending a give-away ceremony in my clan, before my relatives, he said, “Tell hon. Kazoora and hon. Matembe to come back to the Movement.” In front of my mother! “If they do not, they will be hit by a tornado”.  Hon. Nasasira was there, hon. Mary Mugyenyi was there, hon. Guma Gumisiriza was there.  What tornado; does he control heavens?  Certainly he knows the kind of tornado he is talking about!

The other day, on the 10th of this month, he invited the leadership of Kashari to Rwakitura. I gave him my mind and I did not mind if I had been taken to Luzira from there. He said, “Hon. Kazoora and hon. Matembe are politically squinted and they walk mbaliga- I do not know how they say it in English- and let them be careful”. 

Now, this is a President before the people who elected me. Tomorrow if I am arrested and charged of treason I will certainly be prepared for that kind of tornado. A whole Head of State cannot keep saying such a statement to a person and you remain in the way it is. 

Mr Speaker, the honourable Minister for Internal Affairs, on page 2, last paragraph, he says: “We all enjoy equal protection of the law”.  This is emphasized. “We are all entitled to a fair hearing in courts of law”. I would like to imagine, Sir, that this cuts across board. For purposes of emphasis because political decency stops me from mentioning people who worked under State Research Bureau under Idi Amin. They are on the frontbench; they are Ministers; they are here –(Applause)- and hon. Rugunda certainly knows this. So, is this statement justified?  Let us have fair protection by the law and fair treatment.  I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.39
CAPT(RTD) BIRIMUMAASO MULINDWA (Bukoto County West, Masaka): Mr Speaker and honourable members, it is unfortunate that our colleagues were arrested and my only prayer is that they get a quick and fair trial. I do not believe that we members of Parliament are above the law; we are under the law. 

Mr Speaker, why do I make that prayer? It is my humble experience when I was arrested. At that time the Speaker’s Office was not informed, but I knew I was going to be arrested.  A colleague of mine, an honourable Minister came and told me that you should write an apology and then things end there.  

I told him as far as I am concerned I am innocent and I rather go to jail.  It was on a Friday when a colleague of mine rung me. He said,” We are coming for you”. I said but why do you arrest me on a weekend? I am coming on Monday?  So, on Monday, I was lucky, I got my big plate, my mug and walked to CID and went to court.  

My belief was that I will get a fair and quick trial. I went through the legal process and convicted.  I appealed and when the then Principal Judge was to hear my case, the day I went to be heard, I saw a letter that he was a long time friend of mine and, therefore, he could not hear my case. I did not know how he looked like and up to now, we have never meet –(Laughter)- but he could not hear my case because we are long time friends.  I never gave up. I appealed and I was assigned another Judge.  

On hearing my case, he said, “Why have you wasted your time, you stole the money.” But the case against me was not embezzlement, it was not corruption, it was abuse of office and I was a political appointee.  So, I was convicted.  The next day the His Excellency the President issued a presidential pardon.  I am very grateful that he did that but I was not satisfied. I appealed against the conviction.  

During that time when the Attorney General was giving his explanation here whether I should remain a Member of Parliament or not, he sighted that I was charged with embezzlement but on the charge sheet there is no embezzlement. 

When I tried to talk to the then Minister of Ethics and Integrity, hon. Miria Matembe, she said, “Well, there are bigger people involved in this case”.  The next day I heard on radio that, “We have caught a big fish of the Movement and he is corrupt”.  Well, I appealed against this case. I have not given up; I will not give up until justice is got.  

My only prayer for my colleagues is that let them get a quick and fair trial. Let us not judge them either here or outside before court rules and the final court because I have seen several courts.  

I was disappointed in the first court. I was told directly that I was not going to win the second court. I appealed up to the Supreme Court. I believe we are entitled to justice. I pray if they feel it is not fair they should pursue this case until the Supreme Court. The higher you go the freer it becomes.  I wish them well.

3.44
MR ABDU KATUNTU (Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As hon. Mao said, immediately we learnt of this saga, I, together with Professor Ogenga Latigo, proceeded to Buganda road Court.  We know what is on record in the court. 

The case was called at exactly five minutes to 5 O’clock and after the magistrate had read the charges to our colleagues, he did ask the prosecution what they had to say, as it is the ordinary procedure in courts of law.  

The State Attorney said investigations were still going on. This is on record and this is five to 6.00p.m. yesterday -(Interjection)- no, by that time it was in fact around maybe even quarter past five because we went up to around 30 minutes to six, yesterday.  

Now the hon. Minister of Internal Affairs in his statement paragraph 3, hear what he says: “When investigations in the crime were completed, the matter was referred to the DPP for his decision.” I was there yesterday together with our colleagues. The state is saying investigations are going on. You are telling us investigations were complete. You can see the lies, this is political persecution, simple; just face it. Hon. Birimumaso, at least he was lucky. He even had Ministers telling him that you apologise and things will end here. In fact what he does –(Interruption)  

MR BEN WACHA: Mr Speaker, I worked as a State Attorney and so did you. There is a statement which the hon. Minister made here which is factually wrong. It is never true that files are first sent to the DPP before a person is charged. A person is first charged and then the matter is sent to the DPP after police investigation is finished. It is at that point that the DPP makes up his mind as to whether to maintain the charge or to drop the charge. Mr Speaker, somebody somewhere is lying to this House. (Applause)

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, the point I was making - I thank hon. Wacha for the information. You see hon. Mao is telling us that a Col Otema is busy telling some of the accused that if you now think in this direction, you will be forgiven, your wars will end there. This is how we are running this Government. Some of us have been very, very careful, Mr Speaker. We have tried as much as possible not to degenerate into extremes. Do not push us to the wall, please do not. And as day follows night you know what will happen. 

Mr Speaker, what justice is the honourable Minister talking about? I was assaulted together with colleagues in Jinja by meetings organized by the Chairman of the Movement Caucus in this House and even the report of the Committee setup confirms that. Where is the justice you are talking about? We were beaten up, we were humiliated and when we came here and put our case, Mr Speaker, what did the Minister tell us? Police is investigating. It is now over a year. Why do you think we shall suffer this injustice? 

We are talking about families. You take people to jail on a holding charge at this time? Mr Speaker, is it by accident? Is it by coincidence that the people who were beaten up by the national army are the very ones now being arrested? Is that a coincidence?  And what did the Minister say at that time? She said it was justified, because they should not have engaged into a talk with Sergeant. 

Mr Speaker, honourable colleagues, it is time to wake up. This country does not belong to the managers of this Government; it belongs to all of us –(Applause)- I can assure you, nobody will persecute us and he gets away with it. It is only a matter of time. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.54
MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI (Ibanda County South, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  It is absurd that really my two friends are now in Luzira. They are my friends. We have different political ideologies. I believe in the Movement, they believe in Multipartism, but they are real friends of mine. I know some of us might be happy that these people are in prison. But everybody here is a potential candidate to be in prison either now or tomorrow. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, I come from Ankole in particular in Ibanda. We have got our saying or I will give a story of two people. One person was called Mr Lie and the second person was called Mr Truth. They had the same mission, going to the same place on the same day. Mr Lie woke up early in the morning at 6.00 O’clock, Mr Truth walk up at 1.00 O’clock, it was already in the afternoon. They all moved. The other one had moved before, Mr Truth followed, but Mr Truth was there first.  I am saying that by arresting these two people, it might be a step towards the truth. Whether it is political or not, the truth will come out. 

Therefore, it is my humble prayer to the Government, which I support, that these people should be brought to court immediately and they speed up their trial so that the truth can come out and everybody can know the truth. Nobody should seem to be above the law, Mr Speaker. Some people you see them doing criminal acts, then they are protected by the press and sometimes you wonder why. You sometimes wonder why. 

Mr Speaker, it is good that these people have already been charged. I believe in our judicial system here. At least I have got some trust in our judicial system. If the trial is speeded up, the truth will come out.

Yesterday Mr Reagan Okumu was seated in front of me here, we were cracking a joke, and then all of a sudden he walked away. I did not know what was going to follow thereafter, and I was surprised. Even hon. Ocula wrote me a note here; we had our own private dealings. But by the time I went outside, just when I was entering my vehicle a certain man in Katwe rang me. That man is called “Historical Ssalongo”. He rang me and said, “John, sorry for your people being arrested”. I asked, “Who”? He said, “Hon. Reagan Okumu and hon. Ocula”.  But I was with them in the Parliament, how quick – like lightening! It is really absurd honourable members. 

The only thing I want from my government is that they speed up the trail. Let everybody in this country know the truth. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.54
PROF. OGENGA LATIGO (Agago County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to start by thanking you very much for providing this opportunity for Parliament to express itself on the unfortunate arrest of my two colleagues, hon. Ocula and hon. Reagan Okumu. 

Yesterday when I was in the Committee of Local Government’s meeting, a journalist called me and he was saying that he had been at CID headquarters and he was given information that four of us were required to make statements at CID and he was asking me if I had already gone to the CID headquarters. He named hon. Reagan Okumu, hon. Ocula, he named me and hon. Odonga Otto. 

After that hon. Reagan Okumu called me and then he related to me the case of him coming to you and being required to go to the Police. Then he said that the Director CID, Madam Kutesa, had told him that they were required by their letter to be here at 9.00 a.m. He said, “Since I have just got the information and I am in committee, let me then come after lunch, at 3.00 p.m.”  That is the reason they went at 3.00 p.m. It is not that they choose to do so. If they had the information earlier that they were required to be there at 9.00 a.m., they would have gone.

Hon. Norbert Mao gave some background to this incident and the charging of our colleagues, and I think it is important for Parliament to look at that background critically. These two people were initially arrested in Gulu and they were arrested after they had organised a political meeting. Two days later, on either the 8th or the 9th, there were gunshots fired at the home of LC III Chairman of Bungatira, one Tonny Kitara whom I cite because when we were beaten Tonny Kitara wrote in the Red Pepper rejoicing over our beating and even saying that that was the trend of things to come in the politics of Acholi. It is in the newspaper and I quoted that in my statement when we were beaten. 

When the Police checked they did not find any evidence as to why they should arrest the two who the Police were told were responsible for the gunshots at Tonny Kitara’s place by the DISO of Gulu. When the Police said, “We do not have any evidence to detain these people”, the DISO of Gulu again called and said, “We need these people”, and they sent an army truck. The army truck picked them, the Police in Gulu refused to put these people in police cells. The army truck picked them on the 9th from the police station and took them to the barracks. When they were in the barracks we made attempts, we talked quietly with the military leadership in Gulu so that the matter could be resolved. 

The one person who stood against their release was Col Otema. The same Col Otema, whom we told you clearly was responsible for our beating. Hon. Nyeko Ocula raised the matter of the length of detention of these two in Parliament when the Army Commander was here. I do not know what happened but it seems like the Army Commander directed Col Otema to release these two. What happened instead was that on the morning of the 4th of April these people were driven at night, on a Good Friday, from Gulu. They left Gulu at 10.00 p.m. They were brought and put in the CPS on Saturday morning. 

The minister’s statement in paragraph 2 says that “Police investigations led to the arrest and questioning of a number of suspects”. If this statement makes reference to the three people who were on the 16th of April charged for the murder of the same Bongomin, then we want to know if this statement is true. Because when these people were arrested in Gulu, it was on the allegation that they tried to kill Tonny Kitara. When they came here they wrote a statement to the Police on the allegation that they killed RDC Ochaya. How come that these same people are the ones who then gave evidence? I would like to bring these facts –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not want to interrupt you but speaking as a lawyer who has prosecuted cases of this nature, by divulging all these things you may prejudice the defence of our colleagues, or the case. You do not have to cite weaknesses here, this and the other, as if this is a trial. I advise that you do not have to go into details because you may prejudice the investigation of the case.

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to now bring a number of facts to the attention of the House. When this problem was going on we tried our best to resolve the matter through our colleagues. I contacted Minister Rugunda, discussed the matter with him; we contacted hon. Amama Mbabazi and discussed the matter with him; I contacted Dr Crispus Kiyonga and we discussed the matter with him; and I also contacted the Attorney-General and discussed the matter. This is because we had some background on this matter.  

My appeal is that we know for a fact that we have been warned, loudly warned. One day we were with Col Otema, Lt Col Ochola and some of my colleague, Members of Parliament. Col Ochola said jokingly that, “Professor, you come back to DP because this FDC thing is about removing bread from peoples’ mouths. There will be death in it”. He said this under the mango tree in Acholi.  

I also know for a fact that on the day my colleagues – I was in Ethiopia then - my colleagues went to see the President and the President in reference to each one of us expressed doubt as to whether I could be involved in subversive things. He dismissed my brother hon. Odonga Otto, he said, “This young man is sometimes erratic but he has no problem”. But then he said, “You, hon. Reagan and Ocula, I have no question about you”.

Lastly, this problem that we see repeating itself, much of it does not emanate from outside Acholi. When we were beaten it was not a plan that was hatched outside Acholi. This arrest of my two colleagues and the earlier three who were in jail and with whom they will appear tomorrow, this was not planned from outside Acholi, it is all from within. But I know that being in the Movement for certain Acholis is a very difficult thing. Yesterday when we were going to see our colleagues, some other colleagues of ours from Acholi could not even dare to talk to us. When we were beaten, some of our own colleagues made statements in praise of our beating and that, apparently, is what the Movement is about. 

It reminds me of one important statement one day cited by hon. Jacob Oulanyah here, which was made by President Museveni that when you put Nsenene in a gourd they eat each other. When you put grasshoppers inside a gourd they eat each other.

Honourable minister, I thank you for your statement but I am beginning to debate in my mind whether what former President Milton Obote said about you is true or false. (Laughter). Many of us, in interacting with you, had a lot of faith that while dealing with you and discussing such matters with you, we are dealing with a straight and honest person. If this is being pushed for you to do, it would be more honorable for you to leave that ministry because you have no political ground to lose or defend. I pray that Ugandans will listen to the voice of our people. We have suffered for too long. This thing now if you are in Gulu it is like the Pope had died in Rome. Everybody is so upset, everybody is so confused, everybody is so desperate, and they keep asking, “These people who keep harming us - ?”  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR KIBIRIGE SEBUNYA: Mr Speaker, what was going on in my mind was, are we as Members of Parliament immune to prosecution or arrest? 

My friend, hon. Mabikke, appeared in court the other day for issuing a bouncing cheque; any of us can appear in court or anywhere for things you may commit out there. We go on and on and discuss – my friend Latigo, we used to teach together at Makerere University and he goes on labouring a point, and everybody labours a point - are we immune? And must we continue to discuss this case like we are immune to prosecution? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe the Attorney-General can help us on this.

4.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I would like to clarify the question of immunity, which has been raised on the Floor of this House. The relevant law is the Parliament Powers and Privileges Act, Chapter 258 of the laws of Uganda, part 2, which refers to privileges and immunities of Members of Parliament. The relevant sections for members to note are 2, 3 and 4.

Section 2 - allow me to read it - states that; “No civil or criminal proceedings may be instituted against any Member of Parliament for words spoken before or written in a report to Parliament or to a committee, or by reason of any matter or thing brought by the Member in Parliament or a committee by a petition, Bill, motion or otherwise”. So the immunity to prosecution is in respect of words stated or written on the Floor of this House or in committees of Parliament.  

The other point is freedom from arrest for civil debt during a session and this is in section 3. It states as follows; “No member shall be liable to arrest for any civil debt, except a debt the contraction of which constitutes a criminal offense”. 

In other words, if you purchase goods or services by way of a cheque and it turns out that the cheque is a bad one, you cannot plead immunity of Parliament or you cannot even hide in the precincts of Parliament to dodge criminal arrest for issuing a bad cheque.  

The third point is exercise of the civil process. This is section 4; “No process issued by any court in Uganda in the exercise of its civil (not criminal) jurisdiction shall be served or executed within the precincts of Parliament while Parliament is sitting or through the Speaker, the Clerk or any officer of Parliament”.  

In other words, summons for a civil case cannot be served on a Member of Parliament while Parliament is sitting or within the precincts of Parliament. Criminal summons, however, can be served on a Member of Parliament even if he is within the precincts of Parliament. For the record, Sir, I thought I should make that clarification.

The second clarification I would like to give is that the importance of the office of the DPP and indeed its purpose is to read and peruse criminal files even before charges have been preferred against an accused person. In fact the purpose of the DPP perusing these files is to avoid the question of the Police coming up with frivolous and unsubstantiated criminal charges against the accused person. So, it is in order for the DPP to peruse a file and advise the Police either to charge the accused or not. I thought I should make  those clarifications so that this debate proceeds from a position of information as far as the law is concerned. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.14
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honorable members, like many of you I feel saddened –(Laughter)- very saddened indeed that the debate has assumed the direction it has. I am also saddened, actually, that someone is in jail because I know that it is not pleasant to be in jail.  

It is this government, the Government of the Movement, after the struggle of the National Resistance Movement, which restored the rule of law in Uganda. The restoration of the rule of law simply means that everyone is subject to the law. It does not mean rule by law. The two are different. Rule by law is where some people apply the law on others and not on themselves. The rule of law means everyone is subject to the law; everyone must live within the law. So when as minister very clearly put it, some citizens of this country, including Members of Parliament, including supporters of the Movement, of this government, are suspected to have run foul of the law, then the law must take its course. That is what the rule of law means. I am, therefore, saddened –(Interruptions)

MR KIKUNGWE: Mr Speaker, the former Attorney-General has been seated just next to the Minister of state for Parliamentary Affairs. I do not know where she has gone but this Minister of state for Parliamentary Affairs is wanted by the Police for having served in Amin’s State Bureau, or whatever it is. For him to come and say that everybody has got to face the law, I just want to know whether he is in order to apply the law selectively.

THE SPEAKER: Well, what you have stated is that one of us is required by the Police. That is your position, right? But the honourable member who was on the Floor is not the Police, he is just expounding the legal principle, so he is in order.

MR MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As we have been saying all along, that we must really in this House maintain a certain level of the decorum and decency, we must exercise a certain level of respect for each other. I obviously do not know hon. Issa Kikungwe, I am not going to say things about him. I simply respect him as a Member of this Parliament because he was elected by his people. I would like to request him and others like him, to give the same respect to others.

In respect of trumped-up charges, what are trumped-up charges, Mr Speaker? What the minister has said, his statement is that someone was killed in Pabbo and that those that have been arrested have been arrested on suspicion that they had a hand in that murder. It is clear from the minister’s statement, and from hon. Katuntu’s statement and others, that these brothers were charged with a clear and specific offence of murder. What is trumped-up about that?  

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the hon. Amama Mbabazi, a lawyer, to come and mislead this House that a trumped-up charge is not that which is clear? Trumped-up charges can also be clear. A trumped-up charge is just fake, but the ingredients of the offence appear on the charge. So the issue we are raising is that this is political persecution and hon. Amama Mbabazi is here. He made a statement when the honourable colleagues who are under arrest now were beaten up by the UPDF, and he was justifying that very thing that time. Now he is doing the same thing. Is he in order to continue justifying wrong things against honourable colleagues?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I do not whether I should repeat myself. By my assessment of the debate on this issue is that you are prejudicing the parties. You are highly prejudicing it because some of you have gone to show the weaknesses in investigations. If there are weaknesses, they can be strengthened. Please, avoid being lawyers in this House and putting the case this way or the other. You are prejudicing our friends, or even the other side. Leave the details of the investigation to the Police. You can condemn the arrest, the timing and so forth, but going in the details, you are not doing a service to the people you are trying to help. You are doing a disservice to them.

MR MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Of course, the difference between hon. Katuntu and I is that I listened to him for the duration of his statement without interruption, but as you can see, he is different. 

This question of labeling people, especially labeling individuals who are specified in this House, I thought we had agreed that the practice should be that those who are unable to come here to defend themselves, kindly do not use Parliament to attack them. Do not use this Parliament to label them, call them names, or even criminalize them as is being done in the case of many officers that have been mentioned today. 

Mr Speaker, I am the Minister of Defence in charge of the UPDF. I can speak for the UPDF as an institution but when someone comes up with names, like hon. Odur was doing about a major, and saying he is a criminal and he is a murderer; when someone like hon. Latigo comes up and labels someone like Col Otema, surely I find it difficult to stand up and perform my duty of defending these people because I do not have information about the actions of the individuals. 

I would like to say, however, that I know one officer who has been named, Col Charles Awany Otema, and I would like to say that Col Otema -(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I am standing on a point of order. You have ably guided this House in regard to the utterances of words, which may prejudice the case facing our brothers. Is it in order for the hon. Minister of Defence, a whole lawyer, one time Attorney-General, to pursue a matter over which you have guided us?

THE SPEAKER: I have not prohibited anybody from making their contribution the way they want. I have given my own assessment, so you are free to prejudice the case. (Laughter)

MR MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I was saying that Col Otema is a fine gentleman, from the knowledge I have of him. I have served with him for a very long time; he is a dedicated officer of the UPDF and is completely committed, 100 percent committed, to ending terrorism in the North. I know that Col Otema has crossed some people’s paths because of his great fight against terrorism in the North. Otema is the Officer in charge of Intelligence gathering in the whole of Northern region and Southern Sudan; and in that duty he has been able to move around and get information that has led to the successes of the UPDF we have so far registered against the LRA. (Applause). So, I would like to use this opportunity to commend, applaud and inform this House that Otema is one of the finest officers the UPDF has today. (Applause)

I would like to advise those who may have information against individuals -(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been listening to the Minister of Defence praising one of the officers of the UPDF, Col Otema Awany, who also happens to be my son-in-law, if you did not know. I just want clarification from him. Is it the behaviour of a disciplined soldier to rise up early in the morning the day after Barlonyo massacre, to try and bury, secretly, the bodies of the victims of the massacre in order to conceal obvious evidence that could have helped in the investigation? Does that describe that distinguished, disciplined, soldier of the UPDF Col Otema Awany, my son in-law? Thank you.

MR MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I did not know that Col Otema was the son-in-law of the distinguished hon. Cecilia Ogwal. Now that I know –(Laughter)- as we say - maybe I should not say so. In normal developments of human beings, the old influence the young. The behaviour of the young usually reflects what they picked from the old -(Laughter)  

MR MAO: Point of information.

MR MBABAZI: Let me finish my sentence, I can give way later. So, I do not know if some of the behaviour described by hon. Cecilia Ogwal is in line with that. I have had occasion to talk about that matter. I did speak to this Parliament about it and what happened and I really have no intention of repeating it because it will divert us from this issue. 

I would like to advise, honestly, that if any Member of Parliament or any member of the public has any information about the criminal or even non-criminal behavior, which is not normal of an officer of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces, please, feel free to report it to the UPDF or even to the Police. 

MR MAO: Mr Speaker, I would like the honorable minister to remind himself that we have held discussions with him concerning the conduct of some of the officers. He may try to allege that this is just because he has stepped on some other peoples’ toes, but there are cases that are factual. I would like to refer to three.

The first is the one referred to by hon. Cecilia Ogwal, about attempts to organize a mass burial before investigations in Barlonyo. 

The second is the raid he organized and mishandled in Gulu prison in which a prisoner was killed in cold blood. His body has up to now not been handed over and there are letters on your file, honorable minister, concerning the body of Peter Oloya. 

At one time I also rang up President Yoweri Museveni to issue a complaint about Col Otema. He did not describe him as a fine officer, for your information. But he said, “Do you not know your UNLA people?” –(Interjection)- Yes, and then I told the President, “You are also in UNLA”. Then the President said, “But you know, hmm.”

But the truth is, when I make a complaint actually as a political opposition leader, I love it when the face of the NRM is that of thugs, because it makes my work easier. We would be in deep trouble if really fine officers were in charge. 

Around the time when we had some fine officers up in the North, we were beginning to find it difficult to even mobilize against the Movement. We had to work harder, we used to patrol together; we used to address rallies. So, when you have people whose conduct is questionable, I should not be complaining. But the truth is that at the end of the day we all gain when the UPDF is manned by decent people and that is the spirit in which we bring this up. We do not bring this in the spirit to discredit; we have to point out to you that there is a problem. 

Another charge, which has been brought up against this colonel, is using the UPDF helicopter to shoot at LRAs who were walking to peace zones gazetted by the President -(Interjections)- yes, this is part of the record of discussions that were held with President Museveni as a complaint for disrupting the peace process. 

So, we have people who want a peaceful approach, and we have people who want total war and they are doing everything possible to show that they are good. If that is your definition of good, we shall see really who is right. But with due respect, Mr Minister, take this information in good faith. We are not interested in tarnishing the name of any officer. Look at the facts. I wish you had even said you are suspending judgment. I am very upset that is your description of a decent officer. You can keep him there, but I do not know how much good he is doing for you. 

MR MBABAZI: Thank you, hon. Mao. Words of President Museveni, yes; words of President Museveni through the mouth of hon. Mao Nobert, hmm –(Laughter). 

I am constrained to say this - which is a repetition of what I said some time ago at that difficult time – but let me say it. When in Barlonyo the massacre of the innocent people by terrorists of LRA happened and the IDP camp was burnt down, after some days with all these bodies littered on the surface of that area and dogs - and this was even in the newspapers - dogs had started feasting on the bodies. 

A decision had been taken, not by Otema alone but it was an institutional decision that these bodies should be treated with the decency a human body deserves. Otema, and anyone who tried to do it, should be commended for trying to treat the dead with decency. It could not have been to hide evidence! In fact, to use the logical of hon. Mao, if anyone was interested in that evidence, it was us because it was the LRA that had committed this crime.  

Anyway, the extensive and comprehensive debate on a matter before court, I am not sure. I know you made this point, Mr Speaker, and I agree with you entirely. As the Minister of Internal Affairs said in his statement, every Ugandan enjoys the protection of the law, thanks to the NRM. If this House has confidence in our judicial system as I do myself, then let them or let the arm of the state charged with the administration –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: The honorable minister should by now –(Interruption)

MR MUTULUUZA: Mr Speaker, I was trained to be obedient. I remember earlier on you ruled that these placards be put down. Is it in order for hon. Salaamu Musumba to still display this placard?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think the honourable member is not satisfied that so far the impact she wanted to make has been achieved.

MR MBABAZI: In conclusion, I was saying that this business of political persecution, to say that it is political persecution because the person arrested is a member of the opposition, yet it is not political persecution if a supporter of the Movement is arrested, it is logic, which is warped. It is absolutely warped logic because we have had many people, as you heard hon. Mulindwa Birimumaso, he gave testimony here today that he was arrested and he was and still is a member and a supporter of the NRM. 

We have heard of many other members here, I think hon. Nyanzi was even a minister when he was arrested; hon. Moses Ali as well. Of these people that you see demonstrating in this House today, who stood up to say, “Do not charge hon. Moses Ali, it is political persecution”? Why are you saying it now because someone is a member of the opposition?  

All I want to say, ladies and gentlemen is, let the law take its course. Let the arm of state, which was charged with the responsibility to administer justice, do so. Let us not try to use the positions and the privileges we have to influence –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. I have got information that hon. John Patrick Amama Mbabazi, who is the Minister of Defence, was a specialist in forging passports when they were in exile. I do not know which law has taken effect for such kind of forgery, and he is at large. Is he in order to talk as if he is not a well known forger? (Laughter).

THE SPEAKER: Well, I do not know the facts but since you have said that he was in exile, the law in exile should have dealt with him.

MR MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I forgive hon. Odonga Otto –(Interruption)

MAJ. KAZOORA: Mr Speaker, I respect hon. Amama Mbabazi, whom we commonly called Karyabulo in the bush –(Laughter)- but you guided this House that we should speak for five minutes.

THE SPEAKER: Yes.

MAJ. KAZOORA: He has been speaking for the last 40 minutes, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)  

THE SPEAKER: I agree he is out of time.
 
MAJ. KAZOORA: Thank you, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Please, put a full stop.

MR MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I just want to conclude in one sentence. I say this one thing: I forgive hon. Otto. 

Two, what hon. John Kazoora says is true and I would like to ask this House, please, let the arm of the state, which was charged with responsibility of administration of justice, do its duty. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is time we concluded this matter. Hon. Akech has a personal issue to talk about. I think hon. Mao mentioned her name in her absence and she is trying to answer.

4.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR SECURITY (Mrs Betty Akech): Yes. Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to start by saying that I am very unhappy, definitely, about the arrest of my two brothers –[Hon. Members: “Ha, ha!”]- hon. Ocula Nyeko Micheal and hon. Reagan Okumu. 

I want to also say at the outset that I do not condone political persecution whether it is by government or by the opposition. (Applause)

Some of us from Gulu and the North generally have faced a lot of political persecution. When the votes were coming in in 1996 and 2001, and the first votes to come in were from Gulu where predominantly the opposition won, we had to take cover. Our houses were attacked, in the villages we were being attacked because we were in the minority, and we kept quiet. This is political persecution of the minority in a predominantly multiparty area. Women were beaten, all these things came up. So, I am saying this because political persecution is actually even being experienced from the opposition. It is a fact in the sub-region where I come. 

When Bongomin was killed, I was in Gulu and I was the first one to be informed, as the most senior Movement person in the area. I was then a Minister in charge of Higher Education. I was informed in the morning that Bongomin Alipewo had been killed and I asked, “Was the camp overrun by the LRA”? The answer was no. A number of people, about two or three of them, I do not know, went to this man’s home at night at a certain time - about 7 p.m. or 8 p.m. They found the wife at home, held her so that she could not move, as the husband was away, and when he came home he was caught and he was murdered. This is what happened.

Therefore, the next day we organized ourselves, all the Movement supporters in Gulu, to go and bury this man with decency. We buried him and a priest prayed for him. The priest was most unhappy about this kind of political persecution where a Movement person, who was very strong in the sub-county, was murdered in cold blood. When I spoke on behalf of His Excellency the President who had sent me a message, I said one thing that, “The Government will never rest until it has brought this culprit to book.” (Applause) Little did I know that it could probably touch my colleagues. I did not know. But I told the people that this is the stand of the Movement Government; that it will not allow political persecution to continue and innocent people to be killed for their support of the political party or system, even if they are in the minority. 

After that time investigations were ordered and since then investigations have continued. A few weeks ago a number of people were picked up on this issue. I knew about it, I heard about it, but we said, “Let the long arm of the law take its course”. 

It is yesterday when we left Parliament here where I was, I had left my office to be here and I met my brother at the front steps and he told me, “Are you aware that hon. Ocula and hon. Reagan Okumu have been arrested”? I said, “I have not yet been officially informed, but I was aware that investigations were going on. If the Police have decided this is the time to do the arrest, then maybe that is what has happened”. He told me that, “Madam Akech, I was also mentioned because they said my car was seen at the scene of the crime at that particular time when the man was murdered. Should I go and hand myself in”? I said, “Mao, if the Police have not called you, maybe you have been investigated and cleared”. That is what I told him. 

I went away because I was supposed to go to Gulu and attend a function today in Reagan Okumu’s constituency, which is also my constituency. But considering that these two colleagues had been arrested, I found it politically wise not to go to that function but to wait and see the developments of today so that when I go to Gulu I would be able to explain to the people. So I cancelled that trip and when I was in my office I was told that this matter is being discussed. I am surprised, Sir, because this matter, as you have advised, is really subjudice but we are continuing to discuss it and, therefore, we are bringing out a lot of issues. 

I want to say –(Interruption)

MRS AKWERO ODWONG: Mr Speaker, I have risen on a point of order arising out of remarks being made by hon. Wadri. He is shouting to the minister, “Judas Escariot, Judas Escariot”, and I cannot take this anymore. Is he in order to continuously call the Minister for Security, Judas Escariot? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I hadn’t heard. Well, if that was said, it is out of order but I have not heard it and as I have always said, let us not get personal. Please, respect each other. It is the best way.

MRS OKULLO: Thank you, Sir. May I now conclude –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please let us wind up this matter because we have another important item on the Order Paper, which we have today.

MRS OKULLO: May I now conclude, Mr Speaker, by saying that all of us have our beliefs, all of us are principled and we will continue to uphold what we believe in. If to some people it looks like being traitors that is up to them. 

Let me give examples of high-level personalities who were arrested just as my honourable colleagues did earlier. Tigawalana of Mayuge, a Movement chairperson, was arrested on suspicion of murder. He is a Movement person. The Prime Minister of Toro, Mr Katuramu, was arrested on suspicion of murder. The law took its course, he was convicted and he has appealed and I think the judgment was upheld. These are high-level personalities.

In Apac somebody who murdered another Movement supporter was arrested and he is still in. So, if we believe as I do in the justice system of this country, let us let justice reign because even the dead require justice; and the living require justice. We must give justice through this system so that everybody is happy. I rest my case. Thank you, Sir.

4.55
CAPT. DAVID MATOVU (Kooki County, Rakai): Mr Speaker, I thank you. I also want to thank the minister for the statement. I think colleagues have treated this matter well and I do not want to repeat myself. Hon. Ocula has been my friend, and is still my friend. I have been to Gulu, to his place, and he has been to Kooki, with Reagan Okumu. I only have a prayer for them that they get the energy and God gives them the health so that they are able to stand the situation. And like most of you have said, of course the state should speed up their trial and they get a fair trial. I think that is really enough for now.

Secondly, I want to follow up something about what hon. Mao and the honourable professor said, and I want to seek the indulgence of everybody. It looks like there is a problem and this Parliament must get interested. Hon. Latigo said, “Our beating was not hatched here; it was something from back home, from the Acholi region”.

Hon. Mao talked about the numerous killings, the loss of lives in Pabbo, actually he named some people and I was touched especially when he brought in the rebel reporters. I was touched because some time back this House was so divided about the Northern war until, I think it was the AMANI Forum that went to the North and we appreciated the situation. We all owned up to this insurgency. I remember hon. Kasamba presented something here, which moved all us. We said, “Let us get united and we get this war over with.” The Alaso Committee came in and a lot of emotions - we were all there, we become spokespersons and ladies for war –(Interruption)

MRS ODWONG: Thank you honourable member for giving way. Mr Speaker, I would like to inform this House that hon. Mao also in his statement gave a blanket statement to the effect that the pro-Movement MPs are behind this persecution. I wish to inform this House categorically that that blanket statement is injurious to our persons as Movement MPs from the area and it is a dent to our credibility –(Interruption)

MR MAO: Mr Speaker, fortunately, I consider myself not only a decent man but a gentleman, and a lawyer. I presented a written statement, which is actually here. There is nowhere in it that I talked of pro-Movement Members of Parliament. If it is there I would like it to be pointed out. I am always very careful with my words. I used to be Chairperson of the Acholi Parliamentary Group, which includes both Movement and so-called opposition Members of Parliament, I think I was misunderstood. Would the honourable member, therefore, correct it? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: There is no ruling. Was it a point of order? 

MRS ODWONG: Mr Speaker, the fact that the issue of the Movement came out, we cannot really divest ourselves from the issue that we are Movement people within the sub-region. I just rose to give this information that if we want problems in the North, even anywhere in Uganda to be stopped, then there is need for us leaders to re-examine ourselves. Let us search our conscience; let us be compatible with the truth. We should not try to justify things when we think that the yardstick does not measure up to our expectations.  

We are also not happy that our own people or our own leaders have been arrested but we say, “Let the investigations continue”, and we await the outcome. Mr Speaker, in giving this information I wish to categorically state that being in the Movement does not mean somebody is a sell out. If all Ugandans have embraced the Movement System, why is it that we as members in the North are subjected to ridicule? We are being subjected to ridicule like we are not nationalistic and we do not care about our people. 

CAPT. MATOVU: I thank you, my colleague. I now come to the amnesty. Government has never come up with an amnesty law on its own; it was pressured by us leaders both from Uganda in the region and even beyond, until Parliament enacted the amnesty law for the sake of peace in that region. There is now a new development. The people we fought for to get amnesty, we are now up in arms against them. We are calling them names and we are saying they should be either gagged or charged. So, I do not know what we are up to. Are we saying for example that now we should revoke the amnesty law? Are we saying so?

I want to suggest by way of a motion that in order to reconcile the North, in order to put the record straight, we need to refer – because of recent if you saw the New Vision of today, the rebels are sort of alluding to the fact that some politicians were responsible for this insurgency and that they were responsible for the failed peace talks. It looks as if we need to task our Defence Committee to further look at this issue critically. Otherwise, there is a problem in that region and I think the indicators are there for all of us to see.

Lastly, I want to comment something about the submission by hon. Kazoora about the President’s bad words and name-calling –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honorable member, are we not enlarging this debate? The debate arose from the statement of the minister on the two Members of Parliament who were arrested and remanded but as I see it is now becoming a regional matter. Please, it is high time we ended this debate.  

CAPT. MATOVU: Mr Speaker, this is very important. I remember last year or the year before the President was fundraising in Lira at a function - I think he was invited by hon. Cecilia Ogwal, and he took Shs 10 million in cash. If taking Shs 10 million in cash to Lira to boost our people and our honourable colleague means hating them, then I wish he could hate me also as Capt. Matovu, I wish he did that. 

In very many conferences we have been to, the President has always humorously called people names, “Yes my colleague Aggrey, my sister Cecelia”, some of us he does not know our names, I wish he did that to me. So, I think this was unfair. The President should be exonerated. The man is for all of us, he has a big heart. How many people has he assisted to go out of the country for treatment, how many people has he assisted in this House? I thank you.

5.05
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (Bunyole County, Tororo): I want to thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Last Saturday I was at Kyambogo University as a discussant in one of the student’s gatherings for students from Western Uganda: Ankole and Rukungiri. We were there with a number of colleagues: hon. Ruhindi, hon. Jack Sabiiti and hon. Mugisha Muntu who was the guest of honor, the co-coordinator of FDC. The issue we were discussing, which was been put before us, was good governance, constitutionalism and democratization in the country and the question was, where are we now?  

I will not indulge in what other people said but one of the values we thought we were beginning to appreciate is that given where we were coming from, there had been a steady movement towards progression to emphasize the fundamental change that was hinted on.

Mr Speaker, when a chronology of things begin happening that are difficult to explain, it becomes very human enough for Members of Parliament and Members of the public to begin interpreting them - we are human beings! These colleagues, who are in prison, are the same colleagues who were caned yesterday in their respective constituencies and like hon. Mallinga wondered, one Member of Parliament wrestled the UPDF, but they decided to beat a different one instead. That was a scenario that can never be heard of because – even the then National Political Commissar also laughed when the issue was raised on the Floor!  

Mr Speaker, to us, the biggest problem is the timing. Certain things happen in certain times and they become very difficult to explain to the people at the time and the manner they have happened, and it becomes difficult to some of us who must go outside to talk for the good things that the government has done. I have heard my colleagues on the front bench talking about respecting the justice; but at times the Members of the front bench themselves have made statements that undermine the justice because, they have doubted the justice system within the country. This sends mixed signals.  

Mr Speaker, yesterday I was reading a statement from the International Court of Justice, and the prosecutor said that if moving ahead with the investigation and prosecution undermines the process of peace in Northern Uganda, they can halt it for now, to create a pace so that people can begin healing. 

Mr Speaker, a lot has happened in this country and in Northern Uganda, we need to have a cut off point, when should the political persecution and killing stop in this country? In eastern Uganda the NRM chairmen LCIs were murdered, they were butchered so many in Busia, in Mudama in Tororo. In Northern Uganda now I hear the chairman Movement has been killed, and in Luweero the chairmen of UPC and others were being killed. This country must have a cut off point at a situation where everybody needs to know that we are all sinners and we need one another so that we can build reconciliation for this country.  

As I conclude, Mr Speaker, recently we were discussing with our fellow colleagues, Members of Parliament, and we were wondering what must be done for this country to begin appreciating one another. The other time I was reading what happened in South Africa, when Mr Mandela came out of prison. Mr Mandela did not look at what happened behind him, and that has created a very fertile ground for creating a healing process in South Africa and it is progressing highly in the economic, political and social front. In Uganda let us explore our opportunities and let us not do acts in times when people may misconstrue as to what the intention has been. 

Mr Speaker, with those few words, I also wish to join my friends to call for a quick, speedy justice and trial so that the truth can be brought to the surface, so that the justice system in this country can be upheld and so that our Members of Parliament should come out early enough for the political system so that people do not think that we are bringing up charges to prevent them to participate in the transition process. Mr Speaker, I thank you very much.

5.10
MR JACK SABIITI (Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the honourable minister for the report and I agree with him that all persons are equal before and under the law. I also agree with him that all of us should enjoy that protection of the law. Well, these are the statements from my brother the minister, but let us really understand what is happening in this country. The death of Alfred Bongomin, I think all Ugandans should say it was bad to happen and that whoever is suspected should be taken into the courts of law and quickly so that the truth comes out. 

But I would like, Mr Speaker, to touch on one important thing. If this arrest is not political, how come other important personalities in this country, who perished, their cases have been pending and nothing has happened? This brother of ours died in 2002; in 1987 our brother Kayiira was murdered, a report was compiled, suspects are there, and it is stated in the high circles that actually many people involved are known from within the current government but nothing has happened. I would like to know why, 1987 and it is now 2005.

Number two, Mr Speaker, in 2001 a person by the name of Mr Baronda and two others were killed in Rukungiri. Those who killed him are known, no one had bothered even to prosecute them, what is happening! In 2001, three women lost their pregnancies in Kanungu by a personal assistant to one of the biggest ministers from there; two men were made impotent, one lost his eye, but this person was elevated and given another rank. You see, these are things, which really cause problems.

MR MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order first to say that, well I was named by hon. Sabiiti, I am the only big minister from Kanungu.  Anybody who does not know that, I am telling you. (Laughter) So, I represent Kinkiizi West in this Parliament, and I am the Chairman of the Parliamentary caucus of Kanungu District. 

It is not true that any one lost any pregnancy in 2001 because of political disagreement or anything of that kind. It is true that there was an incident where one individual was hurt in a scuffle in the eye and that matter is pending before court. 

I would like to state very clearly, Mr Speaker, that I did not then nor now have any connection or link with it. Is it, therefore, in order for hon. Jack Sabiiti, who as you know, Mr Speaker and you promised one time ago that you would take up the matter yourself - he has taken it upon himself to perpetually malign my name in this House and outside, he has been to my constituency many times to campaign against me as if his presence would have any impact. (Laughter). Is it in order, therefore, unless it is substantiated, for hon. Sabiiti to make these allegations one more time?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Jack Sabiiti, can you substantiate the attack on the great minister from Kanungu?

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, I started by talking about the death of Kayiira and what I said I stand by it.  

THE SPEAKER: No, talk about the Kanungu prominent minister; we are only concerned with that.

MR SABIITI: I stated that in 2001, three women lost their pregnancies, two men were made impotent and one lost his eye and this was as a result of one personal assistant to the Minister of Defence, Amama Mbabazi, who actually inflicted all this on these people and all these were quoted in the cases in the High Court, which Mbabazi himself lost.

THE SPEAKER: No, but the point is, this personal assistant, if he did what is alleged that he did, did he do it at the instigation of the minister, with the knowledge of the minister?

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, when I was talking, you were chairing this House and you are still chairing this House. I said, personal assistant of the big minister and there he is.  

THE SPEAKER: As far as you are concerned, there is nothing wrong with the minister; it is only the personal assistant.

MR SABIITI: He is only putting words in my mouth.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have really taken a lot of time on this statement. Let us be serious with the issue about our friends and proceed. I think you make your conclusion so that the minister comes in.

MR SABIITI: Now, the issue I was trying to raise, Mr Speaker, is why are other cases being handled quickly but others are not? 

MRS MUKWAYA: Mr Speaker, some of us have restrained ourselves because we have been educated that, it takes time and being humble to allow reconciliation. But I think people who are demanding reconciliation should also know that you are seeking reconciliation for people who have been hurt by a system that is still being perpetuated.  So, Mr Speaker, is hon. Jack Sabiiti in order to deny a Hansard, which we can demand? Yes, the Hansard recorded that a big minister from Kanungu. He is denying it, but the Hansard is live –(Interruptions). I am a sober person and I have been listening. The only thing that can happen is to call for the Hansard to put the record correct.

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable member, the question I put to hon. Jack Sabiiti was that, “Did you intend to say that this personal assistant of the big minister from Kanungu did what he did, assuming he did, at the instigation of the minister, with the knowledge of the minister?” 

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, I am not in the court of law; I made my position very clear here.

THE SPEAKER: You are not in the court of law, but I am just trying to clear this point. Did you intend to say that this personal assistant of the minister, in carrying out what he did, was an agent of the minister? This is a simple question.

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, I said this was the personal assistant of the big Minister of Defence.  This man was promoted after all these incidences. But I did not talk about Amama Mbabazi; I was talking about the personal assistant.

THE SPEAKER: Was he promoted because of what he carried out?  Just help me to understand, please.

MR SABIITI: Well, the issue on this Floor of Parliament is, there are people who have done havoc and they get away with it. They are not prosecuted.  Now, this personal assistant did all this, as documented, there are Police –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Have you taken the report to Police?

MR SABIITI: Yes. All these are documented.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, if you have, why do you tie it with the minister because it is a Police case?  Please, let us really be clear on what we say and be relevant on what we are saying. Can you please wind up?

MR SABIITI:  Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

MR MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I would like to say that in 2001, my personal assistant was called Mr Mukumbi, and it is true that he was promoted and now he is serving in our Embassy in Khartoum on promotion.  

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I would like to state very clearly that that gentleman never, even for once, stepped in my constituency because as a civil servant, he would not even go in campaigns, he has never physically stepped there.
  
Thirdly, hon. Sabiiti says this matter came in court. As you know, hon. Speaker, the record of court is written and it is clear and these are public documents. I appeared in the case myself. I have all the pleading, which I can produce before court, those of the petitioner and the response and nowhere in any of those documents was my personal assistant ever mentioned. Is it, therefore, in order, Mr Speaker, to allow hon. Sabiiti to continue making statements that may put in jeopardy the character and career of a gentleman who served me as a personal assistant and was promoted because of his work, when in fact they are lies?  

THE SPEAKER: Well, I do not know how many times I have to repeat what I have said. We do not have to be personal and we do not have to be personal especially on people who are not here, they cannot defend themselves. Please, hon. Sabiiti, desist from attacking people who cannot come here to defend themselves. 

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, I thank you for your guidance, but this case in my opinion –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Please, leave that case, pursue it in the Police offices not here; you concentrate –(Interruption)

MR SABIITI: I am talking about this matter, which is being debated on the Floor of Parliament.

THE SPEAKER:  This one of Okumu Reagan?

MR SABIITI: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. (Laughter).

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, there has been a lot of intimidation in this country. This case of the two honourable members of Parliament is one example of the many intimidations taking place all over the country. The RDCs have actually unleashed some – in some districts in this country some people have been arrested. So, in my opinion, Mr Speaker, this is a case, in which I think as a country and as government and as Parliament, we should take a very keen interest and we request that if it is not just to harass the opposition, we want within at least a week or two that this case be handled because we are told all investigations have been carried out.  We would like this case handled as soon as possible so that we know the truth. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.28
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank colleagues who have made usual contributions to this debate concerning our two colleagues. I do agree with colleagues who stressed the importance of carrying out an expeditious trial so that justice can be done and done speedily. Hon. Kawanga, hon. Zachary Olum, hon. Byabagambi, hon. Birimumaaso, hon. Dombo and many other speakers did stress this very point. 

Mr Speaker, colleagues have raised the issue whether the Speaker was informed. I must say that at the very beginning of this discussion, during your Communication from the Chair, you did clarify the point. I did further in my statement state that letters inviting these two colleagues to CID were passed through the Office of the Speaker. The Speaker endorsed and passed on the letters to these colleagues without necessarily knowing the details why the Police required these colleagues. So, there is no question of telling lies, I think the hon. Speaker and I have clearly harmonized that position very well.  

Mr Speaker, a lot has been talked about political intimidation. I am rather surprised that those who are talking about political intimidation are not taking it into account what hon. Betty Akech said about what happened during elections in Gulu, and also the fact that the late Bongomin was killed as part of this process of political intimidation. So, Mr Speaker, we condemn all forms of political intimidation. 

Hon. Katuntu did make reference to us in government pushing the opposition against the wall. In my view, nothing can be further from the truth because we are talking of a case of some of the Movement people who have been really murdered in cold blood.  So, let us condemn intimidation in all its manifestations perpetuated by anybody and let us fight against it.  

The question of releasing of political prisoners, Mr Speaker, I am rather surprised that this point was raised because to the best of my knowledge, and I am the Minister in charge of the prisons, there is no single person in prisons of Uganda today who was imprisoned because of his political views. 

Hon. Kikungwe did make reference to a fundamental change and in fact he said, “Wapi there is no such a thing as a fundamental change that has taken place in Uganda.” If there is any situation, which vividly demonstrates the fundamental changes that have taken place in Uganda, in my view these changes have occurred in the administration of justice and in our courts of law. We know this very well because we have seen government being taken to court and defeated many times. We have seen the election of President Yoweri Museveni challenged and narrowly going through the courts of law. 

So, Mr Speaker, there is no doubt that fundamental changes are taking place and they will continue to be enhanced in this direction. We have seen ministers, senior army officers, senior security personnel being imprisoned, being charged and when that happens some of our colleagues keep quiet. But when one or two people who are not necessarily in agreement with government are touched after thorough Police investigation that is concluded to be intimidation. Let us not have double standards.

Hon. Kawanga made an important statement to the effect that the public is watching and I agree with him. They are watching all of us. They are watching our performance and they are watching to see what we do when a law-abiding citizen in Pabbo is murdered in cold blood. Do we keep quiet? Do we sit on the investigations that have been found out by the Police? 

In fact, colleagues talked about timing. The question of timing is determined by availability of evidence. Murder cases are not easy to investigate; people who carry out murders are sophisticated and they hide and hon. Sabiiti was just telling us rightly that up to now there are some murders, we have not been able to decipher and the efforts continue in this direction. But as soon as sufficient evidence is made available, then Police take action and that is what determines when cases and people are charged. 

Mr Speaker, I am rather also surprised about the vehemence, about the innocence of our colleagues.  I think we should be a little more restrained. Let the law take its course. Let us wait for evidence to be presented in courts of law, and then see what comes out instead of being so vehement about the innocence of our colleagues. Let us wait and we will find out when the judges hear and determine on this case.

Hon. Adolf Mwesige, the Minster of State for Constitutional Affairs, has very ably talked about the role of the DPP and his relationship with CID and Police, and has also talked about the immunity of Members of Parliament and I really have nothing to add on that very well illustrated point. 

There has also been discussion whether investigations were complete or we are telling lies about the completeness of the investigations. The matter again here is straight. Investigations were carried out and as soon as there were sufficient grounds to charge the people concerned, the DPP gave his advice on this and they were charged. So, really the cases were investigated. In future, even when the case is being heard, if more pieces of evidence come, they will be taken into account. 

Mr Speaker, are there political forces behind the charging of our colleagues? I am glad some people have some evidence that there are some political forces and we are definitely waiting for this evidence. As Minister of Internal Affairs, I am not aware of any political force behind the arrest of these colleagues, but I am more than ready with Police to entertain any evidence that will help us to know these political groups that are being talked about. 

So, Mr Speaker, once again I want to salute the colleagues for their very useful contribution, and my last appeal to them through you, Sir, is that let the law take its course. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO REQUEST THE HOLDING OF A REFERENDUM FOR CHANGE OF POLITICAL SYSTEM UNDER ARTICLE 74(1)(a) OF THE CONSTITUTION

5.40
THE CHAIRMAN, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oulanyah): Mr Speaker, honourable members, I wish to present to you a report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the motion for a resolution under Article 74(1)(a) of the Constitution, to request the holding of a referendum for the purpose of changing the political system. (Interruption)

MRS MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, I do recall the day the notice of a motion was presented, we were advised that it was a notice. I am wondering, is the committee reporting on a notice or on a motion because it was very clear to me that it was a notice? Have things changed? I need some clarification on that.

THE SPEAKER: From who? From me or from the chairperson?

MRS MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, I would prefer from you because it is you who said so. (Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: No, no, let us be clear, honourable. I told you last time that you are presenting to me a notice of moving a motion. And this was a notice that was being moved by the Attorney General. The Attorney General is the principle legal adviser of government, but this time he was the one involved. And actually when it was raised, you raised certain legal issues. I said, let me send it to the committee for it to come and advise us. So, I am expecting the report, let us hear the report and then we shall decide.

MRS MUSUMBA: Sir, the clarification I –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Why do you not listen to the report and then we shall be –(Interruption)

MRS MUSUMBA: I want clarification so that I understand what I am going to listen to. (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You will understand when a report is read –(Interruption)

MRS MUSUMBA: What I am going to listen to, is it on a notice or on a motion?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, you will understand after the details have been given.

MR JACOB OULANYAH: Rt hon. Speaker, the background to this motion is that, as of 9 February 2001, the Constitutional Review Commission, chaired by Prof. Fredrick Sempebwa, was established by Legal Notice No.1 of 2001 issued by the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. The long and arduous process of constitutional review, with all its successes and pitfalls, had begun. Distinctively identifiable in all these areas of constitutional review was and still is the issue of change of political system.

Mr Speaker, from the terms of reference of the Constitutional Review Commission through the reports of the Constitutional Review Commission, the Government White Paper, the report of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee on the Government White Paper, the Constitutional Amendment Bill 2005, the matter of change of political system has been kept alive.  

Mr Speaker, the terms of reference given to the Constitutional Review Commission are contained in the Government White Paper reproduced in page 3 of the Government White Paper to examine the consistency and compatibility of the constitutional provisions relating to the sovereignty of the people, political systems, democracy and the rest of it. 

The recommendation of the Constitutional Review Commission on this matter was that a multiparty form of participation be adopted through the process provided under Article 74(2) of the Constitution. This can also be found in paragraph 4.13 –(Interruption)

MR WACHA: Sir, I am rising on a point of procedure specifically for our own records. I really have no other intent except that. I remember a notice was given for intent to move a motion under Article 74. To the best of my recollection, that notice has not been followed by a motion. I remember you referred this matter to the Legal Committee, I think with the intention –[Mr Kubeketerya: “Point of information”] - Can I finish then you give me proper information that might help the House? 

To the best of my recollection, I think you sent this matter to the Legal Committee for purposes of the minister and the Legal Committee looking at that possible motion and then, I think the idea was that the minister would eventually move the motion and then the committee would report appropriately. I am not too sure yet, Sir, that we have a motion before us.
  
THE SPEAKER: No, exactly I did that and I am waiting to hear the report, what has happened and then we shall see how we move.

MR WACHA: Sir, fortunately some of us have a report in our hands and really, unless the – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, I think what we can do, if the report has gone beyond what we should have done we shall be able to say so.

MR WACHA: The report does not have any implication on the motion. I think at this particular time, the minister should come up and save us by moving the motion.

THE SPEAKER:  No, let the chairperson explain.

MR JACOB OULANYAH:  Mr Speaker, I think we need to sort this out now. If my memory is anything to go by honourable Speaker, the day that this motion was read for the first time was the day it was referred to the committee. The honourable minister read a motion, another honourable minister stood and seconded it and the record of the Hansard should be reflecting this. 

Mr Speaker, then, what should have been referred to the committee, could have been the motion. We raised the question of how notice could not possibly be sent to the committee and we had a debate on this, but we thought by now the matter had been resolved that no notice could have been sent to the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, because a motion was duly read to this Parliament and seconded. That is what happened the day the matter was brought for the first time before this Parliament. So, what the committee went with –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think let us shorten this issue. Is the notice in proper form, does it confine with the law? The merits will be for us to decide – just advise on that and then we proceed. (Interruptions).  No, let the chairman advise us, then we see how we proceed.

MR JACOB OULANYAH: Mr Speaker and honourable members, this notice was given to the Speaker’s Office on the 7 of April 2005 and the notice was under Rule 37 of our Rules of Procedure. It reads: “Subject to the provisions of Rule 38 no motion shall be moved unless the Member moving it has given written notice of the same to the Speaker and the Clerk not less than three days previous to the sitting at which it is intended to move the motion.” The notice was duly served to the Speaker’s Office well in advance before this motion was brought to Parliament. The notice itself, Mr Speaker –[Mr Kikungwe: “Information”]- It is okay.

THE SPEAKER:  Okay, the notice is okay.

MR KIKUNGWE: Mr Speaker, I can help give information. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, let us not waste much of our time. The problem is that I think at one time there was a motion, which required a notice. I was in the Chair and we said well, we have not been given a notice and actually the Rule 37 is that, a notice is given to either the Speaker or the Clerk and they decided to give the notice formerly here to the Speaker, because there is no set venue where the notice should be given. This time they decided to give the notice to the Speaker in the House, when he was seated in the House so that you would have the advantage also of knowing that there is a notice of motion. And when you look at this, the notice I think can be read and it enclosed a copy of the proposed motion. 

So, when studying this notice, of course, the copy of the notice was part of the notice. And, therefore, my question was whether it is in proper form; as for the substance, it is for us really to decide. This is the kind of advice I want from the committee, because it will be up to you really to defend the merits and the demerits of the motion.

MR OULANYAH: Mr Speaker, the notice is in good order and any motion that has been duly introduced under it, is in perfect order.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you.

MRS MUSUMBA:  Point of clarification.  

THE SPEAKER: So it can be moved? Would you like to move your motion please so that we deal with it? You will be able to contribute. 

Honourable members, nobody is going to force you to support or not support this motion. Let him table or speak to it, and then we shall hear people in defence or against and then decide. 

5.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that in accordance with Article 74(1)(a) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, that this House passes a resolution to request the Electoral Commission to hold a referendum for the purpose of changing the political system.  

Mr Speaker, the basis of my motion is Article 1(4) of the Constitution which states that the people of Uganda, “Shall express their will and consent on who shall govern them and how they should be governed, through regular, free and fair elections of their representatives or through referenda.”  

Mr Speaker, under Article 69(1) of the Constitution, the people of Uganda have been given the right to choose and adopt a political system of their choice. I, therefore, on the basis of those legal provisions and on the basis of the fact that in the year 2000 the people of Uganda choose the Movement Political System, beg to move that this House resolves that in accordance with Article 74(1)(a) and Article 61(b) of the Constitution, this Parliament requests the Electoral Commission to hold a referendum for the purpose of enabling the people of Uganda to decide on the change of the political system.  Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

MRS HOPE MWESIGYE: Seconded.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded, justify.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, honourable members will recall that on the 29 June 2000, the people of Uganda participated in a referendum for the choice of a political system under Article 69 and Article 271(3) of the Constitution. For the information of this House, Sir, out of the people who turned out for the referendum in 2000, 92 percent voted in support of the Movement Political System and this system has been in power to date and will continue to be in power until changed by the people through a referenda. 

However, Mr Speaker, on the 22 June 2000, seven days before the referendum was held and 14 days after passing the Referendum Act which was passed on 7 June 2000, hon. Zachary Olum and Mr Paul Semogerere challenged the validity of the Referendum Act. The Constitutional Court then declared the Referendum Act and the referendum of 2000 null and void because in their view it was inconsistent with Articles 90, 89, 271(2) and Article 69 of the Constitution.

Mr Speaker, the state appealed against the decision of the Constitutional Court to the Supreme Court and the Supreme Court held as follows and, Sir, I would like to quote the relevant extract from the judgment of the Supreme Court. The court held that, the actual conduct of the referendum and the results thereof were not challenged nor inquired into to determine if it, the referendum, was not free and fair. As a consequence of the referendum, the Movement Political System was retained in place and the affairs of the state have been conducted on that basis for over four years, by then. To declare the referendum a nullity would have far reaching consequences. In view of the Supreme Court, these were compelling circumstances in respect of which the Constitutional Court ought to have exercised its discretion to declaim, granting the declaration that the Movement Political System was not adopted.

Sir, that was the decision of the Supreme Court.  There is no doubt, therefore, that the Movement Political System is in force both in law and in practice. Therefore, Mr Speaker, the need for a mechanism to change the system from the existing Movement Political System to a multiparty political system, which this motion seeks to achieve, is important because we already have a system in place.

Mr Speaker, as I have already pointed out, the Movement system was adopted by the people of Uganda in the year 2000, there is no doubt that the people of Uganda continue to espouse the Movement Political System. This was confirmed by the report of the Constitutional Review Commission in which it was reported that 70 percent of the people of Uganda still supported the retention of the Movement Political System. 

I wish to state here, Mr Speaker, that the fact that the Movement Political System was adopted by the people in the year 2000, and the fact that 70 percent continued to support the continued existence of the Movement system, are the most compelling reasons why the system should change through a decision of the people in referenda, hence, this motion under Article 74(1)(a). If this motion is adopted, the Electoral Commission has indicated its readiness to embark on intensive civic education and holding the referendum on the 21 of July 2005.  

Mr Speaker, the holding of the referendum on 21 July 2005 is consistent with Article 74 of the Constitution. As long as this resolution is passed today, within the fourth year of Parliament which ends on the 2 July 2005, the referendum can safely and legally be held any date after the end of the forth year of Parliament. Hence, the 21 July 2005 is in my view appropriate for holding the referendum.

Mr Speaker, I commend this historic motion to this august House for its consideration and approval.  Sir, I beg to move.  

6.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE (PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS) (Mrs Hope Mwesigye): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to support the motion. Article 74 of the Constitution, provides for change of political system through a referendum or elections. The motion seeks to recommend changing the political system through a referendum by a resolution of Parliament.  

Article 1(4) of the Constitution provides for the sovereignty of the people. A referendum, Mr Speaker, is an important device in democracy for the people to directly legislate on critical issues. People’s sovereign rights to legislate by referendum has been confirmed by many cases, for example, in Ireland, in the case of Cogan v. Broadcasting Complaints Commission, judges unanimously reiterated that a referendum is the performance of the ultimate act of sovereignty of the people.  

Mr Speaker, people do not yield their sovereignty to legislators, but rather they delegate that as stipulated under Article 1(3) of the Constitution.  So, therefore, the first right that is reserved to the people is the right to referenda and therefore the people should be allowed to exercise their right through a referendum.

Having said that, I would like to add that fundamental political decisions are made by the people world over.  Hon Adolf Mwesige has also alluded to the referendum that took place in 2000. In Gabon, in Malawi, for example, the decision to move from multiparty politics was made through referenda. 

Mr Speaker, referenda have got other attributes that are associated with them legitimacy, ownership, popular participation, acceptability of the people, but have also the educative effect. When people are going through civic education and are going through the process of choosing what type of system, through referendum they get sensitised and in so doing they confirm their duty to defend and uphold the Constitution.  Mr Speaker, honourable members, you are aware that in most jurisdictions constitutional amendments are effected through referenda.  

Mr Speaker, in March 2003, at Kyankwanzi, the National Executive Committee (NEC) of the Movement and at the International Conference Centre, the National Conference recommended that we open up political space to other political players but subject to a referendum and, therefore, what this motion seeks is also to operationalise the recommendations of the National Executive Committee and the National Conference of the Movement.  

It has been argued and rightly so that in order to avoid manipulation of the few political elites, it is extremely important for important political decisions to be taken by the people. It is on those grounds, Mr Speaker, honourable members, that I speak to second the motion and I would implore honourable members to support the motion. I thank you, Mr Speaker. (Applause).  


MR WACHA: I thought now we await the report of hon. Jacob Oulanyah.

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear the report please.

6.07
THE CHAIRMAN, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAITRS (Mr Jacob Oulanyah): Here I go again.  Mr Speaker and honourable members of Parliament, this motion was examined by the committee and now that it has been formerly moved, I wish to report as follows: Mr Speaker, the issue of change of political system in this country has a long background and I wish to point out one, two and three of what happened in the processes.  

Mr Speaker, a Constitutional Review Commission was set up by Legal Notice No.1 of 2001, chaired by Professor Sempebwa, to review the Constitution and deal with the proposals for changes. 

Mr Speaker, from the terms of reference of the Constitutional Review Commission through its report it submitted to government on the 10 October 2003, and the Government White Paper of September 2004, coupled with the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on that White Paper - even the Bill that was introduced at the beginning of February this year, still kept the matter of change of political system alive. 

The terms of reference of the Constitutional Review Commission clearly were spelt out in paragraph a, to show that they have the mandate to review the processes in the Constitution including reviewing the issue of political system. The Constitutional Review Commission made a report, in which they recommended that the multiparty form of participation be adopted through the process provided by Article 74(2) of the Constitution. This is found in paragraph 4.13 of the Constitutional Review Commission report. 

Mr Speaker, the Government White Paper cited the result of the decision that has been just cited by the honourable minister, of the National Executive Committee of the Movement, which took place in March 2003 and the decision was taken to open up political space during the constitutional review process. Secondly, the Government White Paper cited results of its various discussions and consultations with all other political forces, which felt they needed to have a fair representation in the best way they wish to participate in governance.  

The government as result of this proposed to effect the change of political system from the current Movement political system to a multiparty political system through an amendment of Article 74 of the Constitution. Thus, the government proposed to amend Article 74 of the Constitution to provide that from the end of the current term of Parliament, public elections in Uganda will be held under a multiparty political system. 

Mr Speaker, the committee reported in December supporting the proposals of government that the Constitution be amended to effect change in political system in the terms that were proposed by the government.  

Mr Speaker, following up on this, the Constitutional (Amendment) Bill introduced on the 15 of February of 2005, captured this in its object. The Bill further seeks, by way of an amendment to Article 74 of the Constitution, to achieve a change to the multi-organisation or multiparty form of democracy as the form of democracy under which the presidential, parliamentary and local government and other public elections are to be held in the forthcoming elections. You can find this also on page 2 of the Constitutional (Amendment) Bill, 2005 that has been drawn. 

As you will recall, this Bill was published in the Gazette on the 14 of February 2005, it took its first reading on the 15th of February and was referred to the committee for scrutiny. The Attorney General and Minister of Constitutional Affairs withdrew this Bill with the authority of the august House on the 7 April 2005.

Mr Speaker, this resolution now replaces the Bill and the earlier proposals for changing political system to a multiparty political dispensation.  

Observations:
Mr Speaker, the motion is in line with Article 74(1)(a) of the Constitution. It is also in line with Section 15 of the Referendum and Other Provisions Act, 2005 on referenda for changing political system under Article 74(1) of the Constitution.  

The Constitutional Review Commission recommended that the multiparty form of participation be adopted through the process provided under Article 74(2) of the Constitution. 

The committee observes that this motion presents a shift in policy from the previous proposal to change political system by amending Article 74 to now doing it under Article 74(1). All the discussions have been on whether to amend Article 74 to achieve this, or to use Article 74 to effect the change. The overall effect, however, is to effect an already agreed position that there should be a change from the Movement Political System to a multiparty political system.

During public debates on the Government White Paper and the withdrawn Bill, the committee received several representations to the effect that the change is better effected through Article 74(2).  That is, change of political system by representatives of the people in Parliament and district councils. That in this method the time would be sufficient, it would be cheaper to effect and the issue of voter and civic education and all the other requirement for the referendum would not be necessary.

The committee observed that because of the time lost, the Electoral Commission is now constrained to organize, conduct and supervise all the referendum activities within a very tight framework. The activities include, general update of voter’s register, processing of the register for display, the mandatory display period for a minimum of 21 days, processing of the register for polling, canvassing for votes, civic/voter education for a mandatory period of not less than two months, preparation of polling materials and polling, all between April and June 2005.

The parliamentary debates of 19 April 2005, on the committee’s report on the voter register, which ended on the 8 of April, showed the dissatisfaction of the Members of Parliament about the whole process as most of them requested for an extension of the exercise.

The Electoral Commission, as by letter reference EMT112/01, dated 18 April 2005, addressed to the Chairman of the Committee, indicated that the earliest convenient date that the commission could hold the referendum for changing political system is on the 21 of July 2005. The committee observed that this raises the question as to whether holding the referendum in the 5th year will be constitutional. We have the annex copy of the letter from the Electoral Commission.

The committee observed that the referendum would give the political parties an opportunity to move countrywide before the next general elections.  That this will help in formulation of the ground rules for the said elections.  

The committee observed that the existing system was brought into effect through the collective will of the people through a referendum held under the authority of the Constitution in 2000, and would only be proper to adopt an option that would give the same people the right to review their position and change the system they had put in place by their own votes. 

The committee observed that none of the petitions that were filed in the Constitutional Court and the decisions on them and the subsequent appeal to the Supreme Court, and the decisions of the Supreme Court never in effect nullified the referendum held in 2000. Even if the Constitutional Court had nullified the Act, and the actions taken under the authority of that Act, the Supreme Court decided that the Referendum of 2000 was held under the authority of the Constitution, therefore, the referendum was held validly and there is a system in place to be change under Article 74 of the Constitution.

Recommendations:

1. The committee recommends that to take care of the time constraint expressed by the Electoral Commission, Parliament should expeditiously pass this resolution under Article 74(1)(a) to enable the commission carry out requisite activities.

2. The said referendum, which would actually change the political system, should be held within the fourth year of Parliament to avoid unnecessary debates on whether political systems could be changed even in the fifth year of Parliament, as this may even require interpretation. Honourable Speaker, I rest the case.

THE SPEAKER: We agree on time. Is it three minutes?  Okay, three minutes.

MR GEOFFREY EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  According to the Budget Act, this resolution is supposed to be accompanied by a certificate of financial implication. I am seeking your indulgence whether procedurally we are right to debate this report that eventually will lead to adopting it or rejecting it without having the certificate of financial implication.

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to read it for us?  We did not come with the Act; The Budget Act, can you read it please?

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I do not have the Act, but that is what it says. It is very clear.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I think let us hear the debate meanwhile. (Interruptions). No, it is easy to get the Budget Act within five minutes or so. It will be here without prejudice.

MR JAMES MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, I want to quote from our rules. I want to quote Rule 185(3), which reads as follows: “The minutes of the proceedings of a committee shall, be brought up and laid on the Table of the House with the report of the committee by the Chairperson or Deputy Chairperson or any Member of the committee nominated by the committee”. 

I wonder whether it is procedurally correct for the chairman to present this report without laying on the Table the minutes of the proceedings.

MR WAMBUZI: Mr Speaker, we have been doing this business all along and a lot of business has been handled on the Floor without this type of roadblock.

Is it really procedurally right for hon. Mwandha to bring this procedural problem on the road when he knows that even tomorrow we are going to do exactly the same thing we are doing now? Is it really being consistent?

THE SPEAKER: No, the point is that the rule is there; he has read it. (Interjection)- No, no, let us dispose of one. The honourable member has read the rule. It is true that we have not been demanding for the minutes, but this time it seems he is interested in these minutes. I think that point is okay.

MR MAO: Mr Speaker, I hope this will not also be misrepresented as another roadblock, but it is good that when we set rules we should follow them however inconvenient. 

Mr Speaker, Article 74(1) requires that this motion can only be considered to be passed if requested by more than one half of the Members of Parliament. I have been passing my eyes around not in a very mathematical sense, I do not believe that we have that number. So, unless we are just going to talk for the sake of talking, but I was hoping that members would take this provision seriously because we may talk and fail to take a decision. 

THE SPEAKER: No, we are aware of that, and that should not be the issue. The issue is about the Budget Act, which is coming. But as I said, hon. Eresu, please –(Interjection)- Honourable members, we do not need to be jittery about this motion; it is for us to pass or reject it. There is a point of law, which has been raised by hon. Ekanya that we are going to ascertain. So in order to save on time, let hon. Eresu continue with his contribution meanwhile the law will he here.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, it is very important for us to uphold –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: It would appear that you are not interested in proceeding with this motion today –(Interruption)

MR MULINDWA BIRIMUMAASO: Mr Speaker, under our rules, where a Member interrupts debate on a point of procedure, the Member shall state the rule of procedure he or she deemed to have been breached by the Member holding the Floor before subjecting the Member to the Speaker’s ruling. Hon. Ken Lukyamuzi is saying procedure, procedure, without mentioning which procedure is being –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, read it.

MR BIRIMUMAASO: Rule 58(4).

THE SPEAKER: Agreed. What is the point of procedure?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I stood on a point of procedure in regard to what hon. Mwandha has just said, and I was giving information procedurally. Why don’t you give me time?

THE SPEAKER: No, no, you need not, because I ruled that hon. Mwandha reads the rule, which we have.

MR LUKYAMUZI: I was supplementing it.

THE SPEAKER: No, no.

MR JOHN ERESU (Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Honourable members, this country needs a verdict to determine the direction just like they made a verdict at the time when we had a referendum. The Constitution that I am privileged to have signed in 1995 stipulates very clearly that at certain times in our political history we shall have to take a collective decision and make a verdict for the country. It is very important for us Members of Parliament to make decisions here, which will be binding for the whole country. But it is also important for the people of Uganda to collectively make a decision because after all Article one of the Constitution gives them the authority to do so. 

I think a referendum is the only appropriate way Uganda can settle for a new destiny because of our history. Our history has been punctuated by so many unexpected and very sad situations. Therefore, with that history in mind, for any major decisions to be taken and made legitimate, a referendum is the best way forward. But I must caution here that while we will settle for a referendum, if we agree here, for that referendum to be legitimate and respected, we must have clear bench-marks and regulations which must be understood and accepted by all parties concerned. Thus, we must have questions, which are clear, we must have questions, which are not biased, and we must have people to count our decisions without any bias.  

Secondly, I consider the referendum an opportunity for this country once more to take decisions openly in order to hold ourselves accountable for any eventuality. There are incidences in this country where decisions, if made by few people, the others who think they are not party to that decision, will turn a round and condemn that decision even when they had been party to that decision. Mr Speaker, I believe that by holding this referendum, we are providing the opportunity that will hold us all accountable as citizens of this country, so that the event that will follow, we shall all be bound by it.  

Finally, there is an argument that people may hold us, and the report has also pointed out in terms of costs, that we could change the political system of this country from the present position to another one that we anticipate to have by having Article 74(2) be put in place. It is respectable thinking because they say it would in one way or another be cutting on costs. But it is indeed very costly for us to make decisions, which do not involve everybody on major issues like this on the aspect of money. At the end of the day, others may turn round and say they are not party to that decision and seek other methods of sorting out the problem of charting a political direction for this country.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Before hon. Guma takes the Floor, hon. Ekanya has been facilitated with the Bill. (Laughter) He can tell us the way he wants it.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, this is the Budget Act, 2001 Section 10. It reads:“ Every Bill introduced in Parliament shall be accompanied by indicative financial implications, if any, on revenue and expenditure over the period not less than 2 years in its coming into effect.”

Mr Speaker, we need to read this statement bearing in mind the intention of Parliament to come up with this Budget Act. We also need to look at the effect this resolution has on law. It is on that basis that I thought that when we were making the Budget Act, it was meant to create financial discipline –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Anyway, honourable member, thank you very much for what you have said, but the term in the section you referred to is the Bill. A Bill has a meaning, which you can find in Act of Parliament’s Act. A Bill is a draft for an Act of Parliament. This resolution or this motion is based on the Constitution and is based on the Referendum and Other Provisions Act. So, it is not a Bill, but a motion. So, this is not applicable. (Laughter) Can I have the retired Captain?

CAPT.(RTD) GUMA GUMISIRIZA (Ibanda County North, Mbarara): Mr Speaker, thank you for the opportunity to give one or two views on this report of the Legal And Parliamentary Affairs on the the Resolution of Parliament to allow the Electoral Commission to hold a Referendum according to the Constitution.

Mr Speaker, it is true that the Constitution commands us to hold a referendum on the change of political systems as quoted in Article 74 in the Constitution, and therefore we cannot escape it. But I have a problem, Mr Speaker, and I would like, at the end of the debate, the National Political Commissar (NPC), who is one of the Movement chief ideologues, or hon. Mbabazi, to assist me. 

Mr Speaker, a group of Ugandans in charge of the Movement including the President went to Kyankwanzi and declared that the Movement should become a political party and so it did. The Constitution is in place; some of us have copies of the NRM-O. Registration of NRM political party is supposed to have started.

Our Constitution says that before we change from a Movement Political System to adopt any other political system, a Referendum should precede any other action. So the Movement leaders went to Kyankwanzi and pronounced themselves and went ahead and for intents and purposes, Mr Speaker, I am sure including your own constituency Bukoto Central, Ugandans know that parties are in full swing. When I go to Ibanda - and there are some people from Ibanda seated in the Gallery, voters say, “Why are you bothering us? Why are you disturbing us with elections on change because we hear on the radio you have already declared political parties-” (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it is for this –(Interruption)

CAPT. GUMA: Yes, just let me be brief –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, this is general information to assist the other members. The Constitution could not be changed in Kyankwanzi meeting. (Laughter). The Constitution is still prevailing as of now. You can regard that as a preparatory meeting where these ideas were said. But if you have to effect them, you have to make changes in the Constitution and that is why the minister is saying to effect a change we must hold a referendum to change it. Otherwise if we do not follow it, you cannot effect the Kyankwanzi thing to change the Constitution. This is what we are doing.

CAPT. GUMA: Mr Speaker, you are a Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, I am the Speaker but I am telling you this is the Constitution.

CAPT. GUMA: I am entitled to my views whether they are wrong or right -(Interjections)- Those are my views. All I am saying, Mr Speaker, hon. Members - Mr Speaker, I request for the indulgence of the House not to murmur but just to listen. 

The Constitution says in the fourth year of any term, a referendum should be held whether the Movement System should be upheld or dropped in favour of any other system the people shall so decide. My problem is that - let the Kyankwanzi be a preparatory stage, fine, constitutions are printed and all activities go on and other political parties start registering. So, while it is true that the Constitution still has provisions legally talking about the Movement, they have to be changed. But what do we see on the ground? 

Hon. Oulanyah and his committee say we should go and ask the people, on page 4, observation 9. 
“The committee observed that the existing system was brought into effect through the collective will of the people, through a referendum held under the authority of the Constitution in 2000 and it would only be proper to adopt an option that would give the same people the right to review their decision.” But the decision has already been reviewed on behalf of the people, accept it or leave it; that is what is obtaining.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

6.40
MRS ROSEMARY SENINDE (Woman Representative, Wakiso): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also thank the mover and seconder of this motion.  

Mr Speaker, in view of Article 69(1), which talks about the people’s right to choose and adopt the political system, and also in view of Articles 74, I would like to support the motion basing on Article 1(4) of the Constitution.  

Mr Speaker, the 2000 referendum gave a result of about 92 percent of the people’s support for the Movement System, and in view of that, I strongly feel that if we are to change to any other political system, we must give the people a chance to make their own decision.  

Mr Speaker, much as the people expressed their feelings about the change of a system through the Sempebwa Commission, which also responded in its report that we all have, I feel it is necessary that we have a referendum.

Mr Speaker, I appreciate –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure and I beg your guidance. The Constitution is very clear in Article 74 how a political system can be changed. I wonder what we are debating, because we cannot subject our views to what is provided for here.  I just want to be guided on what we are actually doing, because the Constitution has already provided on how it should be done.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Constitution has remained intact since 1995 when it was promulgated. That Constitution set up the Movement Systems, Multiparty system and any other form, which has not yet been adopted. But it envisaged that at one point of time, people might want to change from the obtaining system to another system; from Movement to multiparty or from multiparty to Movement or to any other system, and the means of doing this is provided for in Article 74. This can be done in a number of ways: either by the voters if they are a number, it can be done by petitions. If it is done by petition, the petitioners direct that we petition to move to this one. But where this has not been done, the obtaining system can be changed if there is a referendum requested for by a resolution of Parliament. 

We are not saying that we are going to change; we do not know the results of the referendum.  So, it is not a fait accompli that we are changing from Movement to multiparty, from this and the other. But that is the procedure, which is recommended in the Constitution. The first step for the Electoral Commission to hold a referendum must be requisitioned, and therefore, this is an attempt to requisition a referendum, whose results we do not know, but it is the procedure we are using.

MRS SENINDE: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate that referendums, like most other political institutions, have got merits and demerits. Among the merits there is the legitimising role, a decision taken directly by the people is likely to be accepted as legitimate even by opponents of the idea, who might not have accepted the issue. So, Mr Speaker, because of that, I do strongly believe that once we go for this referendum and the results are out of whichever system the people will have decided on, I believe we shall all accept it.

Mr Speaker, looking at referendum practice around the world, may not bear out the utopian hopes of some early pro referendum campaigners, but neither does it support the fears to those who see the referendum as potentially destructive to democracy.  Mr Speaker, most countries that have held referenda seem to have benefited from them. Mr Speaker, I would like to use an example of the Danish involvement in the European Union. It settled it through a closely argued referendum held in 1992 and then in 1993, and I believe the Danes have really benefited from these referenda.

On the other hand, I do appreciate the fact that referenda may have negative effective if used frequently. For example Switzerland has used it frequently that the turn out has come to –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  But she is about to wind up.

MRS SENINDE: I am about to wind up. Mr Speaker, I was giving that example. I did not know that we have had only one referendum in the politics of Uganda and there is no need to fear. So, Mr Speaker, I humbly request the government to be supportive in whichever decision we shall take, so that civic education is properly done and the intended objectives of this referendum are really achieved.

Finally, Mr Speaker, I urge my colleagues to support the motion in good faith so that we the legislators and share and enjoy the outcomes of the system we decide on with our people. In that way we shall never be blamed alone, we should share the blame or the success. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

6.56
MR BEN WACHA  (Oyam County North, Apac): Mr Speaker, I thank you. Mr Speaker, in speaking to this motion, I take note of the following: 

That the major stakeholders in the politics of this country, that is, people who originally supported the Movement System and others who continued to advocate for political party arrangement are now all agreed that there should be a change from the Movement Political System to Multi Party Political arrangement.  

I also take note that these two groups have made perceivable moves towards attainment of this goal.  The people who supported the Movement Political System held meetings under the NEC and later on under the national conference and agreed that this arrangement should come into effect. The political parties have gone ahead and registered themselves under the Political Parties and Organization’s Act.  

Mr Speaker, I also take note that the Constitution has also made it possible for this political change to be effected by a resolution of this Parliament with the support of District Councils. Having noted this I find the choice of method of change being advocated for by Government illogical.  

Mr Speaker, the committee noted the following on page 5, paragraph 4, and I quote: 

“In public hearings of the Government White Paper and the withdrawn Bill, the committee received several representations to the effect that the change is better effected through Article 74(2) that is, change of political system by representatives of people in Parliament and District Councils.  That in this method the time would be sufficient, it is much cheaper to effect and the issue of voter and civic education and all other requirements for the referendum would not be necessary.”  

Mr Speaker, I have been informed that the exercise that is being advocated for by this motion is likely to cost Ugandan Shs 74 billion. To some of us who come from war ravaged North, the passing of this sort of money for this sort of exercise cannot be explained.  Mr Speaker, I want to restate to this House that we have people in displaced peoples camps who are going without food and they expect Government to provide them with food. We have militia who were recruited by us for purposes of beefing up UPDF in the operations in the war-ravaged North who have not been paid for the last five months. 

We have Army personnel who need uniforms, boots, for purposes of ending the war, which is now keeping our people in displaced peoples camps. For me now to start advocating for a referendum, a one day exercise which is going to cost 74 billion of Ugandan taxpayers’ money is going to be difficult for me and I appeal to my colleagues that since the Constitution anticipated a cheaper and quicker method of achieving the same end, we should opt for the cheaper and quicker method. (Applause)

Mr Speaker - (Interruption)

MR ERESU: Point of information – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But honourable members, we have many people who want to make contribution.

MR WACHA: I appreciate your concern, hon. Eresu, I am slightly surprised that coming from where you came from, you are saying that cost does not matter.  Mr Speaker can I continue and finish – (Interruption)

MR ERESU: I just wanted to give hon. Wacha – (Interruption)

MR WACHA: I am not going to get it, Mr Speaker, I am sorry for once but I will get it from outside.  

Mr Speaker, there is another bigger issue which has come before this House and which seems to be getting out of our heads quickly, that is, the issue of the voter register update. It has been reported to this House that this exercise was done in a very haphazard manner, that a number of our voters right now are not reflected in the registers. In going ahead and advocating and passing a motion for a resolution for a referendum to be held, we are in effect de-enfranchising our voters. Is that what we want?  Do we want our voters to go to this exercise without understanding what they are going for?  I think as leaders much more is expected of us.  

Finally, Mr Speaker, observation 9, on page 4 says, “The committee observes that the existing system was brought into effect through the collective will of the people through a referendum held under the authority of the Constitution in 2000 and it would only be proper to adopt an option that would give the same people the right to review their decision and change the system they had put in place by their own votes”.  

Mr Speaker, when the Constitution was putting into effect the possibility of a change by representatives of this House, and representatives of the people in the District Council, it was very well aware about the provisions of Article 271 which gave a mandatory referendum for change of system after four years.  It was well aware about this; this argument does not hold water. The Constitution knew that there was going to be held a referendum in 2000 but still went ahead and provided that despite that referendum, people could still change the political system by their representatives in Parliament and in the District Councils. 

Mr Speaker, I oppose this motion on three counts, first we are going to be wasteful in spending this money, two, our people are not prepared, and three, there is a cheaper option.  I oppose the motion.

6.56
MR MIKE SEBALU (Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion, first on one serious issue where in 1966 where the people got de-enfranchised when their role in decision making through elections or referenda was usurped by the leaders, and this has been one of the root causes of the problems of Uganda. 

So one of the fundamental changes in the 1995 Constitution was to re-enfranchise the people. That is why this provision was put in the Constitution in Article 1, which gives the people a right to choose their leaders and how they should be governed.  

The opening of political space is a major activity in the transition process and I think everyone of us agrees with that. Therefore, it calls for stakeholders to be offered an opportunity to fully participate in this process. In my personal and considered opinion, the people of Uganda are such a major stakeholder in this process that they must be offered an opportunity to participate in such an important decision making that is going to affect their lives. 

At this point of our political history, we should not leave anything to chance or speculation, we therefore, need to ensure that the people are highly involved in decision making, the people are part of the process the people own the process and the decision arrived at. This is because if we sit here and decide and the people do not own that process and the outcome, it will be very disastrous for us as managers of this country.  

The people must take full responsibility of the outcome, and they can only take responsibility when they have been part of the process. They cannot take responsibility when they have not been part- commit themselves to work for the success. For once, let us go to the people, and for me this is a rare opportunity for us to go to the people with one voice. 

We want to change to this system, the Movement and multi-partists and everyone going to the population with one voice, I think it is a good opportunity for us to start building consensus on major issues of national interest. So let us go together - Hon Kazoora will oppose, that will be fine. I know that it may be financially cost effective to use the option of Parliament and districts, but it may also be costly in terms of political accountability at the end of the day, and that must be considered as a very serious issue when we look at these matters. 

As political managers, we need to avoid such politically embarrassing situations where our people may disown us on the basis of an outcome, which they are not party to. We want to move along with our people and the decision taken is owned by all of us the managers and the people for whom we organize this society. As a Movement system to which the people gave mandate in the 2000 referendum, we have a duty and an obligation to abide by the resolution of NEC and the conference to change the political system upon consultation of the people.  

Two, we can only transfer the mandate given to us in 2000 through a similar process if we are to be consistent politically, and I think we really need to be consistent. Besides, there were people who may not have participated in the 2000 referendum but this time round we would like their vote to this important process. Right now we have parties which are legally constituted and it is only fair to subject them to this process for more legitimacy.

Finally, Mr Speaker, this process should even be more attractive to them because it offers the parties the most cost effective way of reaching out to the population. There is this saying all along, we are not allowed to go to the people, but this is a very good opportunity for everyone including parties to reach out to the population and we put our case to them. So, Mr Speaker, I support this motion and I do request all colleagues here to unanimously agree with it and we go to consult the people and turn around this country.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

7.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE, HOUSING (CAPT. FRANCIS BABU): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I thank the minister for the motion and the chairman of the committee for having brought his report. I also thank all those who have contributed.  

Mr Speaker, I don’t think there is anybody here who disagrees that time has come for us to have a multi-party political system. All of us agree, in fact, to an extent that this will help us. There is a gentleman in this House who has been describing the way political parties are treated as animals in the Zoo. I do hope that this will allow us to free the parties to go out and start canvassing for support and give alternative programmes. The report clearly gives us different alternatives in Article 74(1)(a) and 74(2). 

Mr Speaker, when people talk about legal prudence there is also what we call political prudence. We have told our people over and over again that from now onwards they will participate in any political decision that affects them directly. 

When I was moving in Kampala Central during the consultations on the White Paper a lot of people asked; “When are you coming here to tell us about the new change that you people have agreed upon?” In fact, some of them used a very simple expression in the local language that we were using them as steps to get where we are and thereafter forget them. They said, “You should come back here; we want to see you; we want to hear these new decisions that you are bringing here whether we agree with you or not.” 

Some of us were left to tell them people went to Kyankwanzi, what they did and decided upon. But they also said, but we have not seen the other political parties; we want them to come and tell us if they agree with this”. I think everybody watching us now is wondering whether we all agree whether we should change this political system or not; and I think they would like to see what method we use and whether that method will include them.  

Mr Speaker, I think it is only political prudence that we go back to the people and explain to them that this new model will help us.

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI:  Mr Speaker, I am standing here on a point of order with reference to articles 74 and 69 of the Constitution. In accordance with those two constitutional provisions, Ugandans can change a political system either through elections using a petition, or through the method articulated by the minister. Is it in order for the hon. minister holding the Floor, a minister in the Ministry of Works, to make the people we represent believe that those opposed to the motion as moved by hon. Mwesige are anti-people?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, these are legal interpretations; you may have your own view and he may have his; I do not think he is out of order. This is how he understands the provision.

CAPT. BABU: Mr Speaker, thank you very much.  I am happy that hon. Lukyamuzi recognizes that I am still a Minister in the Ministry of Works. 

Mr Speaker, there are alternatives here and there are legal interpretations of these alternatives.  There is a tag, which has been put on some of them.  The question here is for us to decide, which one of these two is going to be more conducive to our people. As far as I am concerned, I support the motion –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Procedure!

THE SPEAKER: What is the point of procedure?

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, that is exactly what I want to raise. It looks like our air conditioning system has broken down.  We are feeling a lot of heat.  So could we ask the Sergeant Art Arms to take charge?

THE SPEAKER: Is that the point of procedure?

MR OKUPA: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the technical people, correct the defect.

CAPT. BABU: Mr Speaker, I would like to end after that point of privilege, which has just come by supporting the motion and saying that for the purpose of our voters, for purposes of harmony, for purposes of something that we started which is within this Constitution, that let us allow them to participate so that they do not think that it is only the elected leaders that can decide for them without them taking part in the whole exercise. I know it will cost us a little bit more, but it will give us some political mileage. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

7.09
MRS SALAAMU MUSUMBA (Bugabula County South, Kamuli):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I would like to make a few comments on the matters on the Floor, and I thank the movers of the motion for finally moving it properly. I am happy about that.

Mr Speaker, I also thank the committee, and my contribution is really to ask them to clarify to me in detail how the question is going to be put, because it must be anticipated.

Mr Speaker, going back –(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: For your own information, the question will not be framed here; it will be framed by the Electoral Commission.

MRS MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, it is accountability we have been talking about, it is about consistency, it is about political prudence, it is about confirming a mandate, and so it is in this line that I ask my question. Are we still to use the bus as a symbol for supporting the Movement?  Are we going to still use the dove as a symbol for multi-party?  Because this is accountability as you have all said in this House. May I know whether the question is going to change or we are going to use the same question? Because it is simple logic, as far as I am concerned, to know that consistency calls for the same symbols that were used in the first time round.

Unless you are telling me that we are going to introduce political confusion, what are we going to ask the people and what symbols are we going to allow?  Because, Mr Speaker, we cannot pass the bus as politicians to Electoral Commission.  

The bus has already been taken and registered as a symbol of a political party. The dove is already off the shelve. Mr Ocheger and his party have registered. So I would like to know, what are you going to ask the people? What symbols are you going to ask the people in line with consistency, political accountability, political prudence, all these adjectives that have been stated in this House?

Mr Speaker, for me, this option is confirmation that the organs of the Movement that sat in Kyakwanzi and Conference Centre did not have the mandate to do what they did.  It is just a confirmation by themselves, and that they had usurped the power of the people, and so I would like to know, if the people return a verdict different from what you chose in Kyakwanzi, what is going to happen? I would like to be clarified on those two issues before I chose whether to give my vote or to keep it, Mr Speaker. Thank you.

7.13
DR JOHNSON NKUUHE (Isingiro County South, Mbarara): I thank hon. Oulanyah and his committee for the work they did to come up with this report. I would like to focus on the big picture, that is, the promotion of democracy and rule of law in this country, and I am glad that we are almost agreeing because, in 2000 when we went for a referendum, it looked as if that referendum was sort of saying the majority should have all the rights and the minority should never have any right. I found that referendum a bit disturbing.  

But this one, we seem to be agreeing that it is about time that even if it is ten percent, as long as I do not agree with you, I should have my right to disagree, which I think is a very, very important development. Remember even Jesus started with 12 disciples, but he converted many; most of the world is now following Christianity. So the minority starts small, that is why you have got minority, but then you grow up, as long as the field is fair.

I also thank the Committee for their observations, because most of them are more or less cautioning.   They are telling us the second observation, Page 3, “The Constitutional Review Commission recommended that the Multi-party form of participation should be adopted through the process provided by Article 74(2) of the Constitution”.  That is the cheaper option.


The committee is also telling us, observation 4, partly on page 3 and page 4, that during the hearings on the Government White Paper and the withdrawn Bill, the committee received several representations to the effect that change is better effected through Article 74(2). In other words, Parliament and the district, and that this method is cheaper and the time would be sufficient. 

Mr Speaker, today we are discussing our budget. We are all members of sessional committees, and in fact, I have before me a budget for the Ministry of Agriculture. The development budget is Shs 106 billion proposed for next year. Of that money, Shs 68.8 is projected to come from donors and 25.5 from the Government. The budget for NARO is 30 billion, 21 billion from donors and only 6 billion from Government. You are the Minister, hon. Suruma, I pity you. You are going to Paris club, you say, “Look here, agriculture is so important for us, give us some money, but of the required Shs 105 billion, we are only prepared to put Shs 25 billion” and yet we want to spend Shs 74 billion on a referendum when there is a cheaper method.  

So, Mr Speaker, I know our people want to be empowered but every time I go to my rural constituency the only thing I hear is “obwavu bututa” (poverty is killing us). I have never heard anybody saying give us a referendum, they want to come out of poverty. For me any method that can save money and use it for social development would be more welcome. I can assure you if you went out there, I know most of you are very good at mobilizing, and say, “Look here, we want to empower you but unfortunately we are poor, let us use the cheaper option, let us use district and Parliament” I am sure the people would understand because the benefit would be theirs. 

So, my colleagues it is okay to empower people but I am telling you people that are sleeping in leaking roofs, dying of malaria, diarrhoea, and HIV/AIDS, if we convert that money into some programme and save it and then use the cheaper option for the referendum, it would be much, much better. So, let us have pity on our people, after all, they are the ones who pay tax. They do not travel in air-conditioned land cruisers, they are on boda bodas, they are dying; so let us have mercy on our people and go for cheaper options.  

I would like to urge my colleagues that we should go for the cheaper option and, therefore, go for a decision to go multiparty via Parliament and the district. Thank you. 

7.18
THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the honourable Minister and colleagues who have already contributed to this important debate. 

My contribution will address mainly the concerns raised by hon. Ben Wacha and hon. Guma Gumisiriza.  First, let me make it very clear colleagues that holding this referendum or any election is not an alternative to looking after our people in the North. With or without the referendum our people in the North must be looked after. In case of relief and also recovery, there is a rehabilitation programme, which is already being drawn.  

Second the question of cost, which hon. Nkuuhe has just referred to and which hon. Ben Wacha eloquently spoke to: The cost of the referendum as estimated by the Commission was 30 billion and not 78, we should note that. The cost is not 78, the Commission had wanted 30 billion, but the Government has so far provided in the budget 22 billion. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, when we talk about costs as a country, as managers, we should not only talk about the direct cost; the shilling cost. We should not only talk about the immediate cost when we are undertaking a major process like this. There are immediate direct costs, there are also indirect costs, there are also medium and long-term costs.  

In the situation we have, and that is why the honourable Minister Adolf Mwesige took the trouble to quote the support for the Movement system in 2000 of 92 percent; the Commission return over 70 percent. Why is the population stuck to the Movement? They are stuck to the Movement because they have seen change and they fear that if they leave the Movement they are likely to go back to instability, to break down of the rule of law. These are strongly held views. Therefore, if you do not move with the population with that perception, that population can be turned to do different things. 

You can be here in Kampala with Parliament and Cabinet and the people will take different decisions in the countryside. That is what happened in 1981. Parliament was here, the Judiciary was here, the people were not with you. That is how the Movement won the war, because people saw that people in Kampala were not with them. It is, therefore, very important that when we make a major move like this we must move with the population.  We must sit with them and we explain why we think we should change to a different system. Give them assurance, and what safe-guards we have against going back to the difficult past. 

I like what hon. Babu said; that as we are being watched on TV, the country would be happy to see me and hon. Ben Wacha and hon. Guma Gumisiriza, hon. Jacob Oulanyah, all talking on the same side of this question, then they begin to build confidence that we are going to move in a right direction. So, if we count the 30 billion shillings and we think that is the issue, tomorrow we could end with a difficult situation in the countryside. This is what we must prevent by moving with the population.  

Mr Speaker, hon. Guma did put, I must accept the challenge on the Floor, and if we do not convince hon. Guma that he has a wrong perception he could mislead people in the countryside. We must tell the population that much as we have been moving with the Movement political system, we never banned the political parties in this country. 

The Constitution itself makes it clear that never shall we have a single party system in this country. Although, in the Constitution we put Article 269, which was very restrictive on the parties, the same Constitution obliges us as Parliament that we must make another law to facilitate the operations of parties even under the Movement political system. So, there is no way anybody can say we created parties in Kyankwazi; we did not. As you know, we were in Kyakwazi in 2003.  Here in this Parliament in the year 2002, we passed the Political Parties and Organisations Act, which opened for the parties to start operating in some form. (Interjection)-Hon. Guma, if I could first finish the argument then I will come back.  

So, the parties were facilitated by a legal framework we put in place in 2002. And you remember we argued on this Floor to restrict the parties, but the court thought otherwise, and it is the court which thought we should give even greater freedom to the parties. 

So, what did we do in Kyankwanzi? And I think many of us here were in Kyankwanzi. That mental perception of the population was in Kyankwanzi. It took two days to move the National Executive Committee to see the strategic reasons why we must go to the multi-organizational multiparty system. That tells you the job we must do in the population in order to make them see this point so that all of us move together. 

It was for that reason that in Kyankwanzi, although the delegates agreed that we change the systems, they said we must move with the people, and therefore, we must have a referendum. And I think the Constitution makers in 1995 were really very wise men and women that is why they gave these alternatives. They knew the costs, but they said depending on the circumstances, choose the most appropriate for your country. And it is for this reason that Government, through the minister, is arguing that friends, yes, there are opportunity costs, let us spend some money to change the system, but in such a way that our stability is not at risk by leaving the population behind. 

So, Mr Speaker and honourable members, I would like to support this motion that we change the system for the strategic reasons that I will give at another opportune moment and that we involve the people through a referendum. The meeting in Kyankwanzi, and the one in Kampala did not abolish the Movement System; they provided an alternative. Should the people decide to change to the multi-organizational system then the supporters of the Movement would have a ready vehicle to continue the struggle for transforming this country. And therefore I urge all colleagues to support this motion unanimously. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

7.26
MR GODFREY KIWANDA (Mityana County North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have listened to my colleagues and about 10 people have contributed to this motion. From the debate, everyone accepts the issue of changing the political system but disagreement is about which method we are going to use, Mr Speaker.

Mr Speaker given the time frame we have, and according to the report, you can see what the Electoral Commission was talking about, the issue of time, I would move that this issue should be put to vote and be decided today. I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

MR MARTIN WANDERA: Point of clarification, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Well, there is a motion that I put the question –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Point of procedure, Mr Speaker.
 
THE SPEAKER: But there is a motion –(Interruption) 

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I have been listening to the mover of the motion, I did not find any ingredients strong enough to convince me that the time is now for the question to be put. This is a very strong matter we are discussing for this country.

MR MIKE SEBALU: Mr Speaker, is it in order for a Member to come up and take the Floor when there is a motion on the Floor awaiting the ruling of the Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, there is a motion that I put the question, which means ending the debate and then we decide on the issue. I now put the question. 

(The Members voted by a show of Hands.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the position is as follows: Abstention - one; against - 14; for - 123. So, the motion is carried.  

Now I put the question to the motion on the resolution to hold a referendum to change the political system. 

(The Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the position is this. This House has got 214 members representing constituencies, 56 members representing districts, 10 members representing UPDF and 15 members representing the three other special interests; these are people who are supposed to vote. And therefore, when we take the figure in one way or the other, we do not take into account those who do not vote, because they do not contribute to a decision of the House. Currently, in the 214 constituencies we are lacking one person; namely Mbarara and therefore, the voting members are 294.  Is that clear?  Now, the position is as follows - and therefore, half of that number –(Interruption)

MR KIKUNGWE: Mr. Speaker, I am seeking clarification. Mr Speaker, when you look at Article 259 of the Constitution, we have to look at all Members of Parliament and then we determine.

THE SPEAKER: You see, the ex-officio members do not vote in one way or the other.  Therefore, personally I do not regard them as countable for purposes of defining this. But the position is this: Abstention - one; against - 17; and those for passing the resolution - 142. It lacks so of the required number. The motion has not been carried. (Applause)

(Question negatived)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, of course this does not mean that we are stuck; there are other provisions. It is only that the motion requires half of the members to be passed. If I had to include the ex-officio members, it would have required 153, but with this one it required 147.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH, GENERAL DUTIES (Capt Mike Mukula): Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance.  You have very ably guided the House on the procedure and the manner in which this House would proceed to pass this motion. Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance and maybe of the House that you could adjourn –(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, this is a very important motion which will determine the political direction of this country. I seek to move that the proceedings be suspended for 15 minutes to enable us go through the proceedings and determine our –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I beg your pardon. Please, honourable members, let me listen to one person. Hon. Mukula, I have not heard what you were saying. 

MR MWANDHA: A decision has already been taken.

THE SPEAKER: Please, please, I will be able to answer. Yes, what did you want to say?

CAPT MUKULA:  Mr Speaker, I was just seeking your guidance that this is a very important decision for this country.  It is a very important decision for the peasants who would like to see the new political dispensation be exercised.

THE SPEAKER:  Please, please, let us listen to –(Interruption)

CAPT. MUKULA: Mr Speaker, I had two suggestions. One would be to suspend the proceedings for 15 minutes, and we ring the bell so that we come in and determine this matter once and for all.

THE SPEAKER:  You see, honourable members, we have been proceeding with a quorum, but unfortunately, the decision has gone the way it has gone. It could have well been that the 17 were for the motion and there would not have been any problem. But the people have voted in the way they have voted and the text of the motion was very clear.  It provides that a referendum shall be held for purposes of changing the political system if requested by a resolution supported by more than half of all the members of Parliament. 

The only problem that has come is that the people supporting it are less than a half of members of Parliament, and therefore, the motion is not passed. (Applause) But it does not mean that the political system cannot be changed. It will be changed, because the provision of Article 74 is more comprehensive than the provision under which this motion was moved. But this motion has been lost. 

With this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.41 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 26 April 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)

