Thursday, 2 April 2015

Parliament met at 2.07 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I said yesterday, today we will receive the ministerial policy statements and then we will adjourn plenary to enable the committees handle the business. The adjournment of the plenary will take about two weeks. I will be saying this again at the closure of today’s business. This is to enable the committees to activate all their energies and move on to finalise the budget so that we have it in time and the people of Uganda can receive this budget. Thank you very much.

Honourable members, you know the rules; if you have an urgent matter, you come to my chambers and we discuss it. We have not discussed anything with you. That is the purpose of this rule; you come and we discuss, I give you clearance, you go and present and I put it down. You cannot come to the House and do it like this.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE FINANCE BILL, 2015

2.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Finance Bill, 2015 be read for the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, is that motion seconded? It is seconded by the Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness, the Minister of State for Investment, the Member for Rwampara and the Member for Mbale District. Does it have the required documentation or it does not require those? Okay, it stands committed to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE EXCISE DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2015” be read for the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is the motion for first reading, seconded by the Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness, Member for Moroto Municipality, Member for Bukoto and Member for Bukooli Islands. The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill 2015” be read for the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is seconded by hon. Ecweru, hon. Kyamadidi, hon. Nsubuga. The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling.

BILLS
FIRST READING

INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, I beg to move the Bill entitled, “Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2015” be read for the first time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is seconded by hon. Ecweru, hon. Kabahenda, hon. Todwong, hon. Amoit, hon. Byarugaba, hon. Kakoba, the honourable member for Buikwe and hon. Lanyero. This Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling.

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence; there is another financial Bill that has not been included on the Order Paper. It is entitled, “Business Licences (Miscellaneous Repealed) Bill, 2015” to be read for the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands accordingly read for the first time, seconded by hon. Ecweru, hon. Todwong, hon. Nsubuga. The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling.

Honourable members, I am saying that they should be handled expeditiously because we are operating under a situation where the rules that give 45 days will not apply because of the circumstances we have now. We are going to have this back in two weeks so that we can process these matters together with the budgetary issues. Thank you. 

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION BY NOWAMANI MARK ON TAX EVASION

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member with a petition. Let us go to the next item.

LAYING OF PAPERS

MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2015/2016
2.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE (Gen. Jeje Odongo): Mr Speaker and colleagues, in compliance with section 13 and 14 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, I wish to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for the National Planning Authority, vote 108, for the financial year 2015/2016. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling within the timeframe of two weeks. 

2.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Mr Shem Bageine): Mr Speaker, in compliance with section 13 and 14 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for vote 021, Ministry of East African Community Affairs, for the financial year 2015/2016. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let records capture that. It stands committed to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling. 

2.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr James Mutende): Mr Speaker, my ministry’s policy statement is on the way. It will be here before close of the day. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then you might have to lay yourself there. (Laughter)

2.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE (Gen. Jeje Odongo): Mr Speaker, in compliance with section 13 and 14 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, I beg to lay on Table the ministerial policy statement for vote 004, Ministry of Defence, for the financial year 2015/2016. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the appropriate committee to handle expeditiously and report in two weeks. 

2.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, I have the honour to lay on the Table before this Ninth Parliament the ministerial policy statement for vote 003, Office of the Prime Minister, for the financial year 2015/2016. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling within two weeks.

2.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Simon D’ujanga): Mr Speaker, in compliance with section 13 and 14 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, I wish to lay on the Table the ministerial statement for votes 017 and 123 for the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development for the financial year 2015/2016. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling and reporting in two weeks.

2.23
THE 	MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Elioda Tumwesigye): Mr Speaker, the statement for Ministry of Health is still being awaited. I hope to lay it on the Table shortly.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which statements are ready? Please, let us lay those documents on the Table. We will handle issues of procedure later. 

2.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, I have the honour to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for vote 009, Ministry of Internal Affairs; vote 120, National Citizenship and Migration Control; vote 144, Uganda Police Force; and vote 145, Uganda Prisons Service. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling and report in two weeks.

2.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, I have the honour to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for vote 020, Ministry of Information and Communication Technology; and vote 126, National Information Technology Authority. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling and report in two weeks.

2.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table before the Ninth Parliament the ministerial policy statement for vote 103, the Inspectorate of Government, for the financial year 2015/2016. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling and report within two weeks. 

2.27
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Ms Maria Mutagamba): Mr Speaker, in accordance with section 13 and 14 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, I wish to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities representing vote 022, the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities; and vote 117, Uganda Tourism Board. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling and reporting in two weeks.

2.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, I have the honour to lay on Table the ministerial policy statement for vote 131, the Office of the Auditor-General. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEKAER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling and reporting in two weeks.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are we finished with all the ministerial statements? 

MR MWIRU: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, yesterday you ruled that immediately after these ministerial policy statements have been laid before Parliament, we shall have a week within which to act. Now that we have finished laying these papers on the Table and some ministers have not laid theirs, on our side it will be very difficult because we are going to lose more than four days. Therefore, I am wondering how we shall proceed as the Opposition in light of your ruling yesterday as far as time is concerned.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am still hopeful that my order will not have been violated by the end of the day. If it so happens, I will make an appropriate direction on that issue.

Are there any other statements that are still outstanding? If not, we can proceed with item 6.

LAYING OF PAPERS

COMMITTEE FIELD REPORTS

2.30
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HIV/AIDS AND RELATED MATTERS (Dr Medard Bitekyerezo): Mr Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table a report of the Committee of HIV/AIDS and Related Matters on its oversight visit to the fish landing sites. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. At an appropriate time, we will slot that in for handling by the whole House so that we adopt those recommendations.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The proceedings of Parliament used to be broadcast and Ugandans out there are wondering why proceedings of Parliament are now not being televised on the TVs in Uganda.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will find that out and handle it administratively.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE PROPOSAL BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW US$ 83,750,000 (ID 55,460,000) FROM THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK (IDB) FOR FINANCING THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE 132 KV MIRAMA – KABALE TRANSMISSION LINE

2.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament on the proposal by Government to borrow US$ 83,750,000 from the IDB to finance the construction of the 132KV Mirama–Kabale electricity transmission line. 

This project will also cover the distribution line along Opuyo-Moroto. These distribution lines will cover the districts of Katakwi, Soroti, Tororo, Dokolo, Lira, Kole, Gulu, Pader, Agago, Abim and the environs thereof. Mr Speaker, as you know that Government-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you move?

MR KAJARA: This proposal has been presented to the committee –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You beg to move so that we can – 

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that Parliament does consider and approve this motion. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the Minister of State for Energy, the Minister of State for Education, Member for Moroto, Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness, Minister of Internal Affairs, Member for Mbarara Municipality and the members for Kyadondo, Bukwo and Nwoya. Would you like to speak to your motion, honourable minister?

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, you are aware that Government has been prioritising the energy sector, especially generation and transmission of electricity, so as to be able to cover the entire country. In order to do that, we require transmission lines and we also require that distribution lines be constructed. It is in line with this that this loan is being sought, in order for us to extend the electricity network so that those areas without electricity can access it.

In relation to the distribution, there exists a transmission line at the Opuyo-Moroto network but the environs of that area cannot access power until those distribution networks are constructed.

Mr Speaker, the total cost of the proposed project, including provision for physical and price contingencies, is US$ 94 million. Out of this, US$ 67 million is in foreign cost and US$ 27 million in local cost. The Islamic Development Bank will contribute US$ 83.75 million and the Government of Uganda will contribute US$ 10.9 million to the financing of the project. We will also cater for other costs not covered by the IDB loan. 

Mr Speaker, this loan has been considered by the Committee on National Economy and a report has been evolved. I beg to move that this House do consider this loan and approve it accordingly.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that this particular request was presented to the House on 11 December 2014 and referred to the Committee on National Economy. They have examined it and have a report, which can now be presented.

2.36
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Xavier Kyooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a report of the Committee on National Economy on the request by Government to borrow US$ 55,460,000 from the Islamic Development Bank for financing the construction of the 132 Kv Mirama–Kabale electricity transmission Line and distribution project. I beg to lay on the Table the original report of the committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR KYOOMA: I would also like to lay on the Table the minutes relating to the proposal.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes.

MR KYOOMA: Mr Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table the brief to Parliament together with the resolution attached.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the resolutions and other documents.

MR KYOOMA: I would like to lay on the Table the financing agreement between the Government of Uganda and the Islamic Development Bank.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the financing agreement.

MR KYOOMA: Mr Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table the project appraisal document.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR KYOOMA: I would also like to lay on the Table the list of the targeted project distribution areas. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that as well.

MR KYOOMA: Mr Speaker, the committee on National Economy considered the request by Government to borrow US$ 83,750,000 from the Islamic Development Bank for financing the construction of the 132 Kv Mirama–Kabale transmission line and distribution project in accordance with rule 166 (2) (b) of the Rules of Procedures of Parliament.

The request was presented to this august House by the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 11 December 2014 and accordingly, referred to the committee for consideration. Mr Speaker, we have considered and scrutinised the request and now we beg to report.

Methodology

We had meetings and interacted with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development; Uganda Electricity Transmission Company; Electricity Regulatory Authority; and Rural Electrification Agency. The committee also studied and made reference to the following documents:

    • The minister’s brief on the loan request;
    • The project appraisal document;
    • The loan financing agreement.

In addition, we undertook a field visit to some of the implementation sites for this project in the districts of Ntungamo, Kabale and Katakwi.

Mr Speaker, we have given a background to this in our report. I will perhaps now go to the project objectives on page 4. The objectives of this project are:

i) We want to contribute to economic growth and improve the living standards of the country by providing electricity supply and meeting the demand in the southwest, north and northeast regions of Uganda. 

ii) To achieve reliable electricity supply by providing for sufficient power transfer capacity through the installation and commissioning of approximately 85 km of the 132kV transmission line backbone from the Mirama 132/133kV substation to the proposed new 132/133kV- 2 by 40 Mega Voltage Ampere (MVA) substation in Kabale Town; 904 km of 33kV lines and 131 km of Low Voltage (LV) network in 121 villages.

Mr Speaker, the main project covers the south-western, north and north-eastern regions of Uganda. The transmission component will mainly be located in Ntungamo and Kabale while the distribution component will benefit a total of 121 villages as shown in the table that follows.

Mr Speaker, with your permission, I would beg that I go straight to the committee observations and recommendations 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

MR KYOOMA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. With your permission, I beg to take my colleagues to page 12 of the report.

Observations and Recommendations

Economic and Financial Rate of Return of the Project

The committee observed that the base case (2015) of the projections gives a project financial internal rate of return of 16 per cent and an economic internal rate of return of 29 per cent. However, this result is based on the assumption that the distribution losses will be 18 per cent and yet they are currently at 24 per cent. This may be unrealistic within the short to medium term. 

In addition, computations are made at an exchange rate of US$ 1 to Shs 2,500. However, current trends indicate depreciation of the local currency against the dollar, which increases the cost of distribution and end-user tariffs in Uganda shillings terms. The net likely effect is that there will not be enough investment in expansion operation and maintenance, hence escalating system losses.

The committee further noted that the positive financial internal rate of return is premised on higher returns for the concessionaire, obtained from raising the end user average tariff from US$ 0.16 per kWh in 2019 to US$ 0.34 per kWh in 2048. This compromises the project’s intended benefit of US$ 16 cents per kWh. It also implies that in the event that the tariff does not adjust to the projected levels, then the concessionaire will operate at a loss or will require Government to inject capital to sustain the project. This situation, therefore, alters the financial internal rate of return significantly.

More so, the distribution by Rural Electrification Agency in some parts of the project areas, which is supposed to be partly financed by a statutory levy on bulk electricity sales, is compromised by lack of affordability by the households, for example, along the Opuyo–Moroto distribution lines as observed during the field visits. In addition, concessionaires shall be responsible for operations and maintenance of the infrastructure. This situation does not return immediate revenue gains to Government and instead subsidisation of costs for consumer connections will be required to increase electricity access.

In view of the above challenges, despite the projected revenue streams generated by the concessionaire and lack of information on how much subsidy will be provided to the consumers in the project area to generate the required electricity demand to make the project viable, the actual revenues to Government cannot be established. This is coupled with the fact that the structural setup of many of the houses along the project area may not attract connectivity of electricity.

Therefore, we recommend that the local authorities of the project area should make by-laws to ensure improvement of housing conditions to enable the people to benefit from the power resource.

We also recommend that given the objective of Government to equitably distribute electricity throughout the country, subsidies should be made to ensure that the people along the project area access the power supply.

Project Istisna’s Financing Mode 

Mr Speaker, the committee observed that the Islamic Development Bank will make available US$ 83.75 million for the construction of the asset under the 132kV Mirama–Kabale transmission line and distribution project and sell the same to the Republic of Uganda. Therefore, this proposed loan financing is a market based loan and non-concessional, whose financial terms, as indicated in table 3, require the project to start generating revenue for Government within a period of not more than five years as provided for in the Uganda Public Debt Management Framework, 2013.

The committee recommends that since this is a highly non– concessional debt, it would be prudent if the financial internal rate of return for this project is highly positive and incorporates all the likely risks in the energy sector. Therefore, given these gaps on the revenue streams for Government in the short to medium term, this financing modality is not suitable for this project unless it is subsidised by Government.

Support to Project Management Unit Costs

The committee observed that under the project management unit, a start-up workshop at a cost of US$ 30,000 will be established to kick-start the project. However, since UETCL and REA have the experience of implementing similar projects, this allocation is not necessary.

Recommendation: The committee recommends that the start-up workshop expenses be financed from Government of Uganda resources; and the amount, which had been budgeted for sensitisation, be re-allocated for the procurement of step-down infrastructure for domestic connectivity in the villages around the project area that were excluded in the project design.

Provision of Physical Contingency in the Project Budget

The committee noted that the application of the 10 per cent for physical contingency on non-physical activities of the project costs, for instance, financial audit, project management unit, consultancy and the environment and social management plan, is erroneous. When the suggested 10 per cent contingency is applied on only physical activities, that is, transmission and distribution line network and the electricity substations, it yields a saving of US$ 0.48 million.

The committee further observed that the 10 per cent physical contingency provision was very high, given the fact that the anticipated project risks were rated very low as per the project appraisal.

In addition, the committee observed that component 5, that is, financial audit, costing US$ 0.05, is not required for this project since all public projects are audited by the Auditor-General, whose financing is normally provided for in the national budget.

The committee recommends the following:

    • The project provisions for physical contingency should be reduced from 10 to 7 per cent. As a result of this reduction, an estimated total of US$ 2.52 million will be realised as a saving from the above action. This saving should be re-allocated for the procurement of step-down infrastructure for domestic connectivity in the villages around the project area that were excluded in the project design.

    • Similarly, the saving resulting from the removal of component 5, which is financial audit, should be allocated as shown above.

    • We recommend that the parliamentary Committee on Natural Resources, which is the sectoral committee, should follow up on the above recommendations and give a timely report to this august House.

Consultancy Cost for Transmission and Distribution Network

The committee noted that a total of an estimated US$ 3.5 million will be spent on consultancies. The committee was informed that besides this provision for consultancy being a normal budgeting procedure for electricity distribution and transmission networks, it was also one of the conditions of the financier during the loan negotiations of this project.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning Economic Development should in future avoid negotiating very high consultancy costs for projects in order to reduce the cost of implementing these projects.

The IDB Cumulative Undisbursed Loan Commitments for the Country

Mr Speaker, the committee observed that the cumulative IDB undisbursed commitment for the country was relatively high as of March 2014. This was partly attributed to the slow fulfilment of loan effective conditions upon signing of loan agreements in order to trigger the disbursement of committed funds for the implementation of projects, and the low absorption capacity of project implementing agencies.

The committee recommends that Government ensures the speedy fulfilment of effectiveness conditions of project financing agreements in order for the committed funds to be released by the financiers on time to guarantee the timely implementation of these projects. Greater efforts, therefore, should be made by project implementing agencies in reducing transaction costs, improving utilisation and absorption of project funds.

Conclusion

Mr Speaker, subject to the recommendations made above, the committee recommends that the request by Government to borrow US$ 83,750,000 from the Islamic Development Bank (IDB) for financing the construction of the 132kV Mirama–Kabale transmission line and distribution project be approved. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, and thank you, members of the committee, for this quick response on this matter and reporting to the House within time. 

Honourable members, I now propose the question for your debate. The motion that you are going to debate is for a resolution of Parliament to approve the request by the Government to borrow US$ 83,750,000 from the Islamic Development Bank for financing the construction of the 132 kV Mirama–Kabale transmission line. That is the motion for your debate and debate starts now.

Honourable members, in the public gallery we have pupils of Walukuba East Primary School, Jinja District. They are represented by hon. Paul Mwiru and hon. Agnes Nabirye. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome.

2.45
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is very difficult to reject or not to support a loan request which is intended to extend electricity to the people. However, Government has not told us what the principle of this transmission was. 

In other governments, when you are connecting, you take the grid, the step-down because people must connect. The essence is that in the areas where you are taking this electricity, it should be possible to generate and even to help in repayment. However, what is taking place in this country is that we are also transmitting electricity as if we are giving districts. If you carried out an evaluation today of all the loans we have passed in this House, and we have been transmitting, how many people have been connected? Can these projects that we have connected sustain themselves? 

It is for these very reasons that I am alive to the fact that there is a project in the Ministry of Energy to help connect people free of charge and yet when we are passing the loan requests, we are creating an encumbrance even on these future voters of mine. The spirit should have been that since we are supporting this loan request, wherever we are extending this electricity, once we connect, we should have the capacity to generate money and connect the neighbouring places.

I want to reluctantly support the motion. However, Mr Speaker, I implore the ministry to come up with statistics and give us some data on the connection rate in places where we have supported the transmission. Is the money invested in the transmission worth it, given the fact that people are not connecting?

Mr Speaker, I would interest the Prime Minister - This is where you have failed. If you look at the connection to the national grid, I think it is 15 per cent but when it goes down to rural electrification, it is not above 10 per cent. You should be asking, “If we are investing colossal sums of money, what is the return?” You are only interested in saying that you have brought electricity to an area so you deserve a vote, but you should give it extra thought. So, it goes beyond that; this electricity must be used. We were taught in school that electricity was one of the factors of production, so we should also be looking at it from that perspective.

Having said that, and the Prime Minister seems to now belong to my school of thought, I would like to end by reluctantly supporting the loan request on condition that Government interests itself in carrying out research on where we have supported loans and what the output is.

2.58
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I support the motion for a request to borrow this money. However, I have specific issues on the recommendations put forward. 

The first issue is on the improvement of the housing conditions where the connection is going to be done. The nature of our houses reflects the poverty levels in our community. Unless we work on the poverty situation of our people, it will be impossible to improve the housing conditions. If you do not have adequate food, you cannot provide for basic needs and it becomes difficult to have a decent house. Therefore, I urge all of us to work together towards improving our poverty situation.

There was also the issue of domestic connectivity being excluded. To me, this is a key issue because in Adjumani we have the same problem; many of the key government institutions, including prisons, were not part of the project and they have not been included. This has affected what people had expected because when the community demands for electricity, they expect a steady and fully connected power system. Therefore, I pray that since it is excluded in this borrowing, the Government should consider this first so that when power gets to such a community, there is going to be reliable connectivity.

Lastly, I request that the Government or the relevant minister should tell us about this recommendation in which the committee said that the start-up activities would be financed by Government. To what extent have we prepared ourselves to finance this? Are we going provide for this in the incoming budget? Can you tell us how much you are going to provide or propose? I thank you very much.

3.00
MR VINCENT KYAMADIDI (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I rise to second the motion to allow Government borrow money for rural electrification. There is no doubt that we are doing very well as a government on rural electrification. Time and again, the case has been that we should support them as a government. 

Before I submit, I wish to inquire from the chairperson, the rationale behind the committee recommendation for Government to finance the start-up workshop expenses. It appears to suggest that if the Government does not do this, then it should stop. I have a rural electrification project in Rwampara and the other day, the newspapers published that the district chairperson and I ate the money that was meant to compensate the local community. Everyone knows for sure that no MP can access the compensation funds but because politics will be at play, somebody will use it. Can I know the committee’s position on this? 

I am alive to the fact that these communities must be made to understand that some of these projects cannot compensate. We, the politicians, now that it is also a political season, need power for our people but our people also need money for compensation. It is a dilemma. It is a catch-22 paradox. So, what is the committee going to do?

The other issue is about the growing demand for electricity. It has been oscillating around 12 to 15 per cent globally. I associate myself closely with the presentation of my honourable colleague from Adjumani. What do we achieve as Government when there are power lines from Mbarara to Kabale but along the grid, people are not connected? You go to Mile 17 on the Mbarara to Kabale road and people are connected – even at miles 18, 5 and 8 they are not connected. You see people looking at these power lines. What is the rationale of transmitting power to Kabale and you skip the people of Rwampara?

Lastly, Mr Speaker, this loan request was supposed to be approved even yesterday. When you look at the financing needs especially for coverage in the south-western region and in the east, you realise that we needed this loan yesterday. I implore honourable colleagues to support this motion as long as this loan will be put to proper use for our people. I thank you. (Applause)

3.04
MS GRACE KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you very, Mr Speaker. I would like to support this motion to allow the country borrow US$ 83 million to promote rural electrification. 

I support this in relation to what is happening in Zombo where the extension lines are being installed. Even though there is no power, the lines have changed the face of Zombo. You go to Zombo and get excited over the presence of poles, at least along the roadside. (Applause) Although the people are excited that they are going to get power, they are also wondering whom to talk to because there is no office to go to or officer explaining to them on how they can access the poles, how much the poles cost, what period they will take, among others. As this project goes on, where is the office that the local community can go to so that they get this information and prepare themselves to access the power?

I also wish to support the recommendations that the committee has made, for example on local authorities passing by-laws to improve housing conditions. I also support the committee’s recommendation that Government should provide subsidies in order to connect people because electricity is expensive. If Government does not do that, we shall just remain admiring what is by the roadside and the locals, much as we are saying this is rural electrification, will not access it. 

I would like to ask, “What amount has the Government prepared to put aside?” I like the recommendation of the committee that says that given the issues raised and once addressed, this loan should be approved. I would like to know how much Government has put aside as a subsidy to help locals access power. I thank you.

3.07
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): I wish to also join my colleagues in thanking the committee for the good report and also thank Government for finally bringing this loan request. 

Mr Speaker, I am particularly happy for the Opuyo-Moroto transmission line. I have a project that has delayed by over two years due to lack of power in Moroto. Lack of power has greatly affected this region and during our project costing, thermal power was going to cost us 12 per cent of the project cost. Now, since this project is coming to Moroto, the project cost, in respect to distribution of power, will be about 7 per cent.

Mr Speaker and colleagues, I implore you to support this loan request as this will go a long way in opening up investment and tapping the potential of Moroto and Karamoja area. This will spur investment and creation of jobs in Karamoja region.

I would also like to agree with the committee on the issues raised. In respect to contingency fees, we have passed very many loans and contingency fees are still very high. I also request that in future, Government should try, as much as possible, to ensure that it keeps the cost of contingency low because in the short run, the costs of the project affect the economy.

Secondly, I also agree with colleagues that while negotiating for these consultancy fees, Government should try, as much as possible, to ensure that it keeps the consultancy fees low. This is because in the short run, it also greatly affects the cost of the project.

Mr Speaker and colleagues, I request that we wholeheartedly support this loan request so that we are able to open up investments in Karamoja. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.09
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On a unique note, I am reluctant to support the motion until salient questions have been answered regarding the people I represent in Nateete. As we speak, electricity is increasingly becoming unaffordable among the population that I represent and because of that, I was directed by the population I have referred to, to seek answers to these questions before I support the motion.

Mr Speaker, it is on record that electricity of the species of hydro is supposedly the cheapest in the world -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which record?

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Hydroelectricity is the cheapest source of energy, as we speak. You could read the Encyclopaedia Britannica volume 15, 2008. At Independence, an electricity unit in Uganda was around Shs 1 or slightly below a shilling. As we speak, it is immeasurably high. 

My people are seeking the following clarifications: First and foremost, they are saying that borrowing for electricity development is commonplace. If we are borrowing regularly, why shouldn’t the tariff equally become low and affordable to enable expansion to go ahead? They are also asking, if the tariff is increasing from time to time, does it mean that we are borrowing from wrong lenders or are we misusing the money we borrow?

The people I represent would also like to know whether the borrowing we are carrying out is helping us. Why am I saying so? Many people would like to know whether the money we borrow assists this generation and will assist the generation to come. You know Bujagali Dam; I am reliably informed that Uganda will not own this dam until after 30 years as we have mortgaged the dam.

I would like the minister in charge of electricity to give me a response before I get the courage to tell my people that I will support the motion. Otherwise, the type of borrowing we are talking about is burying people in the soil and something must be done to rescue the people ahead of time. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, as a result, I strongly propose that before we borrow any money for electricity, some explanatory notes should be given to us. Why am I saying so? Uganda has a parastatal body called the Electricity Regulatory Authority. Much as there is some privatisation, it is the government body that controls the generation of tariffs. Therefore, we have no excuse to assume that it is Umeme piling tariffs on us. Uganda controls the tariffs and you in Government, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, have no excuse not to fight for your people. 

Stop the borrowing if it is becoming hell. Do not mortgage us. You have no explanation to give that we will own Bujagali 30 years from now. What are you talking about? (Laughter) With those few words, I wait for the answers before I support the motion.

3.14
MR ISAIAS SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I decline to support the motion. If you look at the committee’s observations and critically examine them, one would come to the conclusion that the good chairperson has put forward – the loan leaves a lot to be desired. 

Let us go to observation No.2 on the project Istisna’a financing mode. He says, and I will paraphrase, that the proposed loan financing is a market-based loan and non-concessional. He goes ahead and says, “The committee recommends that since this is a highly non-concessional debt, it would be prudent if the financial internal rate of return for this project is highly positive and incorporates…” That means that there is something there, unless the minister or the chairperson clarifies this. Otherwise, your observation is saying that the committee was not very comfortable with the internal rate of return.

On consultancy and transmission, the committee recommends that Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should, in future, avoid negotiating very high consultancy costs for projects. They are already observing that there are very high consultancy costs. He continues to say, “subject to the recommendations made above...” If I critically examine and analyse the observations made, in my own understanding they are not positive and he is saying, “subject to the above observations, the committee recommends”.

Mr Speaker, I was a teacher and I used to be hired by UNEB to set, grade and examine economics examinations. In order to give a child a very good score, you do not base on the conclusion; you first read the body and make observations before you can make the conclusion.

I decline to support this motion because when will the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development stop negotiating for these kinds of loans? They could have stopped negotiating yesterday. The other day I was very attentive; I listened to the chairperson and these were almost the same observations. The other day for the other loan, it was the same.

Colleagues, we are the trustees of the public. We are the trustees of Ugandans and our children. When will this stop? I do believe that this is the time to reject some of these loans so that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Government go back and clean up their house as far as negotiations of these loans are concerned.

Somebody is talking about demanding money for electricity. It is not just about their demand; it must be effective demand. Do we just demand for the sake of it, or are we demanding and we have the ability to pay? Regarding this loan, income must be generated within five years to start paying it back. Do we have the ability that for each loan we are going for – Even if we are going to provide power to these areas, do they have the ability to start paying back this loan in five years?

Mr Speaker, I decline to support this loan unless the minister reassures the House, which I doubt in this case - It is high time Parliament rejected these loans and Government puts its systems in order, including the negotiation part of it. I beg to move.

3.19
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On 4 February 2011, the President of Uganda was in Mukono. This was during the campaigns. He told the people of Mukono that as we speak, Uganda has enough funds to support her projects.

Mr Speaker, I do not know what I will tell the people of Mukono; that during the period I have been here, on almost a weekly basis, there is a loan to approve. I do not know how we shall be able to pay these loans as a country. 

Mr Speaker, this loan shall be repaid in 19 years. That means we shall pay the last shilling for this loan in 2034. I wonder how many of us seated here today will be very productive in order to share in the paying of this loan.

It is unfortunate that we even take pride in borrowing; that we go to our areas and tell people that we are soon borrowing money to extend power here. It is very sad that we are living on funds that shall be paid by our grandchildren. Because of that, I feel pained that even for small things like extending power –(Interruption)

MR MUSINGUZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been in Mukono and I know that in Mukono, every village has electricity. Is it in order for the Member to be very selfish and very selective in antagonising Government to desist from extending the same to other areas? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Mukono Municipality, you have been put on notice.

MS NAMBOOZE: I thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. I wish to add that I would like, very painfully and on behalf of the people of Mukono, to support this motion. However, I would like Government to come up with a clear plan on how we shall extend power to all those districts, which are not yet on the national grid.

Mr Speaker, three weeks ago we were in Buyende, a district that was separated from Kamuli. We were told that the whole of that district is not connected to the national grid. If they have just one letter to photocopy, they have to travel 40 kilometres to Kamuli town to photocopy it.

In that regard, Mr Speaker, let it be clearly put that these so many districts are not on the national grid and we should arrange a very clear plan instead of giving out power as a favour by His Excellency the President. Let us have a national plan where all these districts, which are not yet connected to the national grid, will have this promise and will be sure that on such and such a date, Government shall secure money for us to –(Interruption)

MRS EGUNYU: Thank you very much, honourable member, for paving way. I would like to add my voice to yours that I also support this loan request painfully. This is because in addition to the district that you have talked about, I also have Buvuma District, which had a presidential pledge to get electricity. The minister was even tasked to explain why Buvuma has not yet got power. 

Mothers in Buvuma are producing children using candlelight. If there are no candles, the doctor must buy a torch. Therefore, I am also supporting it painfully. Next time if Buvuma does not come here, I will not support any other loan. That is the information I wanted to give you. (Laughter)

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, I thanked the honourable colleague for that additional information. As I conclude, I would like to request the Leader of Government Business to request His Excellency the President to stop telling Ugandans that we have enough money as a country and that we are raising enough money through taxes. Otherwise, people will stop taking MPs seriously. The other daythe President was in my district telling people that we have enough money –(Interruption)

THE PRIME MINSTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also thank my sister, hon. Nambooze, for giving way. It is true that over the years the people of Uganda have increased their capacity to mobilise internal resources to develop their country. Whereas a number of years ago, more than 50 per cent of our budget was being financed by borrowed or donor funds, as I speak, more than 80 per cent of the budget is financed by our own resources.

This is, in my view, tremendous and commendable progress. As time goes on Uganda is going to mobilise enough money to be able to run her economy. Therefore, we are doing very well and I am glad that President Museveni rightly told the people of Mukono that Uganda is raising a lot of resources internally to develop our own country. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you for that information. Now that I am properly informed that we raise money through selling nsenene and our economy is growing - Mr Speaker, Uganda at the moment has no clear cash crop and there are no clear exports that we are making as a country. (Interjections) This is true, Mr Speaker. 

However, I am so happy that we are raising enough money as a country and I would like to conclude my submission by still calling on the President and all of us to tell Ugandans the truth. At one time, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister will come to this House and tell us the true figure of our debt as it stands right now. That is my humble submission. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Mukono, the language of this Parliament is English. For the record, what is nsenene? (Laughter)

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, nsenene are the edible grasshoppers that we export in large quantities as a country. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.27
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to support this serious motion for the sake of the people of Mirama, Kabale and particularly Karamoja.

Mr Speaker, I would like to put it to hon. Mwiru that if people of his type do not want electricity because they are in the Opposition, we shall give it to them by force because they need electricity. Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. While I was contributing to this motion, I spoke very clear English. Is it in order for hon. Bitekyerezo to insinuate that I am against this loan that is meant to transmit power to Mirama, Kabale? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know there are different kinds of English. There is the one for the lawyers and the one for the doctors. There might have been some miscommunication somewhere. (Laughter)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, for that wise ruling. I am disturbed by two issues and one concerns start-up workshops. The people who are going to implement this loan are the ones who have been connecting Uganda. When I computed the money for these workshops, it summed up to Shs 90 million. The money will be spent on hiring tents, buying mineral water, and paying for hotels to ask the people of Karamoja and Kabale whether they accept power. I want to support the committee that this money should not be spent on workshops; instead, it should be put into buying more electric poles to give power to the people.

My second issue concerns physical contingency of 10 per cent, which is too much. This is why somebody told me that when we pass a loan request, you see some technocrats smiling as if they are going to give people electricity yet they are very happy that they are going to get this physical contingency.

Mr Speaker, I would like to know and Government will have to find out who these consultants are. I hope they are not the same consultants who could be connected and are eating this money instead of it going to the people. 

On a serious note, I want to re-echo the issue of electricity passing over people’s houses and it does not trickle into those houses. A case in point is Rwagaaju. When you are entering Mbarara Municipality in between Biharwe and Crown Bottlers, there is that wonderful town where a number of things are sold and there are some good houses. Those fellows have come to me and said that I should approve this loan. 

Please, Mr Prime Minister, the people of Mbarara Municipality do not want to be in town and some people do not have electricity. I want Rwagaaju to see power. Electricity should be afforded by almost everybody. I went to Busoga when we were doing our oversight role and looking at health centres we found out that there are some health centres in Busoga, which have electric poles but they have no electricity. [Mr Odonga Otto: “Information!”] You know my time is over and I have given chance to somebody already. 

Mr Speaker, I urge Government and the people to make sure that when power has reached a health centre, it should enter the theatre so that the machines can work. For power to be near a health centre and not reach the health centre is very painful.

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the government of Uganda for borrowing for our sake. I do not fear paying a loan because if you do not have a loan, you cannot develop yourself. I want to tell the people of Uganda that even hon. Nambooze has got some loans and that is how she has become a rich woman. Therefore, it is not going to be very different for Government of Uganda to borrow for the sake of giving power to the people of Uganda. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I support the motion in totality.

3.32
DR BALTAZAR KASIRIVU (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee and the government for this loan request. I totally support the motion for the loan acquisition.

Mr Speaker, I also add my voice to colleagues in saying that electricity is infrastructure and we need more money to make sure that electricity covers the entire country where it is necessary and in a short time. I am sure when this money is utilised, other loans for rural electrification should be brought to this Parliament and we should be able to approve these loans.

Mr Speaker, I also want to support hon. Kwiyucwiny on connections and subsidising connections. A few years ago, electricity was extended to a bigger part of my constituency and you can notice the difference especially that there was some subsidy to those who were connecting customers onto the grid. The amount of money, which Umeme and other service providers were charging was reduced tremendously and people have been queuing at the offices of the service providers to make sure they are connected. 

I therefore appeal to Government that more schemes of that type be extended to other parts of the country so that those who want to get connected on the grid are subsidised and therefore get connected.

Mr Speaker, I also think that alongside this rural electrification, there should be solar connections because there are areas where the grid may not easily reach especially deep in the villages and yet they also want electricity. Therefore, alongside rural electrification, there should be solar connectivity so that they go alongside and the people get electricity.

I want to give an example of an experience in my constituency, which grows a lot of maize. In many of the centres, maize millers have set up their machines and they are milling the maize and packing it. There are many people who come from Kampala and elsewhere to buy grain. Thus there is competition between these people who come from rural areas and Kampala to buy grain and the maize millers. This competition has given the farmers a bigger amount of money per kilogram. 

Therefore, it is the farmers who benefit from this competition and I believe that if connectivity is extended to other areas, farmers who produce maize and other crops will benefit from the competition between those who have machines hence creating jobs for these areas.

However, we have a problem of the operators. I feel Government must come in to make sure that the operators; Umeme and others, treat the people humanely instead of disconnecting them and giving them bills that are not justifiable.

Lastly, you will notice that where electricity has been extended, especially in centres, the trading centres expand in no time. However, the expansion is not planned and therefore we are creating a lot of slums. I would urge Government to make sure that the Physical Planning Act is enforced so that when a centre opens, there is physical planning, services are provided and therefore, infrastructural development can easily move.

Mr Speaker, I support the motion and I expect more motions of this kind to come so that other areas of this country are connected onto the grid. 

3.37
MR JULIUS BIGIRWA (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support the motion for Government to borrow this money because we needed it yesterday. 

I sit on the Committee on Natural Resources and this committee directly oversees the Ministry of Energy and Minerals. Therefore, we have had the opportunity to move to different areas in this country and see the progress regarding these power projects especially the Rural Electrification Project. I can report to this House that there is no doubt that where there is power, those areas are getting transformed. We need to move fast, as a country, to make sure that all these areas without power get power if we are to add value to our products and transform this country to a better one that we deserve. 

I would like to add my voice to other speakers who have spoken about the distribution of power. I have got a power line in Hoima, which has been there since the 1960s. It has been passing by the trading centres and people’s houses. I urge Government that while we are considering this distribution of power, it is not enough to just have power lines pass by the roads for beautification. We need power in people’s houses. 

I support and ask that if there could be a mechanism, like the committee is proposing, of subsidising people with the capacity to have power in their houses, this should be done so that at the end of it all, we have more connections. It would make more sense to me to have electricity bills instead of connection charges so that the payment is as a result of power usage. Otherwise, many of our people have got lines in their areas but cannot afford to make connections to their houses. 

The other thing is that the Rural Electrification Agency is doing a great job in this country. How I wish they would package themselves to have one loan, after having studied the energy needs of this country and maybe we pass it at once so that we deal with that section and say, that it is done. In fact if they came with a loan to make sure power is distributed throughout the country, I would still support it. 

I am also disturbed with the issue of public institutions like schools, hospitals, health centres and so many others that have poles in their gardens and compounds but they cannot be connected. As a Government, we need to have an inter-ministerial work method where if for example we have power in an area, the schools and hospitals should have connections; so that we do not just see power in our areas when we are not benefiting from it. 

Lastly, concerning compensation, I have observed that many of these projects would move faster but some of the challenges I have realised, and this issue is also in the committee, include the fact that while people want power in their areas, the issue we need to think about and discuss is that of compensation. You go to an area and ask people whether they need power, they get excited about it. However, you find one or two persons delaying the entire project, which would otherwise be supported by many others simply because of compensation. 

The issue of compensation is delaying many of our government projects, which would be assisting many of our people in terms of development. Otherwise, I would like to thank the committee and also show my support for this motion because this loan helps us. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, in the public gallery we have Mukono municipal councillors from Mukono District. They are represented by hon. Peace Kusasira and hon. Betty Nambooze. Please, join me in welcoming them.

3.43
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have been following the debate and I do not think many of our opinions differ. I would like to move a motion that you put the question.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a motion that I put the question. 

3.43
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula-Oguttu): Mr Speaker, we agreed, and I gave notice to this House, that we shall not pass any Bill or loan request unless we have quorum. If we have quorum, you could put the question but before that, please establish whether we have quorum in the House. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when a motion of this nature is moved, I am required to put the question to the motion that the question be put first. We shall then go to the next one, which will require us to establish whether there is quorum or not. I put the question to the motion that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now as to the decision itself on the request by Government to borrow, I will ask the Clerk to assist me with this. 

Honourable members, I request all those members in the lobbies to enter the Chamber and we see if we can take a decision on this matter. Can all those members who are in the different places of this House come into the Chamber as we need to take a vote? 

In the meantime, while that is taking place, can we receive some of the ministerial policy statements, the ones that are ready? You should have notified the Clerk on which ones are ready. There is Trade, Lands and Education. Please, let us receive those while we wait for the other Members to come.

LAYING OF PAPERS

MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2015/2016

3.47
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko: Mr Speaker and honourable members, in compliance with sections 13 and 14 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, I wish to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement of Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, votes 012 and 156, for the FY 2015/2016, accompanied with the Ministry Assets Register. I wish to lay on the Table the same. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling for a period of two weeks and reporting to the House. 

3.48
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION, SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND SPORTS (Ms Jessica Alupo): Mr Speaker, in accordance with section 13 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement from the Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports comprising of the following votes: vote 103, Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports; vote 111, Busitema University; vote 127, Muni University; vote 128, Uganda National Examinations Board; vote 132, Education Service Commission; vote 136, Makerere University; vote 137, Mbarara University; vote 138, Makerere University Business School; vote 139, Kyambogo University; vote 140, Uganda Management Institute; vote 149, Gulu University; and finally vote 500, local governments. Mr Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling and reporting to the House in two weeks. 

3.50
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Mr Speaker, in compliance with sections 13 and 14 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, I wish to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for vote 015, vote 110 and vote 154 of the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives for the FY 2015/2016. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It is referred to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling and reporting in two weeks.

3.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Dr James Mutende): Mr Speaker, in compliance with sections 13 and 14 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, I wish to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for the Presidency for FY 2015/2016 comprised of vote 001, Office of the President; vote 002, State House; vote 109, Uganda Aids Commission; vote 112, Ethics and Integrity; and vote 159, External Security Organisation. Mr Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling and reporting to the House in two weeks. Are there any more? Is Uganda Aids Commission covered under that vote? 

3.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (REGIONAL COOPERATION) (Mr Philemon Mateke): Mr Speaker and honourable members, in compliance with sections 13 and 14 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, I wish to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for FY 2015/2016. Formulation was informed by Uganda’s Vision 2040, the National Development Plan II (NDPII); the ministry’s Strategic Investment Plan; the NRM manifesto 2011 and policy pronouncements –(Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, what the House has received is a ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Let the records capture that and it stands referred to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling and reporting in two weeks. All other documents shall be disregarded.

3.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ECONOMIC MONITORING, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (Mr Henry Banyenzaki): Mr Speaker, in compliance with sections 13 and 14 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, I wish to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement of the Ministry of Local Government: Vote 011, Ministry of Local Government; vote 147, Local Government Finance Commission; votes 501-778, all local governments for FY 2015/2016. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling and reporting to the House in two weeks. Are there any other policy statements? Honourable members, would you like to sit?

Honourable members, the House is not properly constituted to take a decision. House is suspended for 10 minutes. The bell shall be rung for those 10 minutes and we shall then resume. If there is no further quorum, we will not be able to take any decision. House is suspended.

(The House was suspended at 3.58 p.m.)

(On resumption at 4.09 p.m., the Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, presiding_)


LAYING OF PAPERS

MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2015/2016

4.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, in line with the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for vote 141, Uganda Revenue Authority.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling and reporting in two weeks.

4.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, and honourable colleagues, in line with the Public Finance Management Act, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for the PPDA, vote 153.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling and reporting in two weeks.

4.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for Uganda Bureau of Statistics.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling and reporting in two weeks.

4.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR, FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, in line with the Public Finance Management Act, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for the National Planning Authority, vote 108.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling and reporting in two weeks.

Honourable members, you will recall that we suspended this House for 10 minutes to see if we can constitute it in the form where we can take a decision. I will proceed to take the roll call and see - (Applause)- the Members who signed up and are not in the House. Please, read the names. 


Hon. Joy Atim			-	Present
Hon. Juliana Auma 			
Hon. Ahmed Awongo			
Hon. Anne Auru				
Hon. Krispus Ayena			
Hon. Michael Ayepa
Hon. Tonny Ayoo		-	Present
Hon. Margaret Baba Diri	- 	Present
Hon. James Baba			

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, that is an ex officio member.



Hon. Veronica Babirye		
Hon. Fred Badda 			-		Present
Hon. Vincent Bagiire 			-		Present
Hon. John Bagoole 
Hon. David Bahati			-		Present
Hon. Martin Mugarra			-		Present
Hon. Stephen Baka
Hon. Charles Bakabulindi
Hon. Peter Bakaluba 
Hon. Mable Bakeine	
Hon. Betty Nambooze 			-		Present
Hon. Christine Bako	
Hon. Edward Baliddawa	
Hon. Sulaiman Balyejjusa
Hon. Moses Balyeku
Hon. Anifa Bangirana
Hon. Henry Banyenzaki			-		Present
Hon. Beatrice Barumba
Hon. Andrew Baryayanga  		-		Present
Hon. Chris Baryomunsi			-		Present
Hon. Michael Lulume 			-		Present
Hon. Tarsis Kabwegyere		-					
Hon. Syda Bbumba			-		Present
Hon. Ignatius Besisira
Hon. Julius Bigirwa			-		Present
Hon. Jalia Bintu				-		Present
Hon. Stephen Mukitale
Hon. Ephraim Biraaro		
Hon. Birekeraawo Mathias Nsubuga	-		Present	
Hon. Emma Bonna
Hon. Tress Bucyanayandi		
Hon. Gilbert Bukenya
Hon. Victoria Businge
Hon. Mary Karooro Okurut
Hon. Yokasi Bwambale
Hon. John Byabagambi
Hon. Nuru Byamukama
Hon. Abraham Byandala
Hon. Alex Byarugaba
Hon. Grace Isingoma			-		Present
Hon. Cadet Benjamin
Hon. Stephen Chebrot
Hon. Lydia Chekwel			-		Present
Hon. Abdi Chemaswet
Hon. Phyllis Chemutai 
Hon. Daudi Migereko			-		Present
Hon. Emmanuel Dombo
Hon. Martin Drito			-		Present
Hon. Fred Ebil 				-		Present
Hon. Musa Francis Ecweru				
Hon. Jennifer Egunyu			-		Present
Hon. Geoffrey Ekanya				
Hon. George Stephen Ekuma		-		Present
Hon. Florence Ekwau					
Hon. Sam Engola			
Hon. Francis Epetait
Hon. Peter Eriaku			-		Present
Hon. Hassan Fungaroo
Hon. Yahaya Gudoi			-		Present
Hon. Hood Katuramu			-		Present
Hon. Margaret Iriama			-		Present
Hon. Rose Iriama			-		Present
Hon. Iddi Isabirye
Hon. Fred Omach
Hon. Evelyn Kabuule 			-		Present
Hon. Tophas Kahwa			
Hon. Olivia Kabaale			-		Present
Hon. Flavia Kabahenda
Hon. James Kabajo			-		Present
Hon. Kabakumba Matsiko	
Hon. Naome Kabasharira
Hon. Ssozi Mukasa Kaddu
Hon. Michael Werikhe			-		Present
Hon. Robert Ssekitoleko		
Hon. Boaz Kafuda
Hon. Kahinda Otafiire
Hon. Helen Kahunde
Hon. Aston Kajara
Hon. Henry Kajura 			-	Present
Hon. Onyango Kakoba
Hon. James Kakooza 			-	Present
Hon. Kamanda Bataringaya
Hon. John Kamara
Hon. Jovah Kamateeka	 		-	Present
Hon. Saleh Kamba		
Hon. Stephen Rwakanuma
Hon. Gerald Karuhanga
Hon. Elizabeth Karungi 			-	Present
Hon.	Matia Kasaija			
Hon. Stephen Kasaija
Hon. Mathias Kasamba 			-	Present
Hon. Freda Kase Mubanda 			
Hon. Moses Kasibante 			-	Present
Hon. Dr Kasirivu Atwooki		-	Present
Hon. Justine Kasule Lumumba 
Hon. Robert Kasule 			-	Present
Hon. Janet Kataha Museveni	
Hon. Sarah Kataike			-	Present 
Hon. Brig. Phenehas Katirirma		- 	Present
Hon. Hatwib Katoto
Hon. Katumba Wamala
Hon. Abdu Katuntu
Hon. Oliva Katwesigye 			-	Present
Hon. Yorokamu Katwiremu 		-	Present
Hon. Muhamed Kawuuma				
Hon. Sarah Kayagi Netalisire
Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi	
Hon. Justine Khainza
Hon. Prof. Kiddu Makubuya
Hon. Margaret Kiboijana
Hon. Ronald Kibuule			-	Present
Hon. Kiiza Keneth Monday						
Hon. Kiiza Rwebembera				
Hon. Winifred Kiiza 			-	Present
Hon. Isah Kikungwe
Hon. Florence Kintu
Hon. Abdu Kitata						
Hon. Godfrey Kiwanda
Hon. Asuman Kiyingi
Hon. Keneth Bbosa Kiyingi
Hon. Deogratius Kiyingi
Hon. Dr Chrispus Kiyonga
Hon. Margaret Komuhangi		-	Present
Hon. Peace Kusasira
Hon. Sam Kutesa
Hon. William Kwemara		
Hon. Grace Kwiyucwiny 		-	Present
Hon. Eddie Kwizera	
Hon. Amelia Anne Kyambadde	 	-	Present
Hon. Hussein Kyanjo
Hon. Haruna Kyeyune
Hon. Xavier Kyooma 			-	Present
Hon. Susan Lakot 			-	Present
Hon. Sarah Lanyero 			-	Present
Hon. Ruth Lematia			-	Present
Hon. Peter Lokeris 			
Hon. Samson Lokeris 			-	Present
Hon. John Lokki 					
Hon. Peter Abrahams Lokki 		-	Present
Hon. Simon Lokodo			-	Present
Hon. Lolem Micah 					
Hon. Oketayot Lowila
Hon. Godfrey Lubega					
Hon. Medard Sseggona
Hon. Kenneth Lubogo			-	Present
Hon. Amos Lugolobi				
Hon. Tim Lwanga
Hon. Samuel Lyomoki
Hon. Sulaiman Madada	
Hon. Julius Maganda 			-	Present
Hon. Raphael Magyezi  	
Hon. Margaret Makhoha  		-	Present
Hon. Amos Mandela						
Hon. Joseph Maate	
Hon. Michael Mawanda  		-	Present
Hon. Stephen Mayende	
Hon. Betty Mbabazi			-	Present
Hon. Fredrick Mbagaddi		-	Present
Hon. James Mbahimba			-	Present
Hon. Kezekia Mbogo	 	
Hon. Robert Migadde			-	Present
Hon. Maj. Sarah Mpabwa		-	Present
Hon. Beatrice Mpairwe			-	Present
Hon. Dorothy Mpiima						
Hon. Mathias Mpuuga
Hon. John Bosco Mubito				
Hon. Muzaale Mugabi						
Hon. Peter Mugema			-	Present
Hon. Ronald Mugume					
Hon. David Muhumuza			-	Present
Hon. Jim Muhwezi				
Hon. Jennifer Mujungu
Hon. Vincent Mujuni Kyamadidi	-  	Present
Hon. Muruli-Mukasa	
Hon. Mike Mukula
Hon. John Mulimba
Hon. Patrick Mulindwa
Hon. Simon Mulongo
Hon. Irene Muloni
Hon. Henry Musasizi
Hon. Yona Musinguzi 			- 	Present
Hon. Maria Mutagamba 		-	Present
Hon. Joseph Balikuddembe
Hon. Dr Lodoi Patrick Mutono
Hon. Rose Mutonyi					
Hon. Florence Mutyabule 					
Hon. Muhammad Muwanga Kivumbi
Hon. Milton Muwuma
Hon. John Muyingo 			-	Present
Hon. Sarah Mwebaze			-	Present
Hon. Adolf Mwesige
Hon. Fred Mwesigye							
Hon. Paul Mwiru 			-	Present
Hon. Robbina Nabanja	
Hon. Agnes Nabirye							
Hon. Flavia Nabugere 			-	Present
Hon. Brenda Nabukenya
Hon. Teopista Nabulya
Hon. Nagayi Nabilah Ssempala
Hon. Rosemary Najjemba
Hon. Patrick Nakabaale			-	Present
Hon. Gertrude Nakabira		
Hon. Rukia Nakadama		 	-	Present
Hon. Kyabangi Nakato			-	Present
Hon. Sarah Nakawunde
Hon. Conie Nakayenze
Hon. Mariam Nalubega						
Hon. Mary Nalubega
Hon. Suzan Namaganda
Hon. Grace Namara			-	Present
Hon. Florence Namayanja
Hon. Rose Namayanja
Hon. Stella Namoe 
Hon. Benny Namugwanya
Hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi
Hon. Anne Maria Nankabirwa		-	Present
Hon. Ruth Nankabirwa			-	Present
Hon. Rosemary Seninde
Hon. Aida Nantaba		
Hon. Calorine Nanyondo	
Hon. John Nasasira
Hon. Rosemary Nauwat 
Hon. Alex Ndeezi
Hon. Florence Nebanda
Hon. Barbara Nekesa
Hon. Ronah Ninsiima 			-	Present
Hon. Wilfred Niwagaba			-	Present
Hon. William Nokrach
Hon. Patrick Nsanja			-	Present
Hon. Muhammad Nsereko		-	Present
Hon. Dorothy Nshaija						
Hon. Hurried Ntabazi   			-	Present
Hon. Annet Nyakecho							
Hon. Rosemary Nyakikongoro 		-	Present
Hon. Vincent Nyanzi	
Hon. Zerubabel Nyiira 
Hon. Sarah Mateke Nyirabashitsi				
Hon. Peter Nyombi
Hon. Thembo Nyombi						
Hon.	William Nzoghu		-	Present
Hon. Jacob Oboth			-	Present
Hon. Dennis Obua			-	Present	
Hon. Benson Ogwal Obua						
Hon. Stephen Ochola 			-	Present
Hon. David Ochwa							
Hon. Fox Odoi				-	Present
Hon. Odoo Tayebwa			-	Present
Hon. Odonga Otto			-	Present
Hon. Philip Wafula Oguttu		-	Present
Hon. Rev. Fr Jancinto Ogwal				
Hon. Peter Ogwang 			-	Present
Hon. Anthony Okello							
Hon. J. F Oketta	
Hon. Peter Okeyoh 			-	Present
Hon. Jon Amos Okot							
Hon. Felix Okot Ogong						
Hon. Reagan Okumu
Hon. Sam Okuonzi	
Hon. Elijah Okupa 							
Hon. Gilbert Olanya
Hon. Huda Oleru			- 	Present
Hon. Geoffrey Omara						
Hon. Peter Omolo
Hon. Kenneth Omona							
Hon. Stanley Omwonya						
Hon. Hilary Onek							
Hon. Obote Ongalo							
Hon. Jacob Opolot			-	Present
Hon. Henry Oryem		
Angeline Osege				-	Present
Hon. Sam Otada								
Hon. Innocent Oula			-	Present
Hon. Jim Owoyesigire					
Hon. Fredrick Ruhindi
Hon. Alex Ruhunda
Hon. Rukutana Mwesigwa
Hon. Bright Rwamirama
Hon. Jack Sabiti			-	Present
Hon. Nelson Sabila			-	Present
Hon.	Sofia Nalule							
Hon. Mutumba Sebuliba 		-	Present
Hon. Isaac Ssejoba			-	Present
Hon. Edward Sempala Mbuga	
Hon. Priscah Ssezi Mbaguta 
Hon. Baker Ssali  			-	Present
Hon. Isaiah Ssasaga			-	Present
Hon. Abdu Latif Sebagala		-	Present
Hon. Edward Ssekandi			-	Present
Hon. Theodore Ssekikubo		-	Present
Hon. Anthony Ssemmuli
Hon. Vincent Ssempijja			-	Present
Hon. Samuel Semugaba			-	Present
Hon. Ibrahim Semujju Nganda					
Hon. Joseph Ssewungu
Hon. John Ssimbwa			-	Present
Hon. Sylvia Sinabulya						
Hon. Kevina Taaka			-	Present
Hon. Sanjay Tana				
Hon. Stephen Tashobya						
Hon. Evelyn Tete			-	Present
Hon. Lyndah Timbigamba		-	Present
Hon. Barnabas Tinkansimire				
Hon. Richard Todwong
Hon. Frank Tumwebaze
Hon. Dr Elioda Tumwesigye		-	Present	
Hon. Elly Tumwine			-	Present
Hon. Mary Paula Turyahikayo		-	Present
Hon. Dr Jeremiah Twa-twa		-	Present
Hon. Femiar Wadada	
Hon. Kassiano Wadri			-	Present
Hon. Waira Kyewalabye						
Hon. David Wakikona			-	Present
Hon. Mudimi Wamakuyu 		- 	Present
Hon. Jack Wamanga Wamai 
Hon. Jacob Wangolo 			- 	Present
Hon. Wilberforce Yaguma 	

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are those who came when their names had been read. Can we have it in an orderly way? Let us start from the member for Kapchorwa.

Hon. Phyllis Chemutai A.		- 	Present
Hon. Arinaitwe Rwakajara 		- 	Present
Hon. Robert Kafeero Ssekitoleko 	- 	Present
Hon. Charles Bakabulindi 		- 	Present
Hon. Gerald Karuhanga 		- 	Present
Hon. Patrick Amuriat Oboi 		- 	Present
Hon. Cecilia Atim Ogwal 		- 	Present
Hon. Beatrice Atim Anywar 		- 	Present
Hon. Florence Ibi Ekwau 		-	Present
Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi 		- 	Present
Hon. Asuman Kiyingi 			-	Present
Hon. Kamanda Bataringaya 		- 	Present
Hon. Abdi Fadhil Chemaswet 		- 	Present
Hon. Isabirye Iddi 			- 	Present
Hon. Stephen Kangwagye 		- 	Present
Hon. Stephen Biraahwa Mukitale 	- 	Present
Hon. Onyango Kakoba 			- 	Present
Hon. David Ochwa Agule 		- 	Present
Hon. Milton Muwuma 			- 	Present
Hon. Boaz Kafuda 			- 	Present
Hon. Juliana Modest Auma 		- 	Present
Hon. Hellen Grace Asamo 		- 	Present
Hon. Ignatius Besisira 			- 	Present
Hon. Suleiman Madada 			- 	Present
Hon. Aboud Kitatta 			- 	Present
Hon. Agnes Nabirye 			- 	Present
Hon. Amos Mandera 			- 	Present
Hon. Naome Kabasharira 		- 	Present
Hon. Geofrey Ekanya 			- 	Present
Hon. Mary Karooro Okurut 		- 	Present


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, could you please take seats? There are seats there.

MS BINTU: Mr Speaker, in the middle there, the legroom is limited and we are too squeezed that Members cannot sit there and face the other side. Therefore, there is no way you can move. Even when you are walking – the way I am standing – actually I am pressing myself. With this, Mr Speaker, I think the Commission will need to think of improving and extending this Chamber so that members do not suffer from blood clot. The way we are seated is not desirable.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is not good for us to resort to this method. When the House was supposed to take a decision it was not properly constituted. That is why we had to take this measure. I do not want to make any further statement on this. However, it is our responsibility to deal with these matters that are brought before us for the benefit of the people of Uganda. The number as last counted by the Clerk is now 173 Members of Parliament. Therefore, the House is properly constituted to take a decision.

Honourable members, at the time we rose to check out these numbers, we were supposed to take a decision on a motion on item number seven. I now put the question to that motion for a resolution of Parliament to approve a request by Government to borrow $83,750,000 from the Islamic Development Bank for financing the construction of the 132 KV Mirama-Kabale transmission line.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion agreed to.)

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, thank you very much for giving me this chance. Whereas I recognise that this form of activity that we have just gone through is provided for in our Rules of Procedure, I am at pain to note that there are Members of Parliament who attend Parliament regularly – I can give examples; Jack Wamanga Wamai, Nandala-Mafabi and Ephraim Biraro from the other side. They could be portrayed as absent by their constituents whereas -(Interjections)– colleagues, you will appreciate that this can count against any of you in the constituency. 

I am saying this from experience. While I am not contesting the decision of the Speaker - (Interjections) - I do not know whether there is a more quiet way in which this kind of roll call can be done. This is because it is loaded with unfairness on Members who regularly attend and yet in an incident like this, they may be absent from the House. It impacts politically on every one of us. 

I see people are shouting at me from across, but it counts against you and I am saying this from experience. I do not know whether there is a better way we can do this while not endangering the political future of colleagues in the House. Mr Speaker, I beg to be guided.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is most unfortunate to force the Speaker to resort to this method. Do not think I sit here and enjoy doing this; please, make no mistake about this. I do not enjoy doing this at all because ordinarily speaking, we should have taken a decision on this matter more than an hour ago and we would have gone on with other business.

However, it is not fair to be forced to do this. The record and the appearances show the honourable members who are regularly attending the House. However, for this moment, for this sitting, on this date and at this time; that is what the record is showing. What can I do? There is nothing I can do.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The one person who sits here from 2 O’clock up to 8 p.m. is you. I know representation of a Member of Parliament has different forms. I am seeking procedural information from you as the Chairperson of the Commission to find out when we are going to have electronic voting so that we can have cumulative participation of Members of Parliament in the House.

I have done finger print and I want to thank you for that. However, we need to know this so that we do not cheat our voters. In case a Member is absent because he is in the constituency for burial, on official duty or he is doing other business, the record will indicate that that Member is serious. However, there are other members, who cause pain to others. We all have families, problems and business to do. They only come to vote and go away. The time we have spent roll calling is so costly for this country.

Therefore, I am seeking to find out from you when we are going to have electronic voting so that we put this method to history.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that is administrative and I am sure when it is ready, it will be communicated to you. They have been taking biometrics and things like that; I am sure the processes are about to mature.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I think to put the record straight, it was the decision of the House when an issue of procedure was raised that when we take a decision on important matters like borrowing money, the House must be properly constituted. Therefore, it is our own decision.

I just want to clarify that in case anybody is in doubt, it is the decision of this Parliament that when we are taking a decision on a crucial matter of national importance, particularly indebtedness of this nation, the House must be properly constituted. 

I think that message must go out very loud and clear so that if you know that your minister or our minister is going to bring a request for borrowing, make sure you mobilise yourselves and come here. If you are not here, you will be counted absent. I think that is important. I thought I needed to clarify that. I thank you very much.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think we are all in agreement that it was important for us to conduct the activity that we have just concluded. 

However, because of its import and the way it affects people, I do not know what provisions we have to cushion those who are away on official duty with full knowledge of the Speaker, especially those who are either in the field or those who are abroad on parliamentary work. 

What method do we have so that we do not reflect them as people who are just absent? These are people who are absent with the permission of the Speaker to be away on duty. They should not be portrayed negatively as absent.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that is important. I think the list will be compiled. However, the most disturbing ones are the Members who sign and go away. Those are really disturbing because the records of those who have sought permission from the Speaker to be away are known. 

Therefore, in future, I think it will be proper that if a decision of this nature is taken, which should be very rare, a complete list of Members who are out and who are not able to take the vote as a result of commitments that are communicated to the Speaker would be announced in the next sitting of Parliament after compilation.

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you very much, Mr speaker. I will start from where-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On what matter do you rise? 

MR ANYWARACH: Procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then just do the procedure.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, let me go straight away to rule 73 of our Rules of Procedure, which is clear on what would amount to dressing in a dignified manner. When the House is well constituted to make decisions, it must also be dressed decently enough to proceed. 

Mr Speaker, without mentioning names, there are people who came in without even neckties – (Interjections)– and they go out for the purpose - therefore, don’t you think it would be procedurally right to advise so that we do not get off the track of decency? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that is not a procedural matter. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you so much, Mr speaker. When you suspended the House, out of interest - because I am a man who believes in truth; I believe that truth can set this Parliament free. I went to the book where we were signing. The last person to sign was the Minister of Luweero, hon. Ndoboli Kataike and she was the 180th Member. Therefore, we were 180 people who had signed in the registry book. There was not supposed to be anything like a problem of quorum here because we were many. What disturbed me as a Member of Parliament, sent here by the people of Mbarara Municipality, was 180 people signing and still, we come here to talk about quorum.

Mr Speaker, what I am trying to raise is very simple. We are adults and there is nobody here who is below 18 years of age. If you have signed, you should then be here. If you are not here, and then your name is read, I want you to answer for your sins.

Mr Speaker, I want to thank you so much for making this roll call because it shows exactly what we are. Where were those people? 

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is still a procedural matter and also to do with attendance of Members. Mr Speaker, the Hansard is the official record of parliamentary business. The Hansard should have records of all Members present in a particular day; those absent with apology, those absent in the field on official duty and those actually absent without permission. This is what the Hansard should show. This is a practice I saw in the Parliament of Ghana. 

I remember while making our rules for the Ninth Parliament, I made this proposal. The only official record that is available for us as Members of Parliament and the public is the Hansard. I would like to move that perhaps this is the right time that we rethink what the record on the Hansard for the Parliament of Uganda should be. The Rules of Procedure could also be amended such that our Hansard also captures those present on any particular day, those absent with permission, those on official duty within the country and abroad, and also those absent. This is what I wanted to say with regard to the exercise you have just carried out. I would like to thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we leave this matter here? I think we have all understood what the problem is, how we should respond to it each time we are required to take decisions, and all the time, to make the House what it should be.  Let us go on with business now. 

Are there any additional ministerial policy statements; because those are important for processing? You need to register them with the Clerk so that we know which ones have come. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2015/2016

5.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Flavia Munaaba): In compliance with Section 13 and 14 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, I wish to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for vote 019, Ministry of Water and Environment, for the financial year 2015/16. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling and reporting in two weeks. Thank you.

5.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): In line with the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, section 13 and 14, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for votes 101, 121, 125, 145, 152, 155, 160, 501, 850 of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for the financial year 2015/2016. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling and reporting to the House. 

5.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR, FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): (Mr David Bahati): In line with the Public Finance Management Act, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for the Office of the Auditor-General for the financial year 2015/16. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It is accordingly committed to the appropriate committee to handle expeditiously and report in two weeks. 

5.24
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Elioda Tumwesigye): In compliance with section 13 and 14 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, I wish to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement of the Ministry of Health for the financial year 2015/16 covering vote 014, Ministry of Health; vote 114, Uganda Cancer Institute; vote 115, Uganda Heart Institute; vote 116, National Medical Stores; vote 134, Health Service Commission; vote 151, Uganda Laboratory Institution Services; vote 161, Mulago Hospital; vote 162, Butabika Hospital; 163, Arua Hospital; vote 164, Fort Portal Hospital; vote 165, Gulu Hospital; vote 166, Hoima Hospital; vote 167, Jinja Hospital; vote 168, Kabale Hospital; vote 169, Masaka Hospital; vote 170, Mbale Hospital; vote 171, Soroti Hospital; vote 172, Lira Hospital; vote 173, Mbarara Hospital; vote 174, Mubende Hospital; vote 175, Moroto Hospital; vote 176, China Uganda Friendship Naguru Hospital; votes 501-580, local governments. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling and reporting in two weeks. Is there a procedural matter? 

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much. The office of the Auditor-General is an Office of Parliament. I wonder how the Minister of State for Planning is going to handle and appear before the committee. For purposes of the Hansard, I was just seeking for your indulgence? 

MR BAHATI: As a Member of Parliament for Ndorwa County West, I did this on behalf of the Parliamentary Commission in the interest of time. (Laughter) 

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Normally, when these policy statements are laid on the Table, by the time we receive them here, we have copies in our pigeon holes so that Members are ready to handle them expeditiously. When I look at the way some of them are bound, I believe they were done overnight. There could be only a few copies. 

I am seeking guidance from you, Mr Speaker; wouldn’t it be appropriate that Parliament also receives the soft copies of these policy statements? This would enable us to upload them on our iPads in order for Parliament to handle business expeditiously?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is proper. In fact, we had taken a decision that I would make that communication once we have received all of them. They should also send soft copies for uploading on the iPads to facilitate Members’ operations. That is okay.

5.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LABOUR, EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS (Dr Bataringaya Kamanda): In accordance with sections 13 and 14 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for vote 018, Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, for the financial year 2015/2016. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling. Thank you.

5.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr Asuman Kiyingi): Mr Speaker, in compliance with section 13 and 14 of Public Finance and Management Act, 2015, I wish to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Works and Transport covering the following votes: 

Vote 016 – Ministry of works and Transport
Vote 113 – Uganda National Roads Authority
Vote 118 – Uganda Road Fund
Vote 500 – Local governments
I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling to report in two weeks. Thank you.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE UGANDA WILDLIFE EDUCATION CENTRE BILL, 2013

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to seek your input on how to handle this next set of business. There is a provision of a law that has been returned to the House twice and it has been pending for some time. It has been on the Order Paper for a while. Can we take this time to take a decision on it?

If we should confirm what we have decided, it will become law as we have passed it by those numbers that are required. I do not know if it will be the proper time for us to consider that, or we go on with other business? Can we deal with this matter?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, forget about the technicalities, tomorrow is Good Friday and our constituencies are kilometres away. I think this Parliament should also be fair to us Christians as Catholics. We are keen to watch the rituals for other religions but when it comes to ours, we are stretched to the limit. It is coming to 5.00 p.m., we would really think that your Chair exercises discretion and release us for our second biggest festival as Christians before it is dark. (Applause)  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am very conscious of these issues and if you have been noticing, I usually endeavour to stop the House by 6.00 p.m. every day, unless business overflows. I was still looking at the 25 minutes we have and see if we could do something in it. Yet if it is the wish of the House, we could use productively the next 25 minutes productively and then close at 6.00 p.m. on the dot and we go home.

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was of the view that this report – There are two reports imbedded in one; there is the main committee report and there is a minority report. We need adequate time to discuss these reports, more so the clause we were to discuss and make a resolution on now; it is very important. It curtails powers of Parliament - on whether to surrender to Cabinet or not.

As we continue discussing this subject, I believe a question might arise from somewhere on quorum, more so as it is touching on the powers of Parliament and Cabinet. I would second hon. Odonga Otto that we differ this to another time in respect of the time left.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are all agreeing that this is a very serious and demanding piece of legislation, unprecedented in the Ninth Parliament, that we got it returned and rejected twice. The Japadhola have a saying that when you have cooked dodo, the next day you do not cook again, you simply warm it. What am I trying to say? This is something –(Interjections)- of course you will get lost. The main thing here is that if we kept it the main thing, we would do the main thing and we get it done within 20 minutes.

We are denying ourselves an opportunity to make a statement and discuss this matter and get it disposed of. There has been a proposal by hon. Odonga Otto, maybe Government is seconding that but I thought that the work before us is not as much. Tomorrow is Good Friday; it would be a good Friday when I know that there is no other work left behind. If this is the same Parliament – (Interjections)- Mr Speaker, I beg for protection. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, you are protected.

MR OBOTH: Easter holidays will never cease but this Parliament has a timeframe to cease. What you are saying about the 20 minutes - Most of us debated this in principle. Definitely, we are taking away so many other minutes that we could use to dispose of this matter. That is my strong opinion. It is not very popular but the right one.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, what I propose is that we could receive the report and do the finalisation later; at least we would have activated the process. I was also going to propose that there are other three reports that could be laid so that they can be commissioned and uploaded so that when you are considering these things, you look at them. For example items 10, 11, and 12. Those ones are already uploaded, they could be laid on the Table, for the formality of Parliament, and then the debate can be deferred.

So, we can also receive the report of the committee and the minority report on this issue and then we go and sleep over it. When we come back, we debate and take a decision. That is how I wanted us to use the next 20 minutes so that we conclude, receive all of it and then go and process it. When we come back, we debate and take a decision. I wonder if that will be proper. If it is proper, then since it was referred to the committee, maybe we would call that item and let them report, both the majority report and the minority report. We then go away and return when we have understood both positions. Is that okay? Next item.

MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION OF THE PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP BILL, 2014, WHICH WAS RETURNED TO PARLIAMENT FOR THE SECOND TIME BY H.E. THE PRESIDENT AS PROVIDED FOR UNDER RULE 132 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we need to receive the report at this stage before we go to committee. Will that be proper? We receive the report and then go to committee later when we come back after debating. That is when we can go to committee. It is a motion. With a motion, we cannot resolve it there. When we decide that we go to committee stage, then we can do that. Can I ask the chairperson to outline briefly and then the minority report writers can also outline briefly what it is about and then we can go and digest it?

5.38
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Robert Kasule): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that guidance. Permit me to present the report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the Private Public Partnership Bill, 2012. 

Honourable members, you may recall that the Bill was referred to the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on Tuesday, 3 March 2015 after His Excellency returned the Bill to Parliament for reconsideration in the letter dated 7 January 2015 addressed to the Speaker in the accordance with Article 91 subsection (3) (b) of the Constitution of Republic of Uganda which reads                                                                                                                            as follows: “The President shall, within thirty days after the Bill presented to him or her, return the Bill to Parliament with the request that the Bill or a particular provision of it be reconsidered by Parliament”.

The committee in consideration of this Bill held a meeting on the 12 Thursday 2015 to consider the clauses 26 (1) (7) and (8) as clearly pointed out by the President in his letter to the Speaker.

We reviewed the Constitution, the Public Finance Bill 2012, the amended Public Private Partnership Act of 2014, the Public Finance Act, the PPD Act of Ghana. What is in two is an outline of what the President said. I am going to go to three which reads the concerns of the President.

In three, approval of agreements as provided for in the Constitution: Article 119(5) of the Constitution of Republic of Uganda provides that: “Subject to the provisions of the Constitution, no agreement, contract, treaty, convention or document by whatever name called, to which Government is a party or in respect of which the government has an interest, shall be concluded without legal advice from the Attorney-General, except in such cases and subject to such conditions as Parliament may by law prescribe”.

The President in his letter noted that clause 26(1) (7) and (8) of the returned PPP Bill 2012 will usurp the constitutional mandate of the Attorney-General to approve agreements in which Government is party. 

His second concern was parallel approval mechanism – (Interjections) - Mr Speaker, protect me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please proceed. Members let us have some order.

MR KASULE: His second concern was that Parallel approval mechanism of PPP agreements will add another bureaucracy, which will cause inordinate delays in implementation of infrastructure projects. 

The President further noted that the provision of this clause and the sub clauses as passed by Parliament hinder investors who may consider not investing in infrastructure projects -(Interjection) - in Uganda as their business decisions will be subjected to parliamentary approval. Since in this law we have put a confidentiality clause 47, the committee observed:

    (a) The original Public Finance Bill, 2012 clause 18(1) and (2) provided for the Public Private Partnership agreement as follows:

    (1) “The minister shall, with the approval of Cabinet by statutory instruments, provide a value of an agreement for which the approval of Cabinet is required before the agreement is signed by an accounting officer.”

    (2) “Where an agreement is of a value for which the approval of Cabinet is required before it is signed by the accounting officer, the accounting officer shall not sign the agreement without the approval of Cabinet.” 

The committee observed that this provision will safeguard Public Private Partnership agreement since the principles of collective responsibility shall prevail.

    (b) PPP agreement as defined by the PPP Partnership Bill, 2012 is a written contract recording the terms of the Public Private Partnership concluded between the contracting party which is Government and the private party. It is therefore an agreement or concession between Government and private entities as a form of procurement and hence an executive function.

    (c) Parliament is empowered under clause 13(2) to appropriate money for public private partnerships. That clause provides as follows:

“13(2) an accounting officer shall not enter into an agreement that in any way binds the contracting authority, which is Government, to a future financial commitment or which results in a contingent reliability except where the future financial commitment or contingent reliability is authorized by Parliament in the budget of the contracting authority.”

The committee observed that this clause empowers Parliament to approve future financial commitment and contingent reliabilities that arise as a result of the public private partnerships.

Recommendations

    a) The committee recommends that for avoidance of doubt and to ensure transparency –

    (i) The relevant minister shall lay before Parliament any Public Private Partnership agreement or agreements within one month, after it has been signed for parliamentary oversight.

    (ii) All Public Private Partnership agreements amended or variations thereto should as well be laid before Parliament within one month after the amendment or variation.

    (iii) Ministries, Government departments or agencies should indicate in their budget frame work papers to Parliament the respective Public Private Partnerships projects to formalise appropriation of funds for the Public Private Partnership.

    (iv) Government should specify which PPP are co-founded by Government and the PPP that are wholly funded by investors.


(b) Clause 26 of the Public Private Partnerships as passed by Parliament should be reconsidered and passed as the President suggested.

In conclusion, Parliament is empowered under clause 13(2) to appropriate funding under PPP which result into contingent reliability. 

The committee recommends that clause 26 of the PPP Bill, 2012 be reconsidered and the committee will propose necessary amendments at an appropriate time. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.


MR KASULE: I beg to lay on Table the report that was considered by the committee and the minutes therein.


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable Chair, It is also your responsibility to tell the House that there is a minority report.


MR KASULE: Mr Speaker, there is attached on the report a minority report from some members in the committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. This would be the time for us to listen to the minority opinion on the majority report. 

5.47
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the chairperson and the members for the report. The members dissenting from the main report base their position on several clauses of the Constitution and several laws of Ugandan. Under rule 1941(1) it states that, “A member dissenting from the opinion of a majority of a committee may state in writing the reasons for his or her or their dissent, and the statements of reasons shall be appended to the report of the Committee”.

Rule 194(2) provides that “The member dissenting from the opinion of the majority report shall be given time to present the minority report….” 

Now, the point of dissent is, a Public Private Partnership is back door borrowing; PPP projects are debts to present and future generations. Consider an example of a road constructed and citizens have to pay toll fee to use that road for 20 years but during the agreeing period of the PPP of the project, it is discovered that it is inflated and then the flow of traffic reduces yet the investor must recover their money. What happens if the investor fails to recover the money?

Mr Speaker, we have fresh lessons from Bujagali power project which is a Public Private Partnership project, whose cost has gradually increased. But the cost of our electricity has not reduced to date. Imagine what we are building for the future generation in terms of long-term costs and effect on quality of service delivery.

In the best practice of good governance, Parliament is mandated to safeguard the interests of the present and future generations. Hence Parliament must regulate revenue terms on which securing external financing and back door borrowing is based; and it does not amount to signing contracts.

Why should Public Private Partnership projects detail not be reviewed by the Parliament, yet we review all borrowing before the Attorney-General gives opinion prior to the final signing. What is hidden in those Public Private Partnerships that we should not know the terms and conditions therein, yet it has financial commitments to be paid by present and future generations?

The power of Government to borrow or lend: Article 159 (1) “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Government may borrow from any source”. 

Sub clause (2), “Government shall not borrow, guarantee, raise a loan on behalf of itself or any other public institution, authority or person except as authorised by or under an Act of Parliament”.

Sub clause (3), “An Act of Parliament made under clause (2) of this Article shall provide - (a) that the terms and conditions of the loan shall be laid before Parliament and shall not come into operation unless they have been approved by a resolution of Parliament;

(b) that any monies received in respect of that loan shall be paid into the Consolidated Fund.” I beg to add; under Public Private Partnership, it is indirect borrowing. The money is not paid into Consolidated Fund; it is paid to a private fund account.

Sub clause (4): “The President shall, at such a time as Parliament may determine, cause to be presented to Parliament such information concerning any loan ….”

When it comes to Public Private Partnership, it is the private person that deals directly with their shareholder - not even the Executive sometimes. 

The extent of total indebtedness

Mr Speaker, if you do not know, I would like to refer you - look at the economy of Ghana, because of oil projections, they went to bond markets and commercial markets and borrowed. They downsized Government because they are not raising taxes; they are in a crisis. I am just giving you one example.

Sub clause (5): “Parliament may, by resolution, authorise the Government to enter into an agreement ….” Sub clause (6): “An agreement entered into under clause 5 of this Article shall be laid before Parliament and shall not come into operation unless it has been approved by Parliament by resolution.”

Sub clause (7) “… expression ‘loan’ includes any money lent or given out by Government on condition of return….” 

When a private party comes here and puts up a hospital, there is a condition of return recovery. That is what we are saying – repayment! Whether today or tomorrow or from the Consolidated Fund.

(b) “Monies…by whatever name called, established for the purposes of payment or repayment whether in whole or in part and whether directly or indirectly…” – the indirectly is the Public Private Partnership.

Sub clause (8), “Parliament may by law exempt any categories of loans from the provisions of clauses (2) and (3)….” These clauses are basically about monetary policy. We did it in the Public Finance Management Act because we cannot always come here when facing inflation at Bank of Uganda. 

That is why the framers of this Constitution thought that certain circumstances warrant saving the entire economy, and we did it for purposes of monetary policy. 

Rescinding clause 26 (1) and (2) as passed by the House contravenes clause 6 (2) which states; “An accounting officer shall not enter into an agreement that in any way binds the contracting authority to a future financial commitment or which results in contingent liability”.

Contingent liability in simple English is a liability that has not been computed to final conclusion. It has present and future impact and can be varied at any moment, except where the future financial commitment or contingent liability is authorised by Parliament in a budget of the contracting authority.

Colleagues, I am just warning ourselves; in the Public Finance Act that we passed, and this is a word of caution, we have allowed Government to make future commitment hoping that by now, we should have had charters of fiscal responsibility. But we have not got them yet. Charters of fiscal responsibility will define the direction the economy would take in the next five years. We should be the last to legislate Parliament from the duty it takes as a safeguard to avoid costly indebtedness to present and future citizens. Parliament cannot rethink on the position that empowers it to appropriate, which appropriation includes the Public Private Partnership projects. Are you saying you are surrendering - and our being here will virtually cease because the power of appropriation is vested in Parliament. (Applause) Hence the role of reviewing Public Private Partnership projects is not the responsibility of the Attorney-General. It is a responsibility of Parliament. The Attorney-General gives legal opinion; for us we do appropriation, the power of the purse is vested in Parliament.

Violation and abuse of Public Finance Management Act, 2015
On 23 February 2015, the President assented to Public Finance Management Act. Herein, section 43 (1) provides that all expenditure to be incurred by the government on projects which are externally financed in a financial year shall be appropriated by Parliament. That is a law we have passed. 

Section 43(3) provides that where a vote is to receive a loan or a grant for a project, the accounting officer of the vote shall in the budget of the vote provide for costs and appraisal of the project.

Section 45 (5) provides that an accounting officer shall be responsible and personally accountable to Parliament for the activity. Now if you surrender this, you are telling the accounting officer that “Do not come here, deal with a private party” that is total violation of the law.

Section 36 (5) provides that with the exception on loan, which I have stated in section 26, the Public Private Partnership Bill 2012, that was passed by this Parliament is in line with the above section of the Public Finance Management Act.

Mr Speaker, the Public Private Partnership seeks to bring in external financing to the budget that has financial implication to the present and future generations. Securing such external financing should be undertaken within the existing law of the country. Parliament and the President as the custodians of the law must observe and respect all existing legislation.

Recommendation

As an institution charged with the main function as provided for by Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda we should make laws for peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda. We should uphold the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and all provisions therein, including the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, especially in relation to borrowing of loans or open borrowing or back door borrowing, external financing.

Clause 26 of the Public Private Partnership Bill as passed by Parliament be maintained, and sent back to the President to assent without any change to avoid violating the spirit captured in clause 6 (2) which provides that an accounting officer shall not enter into an agreement that in any way binds the contracting authority to future financial commitment or which results into contingent liability except where the future financial commitment or contingent liability is authorised by Parliament in the Budget.

I would like to add, colleagues, if you have not read that law; we did justice to this country.  Section 9 of the Public Finance Act says, “Any accounting officer, who has a query on internal audit or with the Auditor-General shall not be accounting officer....” It is so serious an Act and 34 - 

In conclusion, it is our humble appeal that the House adopts the recommendations laid in the minority report for good governance of this country and respect to the existing law. For God and My Country.

The report has been signed by several members; they are so many and pardon me, colleagues, I may not mention all of you. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is why I thought it was important for us to receive this; go and synthesize it, interrogate it and then come back.  However, honourable members, we need to advice ourselves on why it is important for us to take it seriously because this duty now rests with us. We have exhausted the provisions of the Constitution and come to the last one, which means the burden is on this House only and nobody else. If we should pass it by two thirds majority of all Members of Parliament, it becomes law without requiring presidential assent. 

Therefore, where the burden is on you entirely, you have to check yourself and confirm again that you are okay and then take that decision. The question you might want to ask as we interrogate these issues - I would also want to believe that for the President to return it twice, he also had some position which he now cannot defend but for Parliament to pass it twice, first in the Bills at third reading and secondly when he returned it also means there are positions that are already there.

Now the burden is on us. There are questions that you might want to ask: in a PPP, is it a borrowing or is it a contract? Wait, I am just suggesting to you what you need to interrogate so that when you come, we can take a responsible decision as Parliament. 

Is a PPP a borrowing – I am just posing questions to you; I am not debating. I am saying this because the burden is on Parliament and I happen to be chairing at this time. Therefore, as you interrogate it, I am just suggesting the areas you should interrogate. If you do not want me to, it is okay. 

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The beauty with this particular matter is that it has been substantively fully debated in this House twice and the honourable members are conscious of the prevailing circumstances and what is going to happen even tomorrow. Therefore, I believe at the time we come to make the final decision, there will be no change of goal posts and members know what to do.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is okay. Members, should I not pose this question to you to interrogate? If it is in your interest, I can leave it because -

MR OBOTH: Mr Speaker, I do not want to be counted among those who display intellectual cowardice. What you are doing is the right thing for this Parliament. Any decision made must be made from information and on the basis of knowledge. I know that we are looking forward to the adjournment – (Interruption)

Mr EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from hon. Oboth. For him to say that he does not want to display intellectual cowardice, is he saying that we are intellectually empty or is he – (Interruption)

MR OBOTH: You have asked for clarification. Whether or not, that is my internal thinking and it only happened to come through my mouth, which has no sieve. You know, when the Speaker was guiding, his guidance was being construed by others as “you stop” that is what I was referring to; that we should allow the Speaker to guide. He is not the one to make for us decisions, this is a matter we have debated here twice and we have a position that unless it is something new - this is a matter that I personally have a position on.

Mr Speaker, as I conclude, you have guided us on this matter and I have liked the minority report on referring to a constitutional matter. I think that I would equally invite ourselves to look at the constitutional provisions that hon. Ekanya referred to because it can either be a point of departure or convergence in this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are we now debating this matter or had we agreed that we just receive and then we leave it there and when decision time comes, you have –
MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate what is taking place and for the record, I would like to say that in every business I have participated in this House, I have had to use a lot of brain and carefully; actually, contributed to the best of my ability.

However, I think what we are dealing with, from how we were construing it - you are narrowing the issues that we were trying to do some scheduling of some sort so that people get to know what the real issues are to which we should pay attention to. The challenge was that in doing that –(Laughter)

Mr Speaker, a member was constrained to think that there is no way you would help in the scheduling without trying to participate in the process and yet we are very much aware that you are to take a vote with our voting mechanism of the “Ayes have it.”  Therefore that is what we are trying to seek your guidance on. 

MR OYELOWO-ODOI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable colleagues, when the vote is finally taken, I need to go on record that I will vote against the position of the President. That said, the duty to guide this House falls squarely on the Speaker and that is what he was doing. 

Secondly, learning is a continuous process and you learn from everybody. You cannot lose the opportunity to learn from the Speaker. How can we walk away from that? That is what my colleague called ‘intellectual cowardice’; let us listen to the guidance of the Speaker, go and think through it and do research and comeback on that day to argue in an informed manner. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much. Mr Speaker, I am so impressed by the debate emerging from the West Budama South and North. Since I have been in this Parliament, most of those seats had one time MPs; it looks like in the next election, we shall have both of them back. (Laughter) Having said that, there is nothing wrong with the Speaker guiding the House.

What the House should know, I was just discussing with my learned friend Fox; in the US, for every PPP, they pass a law. If they are giving this northern railway line to this private company, the whole country must be aware by law that this country will construct this railway line and collect revenue for 50 years. That is the level they have reached to protect the interests of their people from multinationals. Now, asking in Parliament that we need an input in whatever good thing Government wants to do for us, is absolutely in order. So, the guidance of the Speaker should be taken in good faith. 

Let me caution us: look at the Kampala-Jinja Road; if they give it to a private individual and some technocrats in Government negotiate the deal and get their commission, they will mortgage the entire country to private individuals - (Applause) - that you will have an elected leader whether a President or a Member of Parliament without any power to change those things.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Member for Aruu, can we now say we are debating this subject? (Laughter) 

MR ODONGA OTTO: I was just telling them your guidance is absolutely right -(Laughter)- and I do not think if I was in that seat I would be able to guide to where you ably guided. Thank you, so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was saying that we interrogate all aspects so that when we detect this responsibility, which is now squarely in our hands, we are safe. That is all I was trying to do because beyond now, nobody else can act on this. If we should pass it by the two thirds majority, it becomes law without requiring presidential assent.
Therefore, that burden is higher; there is nobody else going to look at what we have done, probably if somebody goes to court, maybe then somebody else can do but beyond that there is nobody. 

When you are exercising a responsibility that is now purely in your hands, you need to look at it again squarely from all angles and then you confirm your decision; that is all I was trying to do. It was in purely good faith that we do that and then - but if it is uncomfortable to the members, of course, I reserve my - because I am also fairly schooled in these matters; that is why I was just volunteering something that I may not participate in the decision but for you to consider. Just look at it again and if you do not want it, it is fine.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, please, I am begging for your indulgence that on that day of voting, if these decorative machines are not ready to enable secret voting, please do everything it takes in this Parliament to allow us have secret voting on this subject matter. The moment we do not have that freedom to vote freely with party primaries looming a head we may lose a very important piece of the legislation. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, please assist us and ensure we are able to vote by secret ballot. Thank you so much. 

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, our Rules of Procedure empowers you to guide and preside over this House. I agree with you totally. Your guidance is very right because the House is going to decide on a very important matter; it is matter of investment, it is a matter of our Constitution and a matter of rules in this country.

Having said that, it is clear that Government has borrowed in many ways; there are those that come to the House, which is a mandate of Parliament and there are others that do not come to the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you now debating?

MR OKOT OGONG: I just want to cite an example so that Members, like you are guided -(Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, honourable Okot Ogong, let us not start a debate now on this matter. 
MS JANEPHER EGUNYU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Some of us want to hear your guidance and we want to know the exact things that we would think about before making a decision but it is very unfortunate that some people here have intentionally diverted you. It is almost 15 minutes from when we began - Mr Speaker, can you please help and guide us so that we debate from an informed point of view when we come back? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I will not do that today; let us leave that. Honourable members, I had said that we needed to receive, just by laying on the Table, some three reports.  The chairpersons of the committees for legal and PAC, you could just lay it to commission it so that the members can start the internalisation and when we come back, you just outline and we go into debate, for they would have already looked at it properly.

There are some ministerial policy statements and then I have a short statement from hon. Nambooze, as a matter of urgent importance that she will raise as I close. Let us finish with the ministerial policy statements and then we come and finish with the three reports and we move.

MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS

MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT OF THE MINISTRY OF 
DEFENCE VOTE 004 FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2015/2016

6.17
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, in line with the Public Finance and Management Act, 2015, I beg to lay the Ministerial Policy Statement of the Ministry of Defence Vote 004 for the financial year 2015/2016. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that and it stands committed to the appropriate committee to handle expeditiously and report in two weeks.

LAYING OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS ON THE INSPECTORATE OF GOVERNMENT REPORTS 2007–2012

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, you can lay the documents and the report so that it becomes the property of the House. 

6.18
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Article 231 of the Constitution requires the Inspector General of Government to lay once in every six months reports on the performance of its functions. 

The Inspector General of Government has done this before from 1999 to date. Last year, the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs presented its report on the reports from 1999 to 2006.

Mr Speaker, you directed that we should conclude the remaining work and lay the reports before this Parliament. I am happy to lay on Table a report from the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the affairs of the Inspectorate of Government reports from 2007 to 2012, together with the minutes of the meetings held by the committee and respective institutions and ministries. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the report and the minutes of the committee meeting. Honourable members, we will find time to deal with these reports from the Inspectorate of Government when we get a slot. Next item.

LAYING OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2011 AND 2012 – REGIONAL REFERRAL HOSPITALS

6.21
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Ms Alice Alaso): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on Table the report of the Public Accounts Committee on the report of the Auditor-General on financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2010 Volume 2 - Central Government covering the following regional referral hospitals: Butabika, Arua, Gulu, Jinja, Mbale, Lira, Masaka, Fort Portal, Kabale, Hoima, Soroti, Mbarara, Moroto and Mubende hospitals for the financial year ended 30th June together with the minutes of the Public Accounts Committee. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that report. As I said earlier, this now becomes property of the House and let us internalise it and when we resume and there is time, we will allow the chairperson to speak to it and then we will open debate on that report. 

LAYING OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2013 FOR ENTITIES WITH DISCLAIMER OF OPINION (MINISTRY OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS, NYABYEYA FOREST COLLEGE, MUBENDE REFERRAL HOSPITAL AND THE UGANDA MISSION IN NEW DELHI INDIA)
 
6.22
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Ms Alice Alaso): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on Table the report of the Public Accounts Committee covering the annual report of the Auditor-General for the year ended 30 June 2013 Volume 2 – Central Government.

This is a compendium of those institutions that had those entities with disclaimer opinions. They are the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, Nyabyeya Forest College, Mubende Referral Hospital and the Uganda Mission in New Delhi. 

Mr Speaker, this is a very current report for the last report of the Auditor-General and I am happy to lay this on Table together with the minutes that covered the meetings conducted by the committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that report. Honourable members, as I said earlier, we shall find time when the chairperson can address the House and then we can debate it formally and take decisions from their recommendations.

There was a matter on procedure from the Member for Kumi.

MR AMURIAT: I thank you very much. Mr Speaker. I notice that you are about to end today’s business. I rise on a procedural point to find out whether we have now received all the ministerial policy statements. I sat here yesterday and you did direct the Prime Minister and the Leader of Government Business that without exception, all these ministerial policy statements should be laid on Table today.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you let me handle that? 

MR AMURIAT: Yes, Sir.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member from Mukono has a matter of urgent public importance. 

6.25
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of great national importance after I received a distress call from one Ugandan girl on behalf of 79 others now stranded in Saudi Arabia. These girls were taken to Saudi Arabia by Nomad Company Limited located in Kamwokya near Kira Road Police Station. Among them is a girl named Aisha Munubi from Bugiri District and daughter of Hajji Yusuf Munubi, who works in Jinja. 

Aisha made contact with me this morning using telephone number +966545604856. As she talked to me, it was very clear that she was crying. This young lady told me that she is 22 years and was recruited together with other 46 colleagues last November to Saudi Arabia. 

Soon after they were taken, they were joined by another group of 24 girls and then another eight girls. The girls were paraded for rich men to inspect as though they were inspecting cattle to be bought. She said that she was eventually sold to a family in Medina at a location she cannot tell.

Aisha further told me that she has gone without food for four days and that they are battered, raped and even forced to clean up human faeces with bare hands. Mr Speaker, this is a very sad story. She also said that when her bosses give her food, they first spit into that food before they allow her to consume it. 

Mr Speaker, I recall that in November last year, this Parliament moved a motion and it was unanimously resolved that we suspend the recruitment of our girls for domestic slavery in the Middle East countries. Aisha old me that two of her colleagues have disappeared and their whereabouts cannot be traced. 

I thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing me this time to request Government to trace for the whereabouts of these girls and others that have been taken by other companies.

Mr Speaker, this also touches on Government’s capacity to implement and respect decisions made by this House. We passed a resolution here that our girls will no longer be taken to the Middle East to work as domestic workers. However, up to now, it seems that our children are still being taken to Saudi Arabia. This girl told me that she does not have her passport. The people who took her told her that she would be paid through the bank and that her boss would be taking her regularly to the bank to check on her account. However, since she went there in November she has not been able to access the said account. She does not have her passport. 

They also told her that if she gets problems while there, she would call a company called Samapco and she has tried as much as possible to contact these people but they have not come to her assistance. This is a sad story and I think it is a matter of great national importance that 79 of our girls are stranded in Saudi Arabia. I wish to thank you very much that you have found time to allow me to raise this matter and I call on Government to make any possible move to save these girls. I beg to move. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

6.31
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank our sister, hon. Nambooze for raising this matter. If the information is accurate, it is extremely deplorable and we will straight away investigate the matter and then take appropriate measures and report to the House. The minister responsible will make a report to this House as soon Parliament resumes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Prime Minister, you see these matters are really serious. Therefore, what can be done immediately to verify these things that could give the House comfort?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, there is obvious consensus about the serious nature of this very matter where 79 of our young girls have been taken in circumstances that need to be properly investigated.

Secondly, for immediate purposes, really this matter is going to be taken up by both the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Internal Affairs to get to the root of this matter and to ensure that appropriate and urgent measures to redress the situation are taken on the basis of the result of the investigations, and at the same time make a report to this august House.

Mr Speaker, you have already indicated that we are going to have a break and I did indicate that as soon as the House resumes -(Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, the information I would like to give this House is that when there was an undertaking on this matter earlier, I got information straight from Saudi Arabia that the people who were supposed to visit - hon. Rukutana and team visited and were sponsored by the other company which takes people into slavery. Therefore, I am informing you that if you want us to believe you on this matter, assure us that you are going to get in touch with hon. Rukutana who even knows the company dealing in this. If I were the Prime Minister, I would ask him who cleared him to go to Saudi Arabia. I was informed by the embassy in that place that you did not clear him.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr speaker. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister should be aware that Uganda is a signatory of the law against trafficking in persons and slavery. It is a very serious crime worldwide. The ministry, which you superintend, and that is the Ministry of Gender, is licencing companies to engage in activities, which violet laws against trafficking and the Constitution and that is hon. Rukutana and others. 

We really need when the Prime Minister comes here to give us a report of how many companies your Ministry of Gender has licenced to engage in trafficking persons contrary to the UN convention and the laws of this country. It is not only in the Middle East but even Asia and China.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, colleagues are giving very useful information, which will help in investigations and of course when I talk of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, I also include our embassy in Riyadh. We are going to thoroughly investigate this matter and take appropriate measures and inform this House.
 
Government takes this matter seriously. The issue of Government departments and some individuals will be part of these investigations.

MR OBOTH: Mr Speaker, I want to thank the Prime Minister for giving way. I would like to get clarification. Is it possible to be comfortable that where there is even a telephone number, somebody in Government is going to verify and call that number before that girl is fed on faeces and beaten further, to let her know that somebody in Government is caring? Can that be possible? Can we get that clarification from you, Prime Minister?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the presence of this number is one useful source or contact we are going to use and really, the investigations are going to start as soon as Parliament closes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, yesterday I was very categorical on the issue of ministerial policy statements because by my brief, we were supposed to adjourn plenary today. However, I now adjourn plenary to do what? We have not received all the ministerial policy statements because if we adjourn now, how do we receive the ministerial policy statements?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it definitely regrettable that a few ministries have failed to meet the deadline that you and I gave. We have already agreed and you have already ruled on this that there is going to be electronic transmission of the ministerial -(Interjection)- Yes, we have already said that and I think it is appropriate that colleagues in the House should have access to both the hard copies and electronic copies. I believe that that may reduce the damage that is going to be caused. Nevertheless, Mr Speaker, I am in your hands to get further guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the challenge we have is, the Clerk has to forward formally to the committee that this matter was brought to the House on this date and the time starts running on that date. My two weeks, which I am saying will start running from the date of receipt of the letter and the attachments - there is no way it can come electronically and enter the Hansard of Parliament the way we are doing it here.

“Electronically” is a facilitation of a process already done in Parliament. If it is not laid in Parliament, there is no way it can get into the iPads; that is the challenge I have now. Therefore, it is going to be impossible for me to adjourn plenary when we have not received all the ministerial policy statements and that is going to contribute to the delay of the whole process.

6.40
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula-Oguttu): Mr Speaker, I think it would be proper for us to know exactly which ministries have not brought their reports and those which have so that we congratulate those which have brought their reports. We would like to know their accounting officers. It is important that we have on record the ministries which have not brought their ministerial statements today.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, which ones have not brought?

Ministries which have not brought their policy statements

    1) Kampala Capital City Authority.
    2) Ministry of Public Service.
    3) Public Service Commission.
    4) Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.
    5) Ministry of Information and National Guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That one was laid, wasn’t it? Oh, it is Information and National Guidance. Local government was laid. 

    6) Electoral Commission.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Mr Speaker, senior counsel Oboth will agree with me that when you are trying to interpret the rules, you do not create more absurdity. We have a situation that we are going for Easter and these papers are not going to be laid today. I would think our rules give you certain powers - I cannot get the particular rule right now but it gives you certain powers to exercise discretion to deal with certain situations, which would have ordinarily not been foreseen. 

What I suggest, Mr Speaker, is that you would probably –(Interjection)- Young man, can you excuse me? This is the view from the MP of Aruu County. Unless we will come back here on Tuesday to have these papers laid again, I would suggest that to avoid absurdity –(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Hon. Odonga Otto, while submitting, referred to me as a “young man” yet he knows very clearly that I am twice his age. Actually, I could qualify to be his father if I had born children early enough. Is hon. Odonga Otto in order to refer to me as a young man when I am actually an old man? 

Hon. Odonga Otto has continued to refer to our Rules of Procedure without citing them and actually trying to force you to carry out a duty that would cause you to violate our own rules. Is he in order to try and distort our Rules of Procedure in order to help Government wiggle out of a situation that they themselves have created?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members and the honourable Member for Kumi, actually if you are an old man then that reference was not to you. I do not recall your name being called on this occasion. If you know you are old, I am even wondering why you stood up. It could not have been a reference to you. (Laughter) Therefore, for you to insist that you are the “young man” referred to, I think it is. (Laughter) 

However, on the second aspect, the honourable member is simply saying, can you exercise the authority where there are gaps in the rules or where you are given authority to take some decisions? Can you exercise with some guidance? I think there is no particular problem with that. However, on that issue, since you were not mentioned specifically, it is not proper for you to put your name on the list. Honourable member for Aruu, please conclude.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I am making reference to Rule 8 of our Rules of Procedure. The thinking was that these papers should have been laid today. We are in a situation where the papers may not be laid. In that regard, my legal interpretation is that these are situations which have not been provided for in our rules.

According to rule 8 – if I may read it verbatim: “In case of any doubt and for any question of procedure not provided in these rules, the Speaker shall decide, having regard to practices of the House, constitutional provisions and other Commonwealth Parliaments in so far as may be applicable….”

Mr Speaker, what I suggest is that if you would use your discretion to avoid the absurdity we are getting in to direct that these papers are tabled with the Clerk to Parliament and subsequently, the necessary instruments will be done to ensure that Parliament receives it. This is free advice I am giving. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, these timeframes which we are using now especially on the ministerial policy statements were exceeded long time ago – 15th of last month. We should have received the ministerial policy statements in this House and given to the committees to handle. 

In that regard, we are already operating in an abnormal situation. The abnormality continues to be compounded by those who prefer abnormality in terms of procedures. We said that in order to assist this House, deliver the budget on time. We needed to receive the ministerial policy statements at least by today. As you can see, they are not there. It is important that we receive them. 

Therefore, I am going to extend my directive that all that has not been presented should be presented on Tuesday next week. On that day, the presiding officer will give direction on how it will be subsequently handled. We are going to lose this whole period again because the committees cannot start sitting because the plenary is still pending; that is the problem we are now in. Therefore, let us push this matter to Tuesday and then receive the ministerial policy statements.

This problem came because even when we used to say they just bring ministerial policy statements and put them in the pigeon holes, we were not able to capture when they came. As a result, dates were exceeded and we did not understand how to remedy this. That is why we came to this; that they should be formally laid and we proceed from there. I am now being advised that Public Service is here. Please, let us receive that and we adjourn.

6.48
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In line with the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, I beg to lay on Table the Ministerial Policy Statement of the Ministry of Public Service – Vote 146 – for the financial year 2015/2016. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. The timeframe is still two weeks for the committee to begin examining. Clerk, extract those ones that have already been laid and formally communicate to the committees so that they can start the work. House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 6.49 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 7 April 2015 at 2.00 p.m.)

