


Wednesday, 11 April 2018

Parliament met at 3.26 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I will begin by making adjustments to the Order Paper: one, I would like to allow the honourable Leader of the Opposition to present the alternative policy statements because they are due tomorrow, under our Rules of Procedure. 

Secondly, I would like to permit hon. Beatrice Rwakimari to make a statement on maternal health because a celebration of the Maternal Mortality Day is around the corner. Those are the two adjustments to the Order Paper.

Honourable members, I am delighted to be with you today. I have been out on some missions: first, to the Commission of the Status of Women in New York and reports will be presented here. We discussed the situation of the rural women and the girls, especially their education and wellbeing. I hope that since we are dealing with the Budget, as we discuss, we shall consider their situation specifically so that we enable them to get empowered, both economically and otherwise.

The second one was a meeting in Mauritius of the Commonwealth International where, again, we were looking at opportunities for the regions of the Commonwealth to be able to participate in these opportunities within the Commonwealth and a report will be presented here.   

Thirdly, we also attended a meeting in Geneva of the 138th Inter Parliamentary Union where we discussed many things but key for us is the issue of refugees. I would like to inform the House that Uganda was commended for the work we have done in hosting refugees and many said that they are going to learn from our example. I told them that although we are being thanked, it is coming at a cost. 

During this meeting, I requested the United Nations to consider giving us additional support, especially on restoring the environment, on our infrastructure because our roads are badly damaged as a result of the heavy vehicles and to also support us on issues of water, education and health because we are competing with the refugees for all those facilities.

Yesterday, I was in Dubai at the Annual Investment Meeting. It is a big meeting where all the investors assemble once a year. Of concern to us was that Intra-Africa trade is only between 5 and 10 per cent. Therefore, as Africans, we are not even trading with one another but we are trading with foreigners and promoting their industries. I hope that this newly signed continental free trade area will facilitate trade within the region so that we can all grow together. 

During those meetings, awards are given for countries that have got good speed on doing business; Rwanda and Ethiopia were recognised from the East African region on the ease of doing business. What the organisers do is to contact investors in those countries and ask them how long it took them to meet the officials, to get a license, how quickly it took them to conclude the business and so much more. I hope that one day we shall also receive an award.

Lastly, death occurred of a very important African woman, Nomzamo Winnie Mandela. I had indicated to the Uganda Women Parliament Association (UWOPA) that we might want to move a tribute motion in her honour; I do not know whether the Government has plans for it but I think it is important that we do it before she is buried on Saturday.

The final one has to do with the 4th Commonwealth Youth Symposium, which will attract attendance from a number of young people from the Commonwealth Africa region. It is sponsored by the Commonwealth and we are just hosting it. I would like to appeal to the Youth Members of Parliament and the other Members to come and give the young people company. We shall give you the theme in detail. Thank you very much. 

PRESENTATION OF THE REPORT OF THE PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION TO THE NATIONAL PEOPLE’S CONGRESS OF THE PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF CHINA

3.34
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the parliamentary delegation to the National People’s Congress of the People’s Republic of China, which was held from 21st to 27th August, 2017. 

Madam Speaker, pursuant to rule 33 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I beg to present to this august House the report of this delegation. I will just highlight the summarised briefs of the observations, the activities that were carried out and the recommendations thereof. 

On 16th September 2013, H.E. Mr Zhang Dejiang, Chairman of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress of the People's Republic of China led a 50-member delegation to Uganda. The delegation made a courtesy call on H.E. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the President of the Republic of Uganda and held a meeting with the Rt hon. Speaker of Parliament.

One of the highlights of H.E. Mr Zhang Dejiang’s visit to Parliament was the signing of a memorandum of understanding between Parliament of Uganda and the National People's Congress of the People's Republic of China. The memorandum highlighted the need to strengthen and further develop existing friendly cooperation and exchanges between the People's Republic of China and the Republic of Uganda.

Following the above developments and in pursuit of the memorandum of understanding mentioned above, H.E. Mr Zhang Dejiang, the Chairman of the Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress invited the Rt. hon. Speaker of Parliament of Uganda for an official visit to China under the auspices of the Uganda–China Parliamentary Friendship Association. 

The Speaker of Parliament of Uganda led the delegation and other Members included:
    a) Hon. Nandala-Mafabi 
    b) Hon. Noah Olega 
    c) Hon. Alum Santa 
    d) Hon. Susan Amero 
    e) Capt. Everlyne Asiimwe 
    f) Hon. Andrew Baryayanga 
    g) Hon. Kenneth Lubogo 
    h) Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi 
    i) Hon. Sylvia Rwabwogo 
    j) Hon. John Baptist Lokii 
    k) Hon. Pamela Kamugo and 
    l) Hon. Jalia Bintu.

Objectives of the visit 

    a) To study the Communist Party of China (CPC) and the National People's Congress (NPC) and their contribution to the social, economic and political development of China;
    b) To strengthen and further develop the existing friendly relations between the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda and the National People's Congress of the People's Republic of China;
    c) To share best practices and experiences on issues of common concern such as trade relations, promotion of tourism, technological innovations and vocational training skill enhancement programmes for the youth;
    d) To collaborate and promote sharing of working experiences on gender equality, promotion of women’s participation in decision making and improving maternal and reproductive health and Government support to Small and Medium-sized Enterprises (SMEs); 
    e) To share experiences and knowledge in areas such as food security, agricultural modernisation, sustainable development, environmental protection and tree planting.

Madam Speaker, many activities were carried out but due to our Rules of Procedures, I would like to go to the observations.

Basing on the meetings held with H.E. Zhang Dejiang, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on the National People’s Congress, the Vice-Chairperson of the National People's Congress of China and President of the China Women Federation, other political leaders and senior Chinese officials, these were the findings and observations that we made after the discussions: 

The delegation learnt that the Communist Party of China (CPC) is the founding and ruling political party of the People's Republic of China. It was founded in 1921 by Chen Duxiu and Li Dazhao. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, I beg to be excused in case my pronunciations do not bring out the names.  

The delegation was informed that the highest body of the CPC is the National People’s Congress. It is comprised of the NPC deputies who are elected from 35 electoral units according to the law. These units include: People’s Congress of Provinces, autonomous region and municipalities under the Central Government, the Servicemen (Congress of the People’s Liberation Army), the Deputy Election Council of the Hong Kong, Special Administrative Region, the Deputy Election Council of the Macao Special Administrative Region and the Taiwan Compatriots’ Consultation Election Council.

We were informed that each congress is elected for a term of five years. A total of 2,987 deputies were elected to the current 12th NPC. The NPC meets in a session once a year. The following were their functions:

    1. To amend the Constitution and supervise its enforcement;
    2.  To enact and amend basic laws governing criminal offences, civil affairs, the State organs and other matters; 
    3. To elect, decide to appoint and remove from office Members of the Central State Organs; 
    4.  To determine major State issues.

The NPC Standing Committee is the permanent body of the NPC and is composed of a chairperson, several vice-chairpersons, the Secretary-General and other members. All the above office bearers are elected by the NPC from its deputies for a five year term, as I have already intimated.  

We had a meeting with H.E. Zhang Dejiang and the issues discussed were: 
    1. Strengthening the existing friendly relations between the Republic of Uganda and the People’s Congress of China;
    2. The role of the Chinese Communist Party and the National People’s Congress in socio-economic and political transformation in China. 
    3. We looked at China-Uganda trade relations. 
    4. We further looked at the local content and I would like to talk about local content in the observations.

In the same meeting about local content, the leader of the Ugandan delegation emphasised that mutual benefit should be the key principle in our trade relations. She highlighted the need for Chinese financed projects in Uganda and the Chinese investors to prioritise the sourcing of locally available goods and services and in recruiting specified proportions of Ugandans at both managerial and non-managerial levels to work in Chinese-funded projects.

We also discussed technological transfer and the leader of the Ugandan delegation requested the Chinese Government to share its experiences and technological advancements by establishing technical incubation colleges in Uganda, particularly in the youth vocational training and skills enhancement programmes.

We further looked at support to agricultural modernisation in Uganda and specifically focused on irrigation technology transfer and attracting Chinese investors to invest in commercial farming in Uganda.

In addition, we looked at economic empowerment of women and women’s emancipation in decision making and management. 

The delegation also had a meeting with leaders from Hangzhou Municipal People’s Congress. The leader of the Ugandan delegation commended the Chinese Communist Party for spearheading the above reforms, which are in the report that you will look at. These reforms brought about economic transformation in China and transformed the Chinese society from one of the world’s poorest countries to now second largest economy in just 30 years.

The Ugandan delegation interacted with the Uganda Mission staff in China and issues discussed included: bilateral relations challenges; marketing of Uganda tourism industry to the Chinese people and addressing low tourism volume from China to Uganda; addressing the existing trade imbalance between Uganda and China; undertakings made by Uganda Government on double taxation; the 102 Ugandans in Chinese prisons; attracting Chinese investors in Uganda’s mineral development sub-sector (marble processing and iron ore mining); utilisation of the Shs 5 billion Parliament passed for economic diplomacy and concerns over continued renting of property for the Uganda Embassy in China.

The delegation visited the Shanghai Memorial Hall historic site, the Shanghai Urban Planning Exhibition Centre, Shanghai Business and Tourism School, the Dahu Technologies Company Limited, Hangzhou Binjiang Fruit Industry Company Limited; China Railways Construction Corporation; Huawei Telecommunication Company and Star Times.

Findings, recommendations and lessons learnt

The delegation noted the important role and contribution of the Chinese Communist Party in spearheading the reforms that brought about economic transformation in China and transformed the Chinese society from one of the world's poorest countries to now the second largest economy in just 30 years. 

We, therefore, recommend that political parties in Uganda should pick lessons from the Chinese Communist Party and make economic transformation the main agenda of our political activities. 

The delegation noted with concern the existing trade imbalance between Uganda and China. According to data from the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, total trade between Uganda and China reached $932.8 million in 2015 with Uganda's exports to China contributing only $57.7 million while China's exports to Uganda contributed $875.1 million. It is our considered opinion that mutual benefit should be the key principle guiding the Uganda-China trade relations. 

In line with the above, we recommend that the Government of Uganda should address the current trade imbalance between the two sister countries by sensitising the business community in Uganda to take advantage of the big market in China and through tax and trade incentives to exporters of Ugandan goods to the Chinese market and through providing support to Ugandan exporters to address issues of value addition.

The delegation would like to highlight the issue of local content and underscore the need for Chinese-financed projects in Uganda and the Chinese investors to prioritise the sourcing of locally available goods and services and in recruiting specified proportions of Ugandans at both managerial and non-managerial levels to work in Chinese-funded projects. 

In line with the above, we recommend to Parliament to urgently consider the Local Content Bill and pass it into law to address issues of value addition and local content for multi-lateral projects in Uganda. 

The delegation learnt that the Chinese government has formulated and adopted a series of policies and measures to ensure gender equality and to enhance women participation in economic, political and social development. 

We recommend to Government to instruct local governments and other agencies at all levels to adopt favourable policies towards women such as providing vocational training courses, monitoring sex discrimination against women in employment and helping women, especially those laid off, to find and create new jobs. 

One of the key lessons the delegation picked from China relates to major reforms in agriculture. We were informed that reforms in agriculture are regarded as the main reason behind China's economic transformation. It caused an immediate impact on output and agricultural incomes resulted in quick successes that provided important support for reform in other sectors of the economy.

From the experiences noted above, the delegation wishes to propose the following recommendations/reforms in the agriculture sector: 

    1. Government should establish an agricultural bank to finance agricultural projects and facilitate small farmers and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) with soft loans and inputs.
 
    2. Government should make use of the abundant water bodies in the country by establishing the necessary infrastructure to support the application of irrigation schemes technology throughout the country.

    3. Government should urgently address the challenge of poor quality planting materials (seeds) and promote and support the application of fertilisers. 

The delegation further recommends that Government reviews the undertakings mentioned above and ensures that the arrangements will bring about mutual benefit for the two sister countries.

Madam Speaker, during our interaction with H.E. Zhang Dejiang, we noted the concerns of the Chinese officials on non-implementation of undertakings on double taxation and protection of investments by the Government of Uganda.

The delegation interacted with our embassy staff in Beijing and noted with concern the low tourism volume from China to Uganda. We, therefore, recommend that Government should launch a tourism promotion campaign in China aimed at attracting more tourists from China to Uganda as one way of addressing the trade imbalance between the two countries. 

The delegation visited Shanghai Business and Tourism School and noted that Shanghai Business & Tourism School enrols over 3,000 youth every year in various youth enhancement skills development programmes. 

We, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development explores ways of establishing partnerships – which you can call exchange programmes – with vocation training institutions in China in an attempt to enhance the Youth Skill Development Programme. 

The delegation further recommends that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should explore ways of establishing technical incubation colleges in Uganda, particularly in the Youth Vocational Training and Skills Enhancement Programmes.

Conclusion

Madam Speaker, in conclusion, the visit to the National People's Congress of the People's Republic of China offered Members the opportunity to interact and share experiences on what role parliaments the world over can play in the realisation of economic transformation of its people. 

The visit further reminded Members that they are one of the central pillars of democracy and that they embody the aspirations and will of the people. The visit challenged policy makers and legislators to ensure that the number of women who participate in political, economic and social development issues is increased. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Parliamentary Delegation to the National People’s Congress of the People’s Republic of China from 21–27 August, 2017. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Jalia. Just to compliment that report, DAHUA Electronics, which has been serving this market from Ethiopia, agreed during that visit to come and establish an assembly plant for electronics in Uganda. I hope that when they come, the ministers will receive them.

Secondly, the Government of China has been able to take people out of poverty. You know they are over a billion people. As of now, there are 50 million people remaining in poverty. They actually know how many are remaining so that they can address them. Thank you very much.

Let me invite the Leader of the Opposition to present the alternative policies and then we shall go to matters of national importance.

3.54
THE DEPUTY OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Roland Mugume): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to lay on the Table the alternative ministerial policy statements for financial year 2018/2019. 

In line with rules 14(2) and 146 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, 2017, I humbly submit the alternative ministerial policy statements for the financial year 2018/2019. I am going to lay on the Table alternative policy statements for the shadow ministers who are not here with us. For those who are present, I will ask them to come and lay by themselves.

Madam Speaker, allow me to lay on the Table alternative policy statements for: 
    a) Justice and Constitutional Affairs;
    b) Finance, Planning and Economic Development;
    c) Trade, Industry and Cooperatives
    d) ICT and National Guidance
    e) Kampala Capital City Authority
    f) Internal Affairs and Official Duties (Laughter)
    g) Science, Technology and Innovation
    h) Human Rights Sector, and
    i) Water and Environment

Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to request my colleagues to come and lay theirs.

3.57
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR SPECIAL REGIONS AFFAIRS (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to lay, on behalf of the Leader of the Opposition, the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for Special Regions for financial year 2018/2019. I beg to lay.

3.57
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Lucy Akello): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for Gender, Labour and Social Development for financial year 2018/2019. I beg to lay.

3.57
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE, SECURITY AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (Mr Gilbert Olanya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me lay on Table the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for Defence, Security and Veteran Affairs. (Laughter) I beg to lay. 

3.58
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Betty Nambooze): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for Local Government for financial year 2018/2019, with a request that this Parliament appoints a day to receive a report on the performance of decentralisation in Uganda. I beg to lay.

3.58
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR REHABILITATION, RELIEF AND DISASTER MANAGEMENT (Mr Gershom Sizomu): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for Disaster Preparedness and Refugee Management for financial year 2018/2019. I beg to lay. 

3.59
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr William Nzoghu): Madam Speaker, allow me to lay the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for the Works and Transport Sector for financial year 2018/2019.
3.59
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE (Mr Francis Gonahasa): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for Agriculture for financial year 2018/2019.

3.59
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Mr Francis Zaake): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for the Ministry of East African Community Affairs for financial year 2018/2019.

3.59
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Robert Centenary): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities for financial year 2018/2019.

4.00
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR PUBLIC SERVICE AND PRESIDENCY (Mr Herbert Ariko): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for the Uganda Public Service for the financial year 2018/2019. I beg to lay.

I beg to lay the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for the Presidency for financial year 2018/2019. I beg to lay.

I beg to lay the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for the Health Sector for financial year 2018/2019. I beg to lay.

I beg to lay the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development for financial year 2018/2019. I beg to lay. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. In relations to the policy statements, I read somewhere that some ministries have withdrawn their policy statements, so, I do not know where we stand on that issue. (Laughter) Maybe you will give us an answer tomorrow.

Honourable members, let us quickly go to the matters of national importance, but use two minutes each.

4.02
MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance, which is a challenge to the human rights norm of “equal pay for equal work” and this concerns selective salary enhancement.

Madam Speaker, the proposed salary increment by Government for financial year 2018/2019 shows a lot of discrimination that is bound to impact on performance and service delivery in the Public Service. From the proposed salary structure, one cannot tell the method and percentages that have been used to propose higher salaries for the selected groups of public servants. 

For example, Madam Speaker, the secondary school science teachers who are in salary scale U3 would be getting a salary of Shs 2 million per month while their counterparts of arts in the same scale (U3) will be getting Shs 630,000 yet in 2012/2013 the science teachers got a salary increment of 30 per cent. 

Madam Speaker, this Parliament is mandated under Article 40(1)(b), which states: “Parliament shall enact laws to ensure equal payment for equal work without discrimination.” Colleagues, the head teachers in salary scale U1 (government secondary schools) will be getting Shs 2,050,000 and the deputy head teachers of salary scale U2 will be getting Shs 1.7 million. The issue at hand is: Who is to supervise who, if the secondary school science teacher gets Shs 2 million and the deputy head teacher gets Shs 1.7 million? 

I think we need to harmonise this. You will also find that the educators in business, technical and vocational institutions (BTVET), National Teachers Colleges and Primary Teachers Colleges have not been considered. In 2003, the Government of Uganda came up with what they called the single spine – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Just go to the point quickly.

MS RWABUSHAIJA: Madam Speaker, the issue at hand is that some of the officers at local government have not been considered even when they are scientists. In fact, the veterinary doctors have been left out. 

My prayer is that the Minister of Public Service should come to this House and explain these anomalies. This House should also not accept to continue with the issue of selective salary increments. There should be equal pay for all public servants. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I hope the Minister of Public Service will address us on this issue, especially now that we are budgeting. Do you have something to say, Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development? 

4.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I would like to appreciate hon. Rwabushaija for raising this issue. It is one of the issues that we have been discussing for the last one year. Given the resources we have, we made a decision, as Government, to make some increment for some categories of civil servants.

The point I would like to make is that we have already submitted the budget regarding this issue to the House. I do not know whether we should handle it as a matter of national importance or the committees could look at it and make a decision. Otherwise, it is already within the budget and the budget is being discussed by the different sectoral committees of the House.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, since the matter is already before us, please engage in the committees and see what adjustments could be made. 

4.08
MS NORAH BIGIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Buliisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance that is greatly affecting the people of Buliisa, who I represent in this august House. Buliisa District has suffered in the past on the issue of cattle keepers commonly known as the “Balaalo”. This country is aware of this and we have lost lives and property. 

Madam Speaker, in the last one and half weeks, we have seen  movement of heavy trucks coming back into the district loaded with cattle and some of them being escorted. You are also aware that these people have been chased from West Nile, Acholi and Lango sub-regions but they have decided to come to Buliisa District.

Madam Speaker, Buliisa District –

THE SPEAKER: Order!

MS BIGIRWA: Buliisa District is surrounded by forest cover of 320 square kilometres. The land under water is 1,312 square kilometres. The land under Uganda Wild Life Authority (UWA) is 832 square kilometres and the land under settlement is only 736 square kilometres.

Madam Speaker, we do not have enough land for cultivation and neither do we have enough land even for grazing our own cattle. As a community, we are planning to reduce the number of cattle we have. I am surprised that despite all that we have gone through, we still have these people. I do not know where they come from and I do not know whether they are Ugandans. However, the impunity at which they are being handled and allowed to settle in our land –(Member timed out.)

MS BIGIRWA: Madam Speaker, we would like to pray that - already our land is being grabbed; there are dealers that are being positioned there to grab our land. When these people come with their cattle, it is not only the cattle they come with but they have a hidden agenda. In fact, the cattle is just an entry point for them to come to a place – 

THE SPEAKER: What is your prayer?

MS BIGIRWA: My prayer is that these Balaalo should be directed back to where they came from. We need peace in Buliisa because we already have enough problems. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the Minister of Internal Affairs here. However, this issue of people moving with their animals into other people’s lands – I do not know what Government is doing about it.

4.12
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The current situation is that the Balaalo who settled in the north without proper arrangements have been asked to go back where they came from. I think not all of them have actually left. Some of them have come and some are still being asked to leave. 

Madam Speaker, that exercise is not yet finalised but if these people who have been asked to leave northern Ugandan are settling in Buliisa, then it is not a government arrangement; we do not know about that. However, what is very serious is that the Balaalo must leave northern Uganda because they went there unceremoniously –(Laughter)– without proper arrangement. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can we ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to establish who these people are and what they are doing there, so that we have answers for the people of Buliisa? Minister of Internal Affairs, you will give us an update next week.

4.13
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja East Constituency, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance in respect of violation of fundamental human rights and freedoms.

Madam Speaker, as you are aware, I was declared the winner for Jinja East Constituency by-election. As a way of victimisation, my supporters are being arrested and incarcerated for more than 48 hours. I am not saying that nobody should conduct investigation; what I am saying is that under Article 28(3) of the Constitution, every person is presumed to be innocent until he or she has been convicted and proved guilty.

Further, under Article 23(4) of the Constitution, if someone is held for more than 48 hours without being produced in the courts of laws, he or she must be released on bond. I have so far 48 people who have been arrested and incarcerated. They have been held for more than 48 hours, under the presumption that they are investigating why I won the Jinja East Constituency by-election.

I have raised this issue with the Inspector General of Police (IGP), the Director of Criminal Investigation Division (CID) and the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP). They told me that there is “an order from above” and that is why they are holding my people up to now.

Under Article 20 of the Constitution, these rights are inherent; they are not granted by the State or anyone. The Government has a duty through its organs to protect and ensure enjoyment of these rights. Therefore, I would like to request the Minister of Internal Affairs to make a statement and explain under what circumstances people could be held for more than 48 hours and held even outside Jinja. In fact, the Speaker of Jinja Municipal Council is held at Kira Police Station and others are in other various police stations.

Madam Speaker, I have been moving up and down to ensure that these people are released or produced in the courts of law.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mwiru, I do not know whether you might not want to give names because I do not know which police stations they are being held. Maybe you would need to avail the Minister of Internal Affairs with the names. You are saying there are 48 people - I do not know whether they are 48 robbers at Nalufenya or 30 robbers somewhere.

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, I have undertaken to provide the Minister of Internal Affairs with the details. I understand what it means to lose an election genuinely but I will submit this list. (Laughter)

4.16
MR JOSEPH KOLUO (NRM, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance that affects my people of Toroma, Teso in general and the Ugandan business community.

On 22nd last month, a police officer attached to Anti-Stock Theft Unit (ASTU) called Otto Alfred, shot dead three people. They are Lilian Nandutu, the officer in charge (OC) - moreover she was pregnant; Julius Eremu, the police officer and Jessica Anyait, presumed to be the girlfriend. He seriously injured one person called Dominic Imalingat, who is currently in Ward 7, Mulago Hospital.

My prayer is that:

    1. The Government, especially the Ministry of Internal Affairs, should take responsibility to treat the injured victims.

    2. The people of Kokorio are traumatised a lot and need counselling. They do not even want to see anyone wearing police uniform because of that incident.

    3. I appeal to the Ministry of Internal Affairs to at least build a police post for people at the landing site of Kokorio. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The request will be transmitted to the Minister of Internal Affairs and he should come and report to this House.

4.18
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Honourable members, I thank you because one of my hands sometimes belongs to the Persons with Disabilities (PWD) movement. Therefore, I need to have somewhere I can put my document because I cannot hold it.

Madam Speaker, I rise on an issue of national importance regarding the women’s fund. I rise to seek an explanation from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development.

In the 2015/2016 financial year, Government of Uganda launched the Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme (UWEP). Its target was to benefit the poor women and the unemployed in all districts of Uganda. The commitment by Government as evidenced by the releases has been a bit questionable. 

For example, out of a total of Shs 85 billion committed by Government, so far only Shs 36 billion has been released by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, representing a performance of only 43 per cent.

If I just give you a quick highlight; in the financial year 2015/2016, Shs 3 billion was allocated by Government but Shs 1.9 billion was released, totalling to about 66 per cent in terms of budget performance. In 2016/2017, Shs 43 billion was allocated but Shs 24 billion was released, an equivalent of 56 per cent performance which was fair. The 2017/2018 financial year is the worst in performance. Shs 36 billion was allocated but only Shs 10 billion has been released.

The reason I raise this issue of national importance is that about 7,000 groups of women have already been shortlisted to receive this money. As you know, this year, we are celebrating the Women’s Day in line with the theme, “Empowerment of the Rural Women and Girls: The Opportunities and Challenges That We Have”. If we talk about all those groups, a tune of about Shs 38 billion has not been released by the finance ministry across the country. While these groups are waiting for this money, women Members of Parliament and all men have been asked about this funding by their constituents.

I would like the finance minister to explain his actions on whether his ministry has lost interest in the women of Uganda, particularly funding this important project which could turn around the lives of many women. (Applause)

If not, why then has it also been a habit by the finance ministry to keep reducing this money? (Laughter) Why has it also not been ring-fenced, for example, because women are different from the youth? I believe that the women have been paying this money and in terms of performance, the women need this money. They are household heads; they are women in the families and they need to support their families. (Applause)

We would like the gender minister and the finance minister to explain the effort they are taking in terms of addressing these gaps because we cannot wait for 7,000 women groups which are representing. The multiplier effect is big because 7,000 represent many other women but the gap of Shs 38 billion cannot be explained. That means this entire year, no single women group has received funding. Therefore, the House needs to receive an appropriate explanation in regard to this matter; whether the Government is still interested in the women of Uganda or not. (Applause)

4.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, as you know, no one can doubt whether the NRM Government is interested in the cause to emancipate the women of Uganda. That is not in question. Now, all the money that was appropriated by Parliament to the Women Fund will be released to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development as requested, by end of this year. 

Madam Speaker, as you know, we appropriate money here. We release money on a quarterly basis, on the request of the ministries. What I can commit from the Ministry of Finance is that all the money that was appropriated by Parliament to the Women Fund will be released.

THE SPEAKER: So, what is your deadline for releasing the money? 

MR BAHATI: Tomorrow, if you allow, I can come and tell the House how much has been released so far and how much is remaining for this quarter.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, it is very important because under the Sustainable Development Goals, the principle is that “leave no one behind”. You should include everybody. The women are good, peaceful and they are not militant. We would like to know about their money tomorrow.

4.24
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to bring to the urgent attention of this House the disturbing rate at which mothers are dying in child birth at Mukono Health Centre IV.

The latest deaths of these cases are those of 32 year-old Juliet Nakyeyune, a resident of Ham Mukasa zone and Florence Nakamya of Kikubankyima a few days ago. On average, I am losing a woman every week at the health centre IV in Mukono. The most painful thing is that most of these ladies are dying under what would be preventable circumstances. 

Juliet Nakyeyune went for delivery but was made to climb the bed unassisted. She fell down, her uterus ruptured and she died together with her baby. Florence Nakamya was due for a caesarean birth but her husband failed to raise Shs 350,000 demanded for by the doctors. The husband could only raise Shs 200,000 but the doctors refused to work on her. She also died, together with her baby.

My health centre IV is now acting like it is a hospital for the entire district. Mukono District does not have a government hospital. With only 12 beds, the hospital is delivering an average of 18 ladies per day with very few staff. On the day Juliet died, for example, there was only one midwife on duty delivering four women at ago. 

Madam Speaker, we do not know if it has become a culture that women should pay money at Government facilities. In Mukono, women are asked to pay Shs 350,000- (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Make your prayer.

MS NAMBOOZE: Our prayers are as follows, Madam Speaker:

    1. That the ministry interests itself in what is happening at Mukono Health Centre IV.

    2. I also would like to make a special petition to you, Madam Speaker. If it pleases you, send us your Committee on Health to come and look at Mukono Health Centre IV so that we do not lose more of these mothers.

Madam Speaker, I pray.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. This matter reminded me that in the Ninth Parliament we had a debate here on maternal health. One of the resolutions was that there should be regular audits of maternal deaths and we have not heard from the Government on this. I do not know whether anyone can speak on this issue.

MS LUCY AKELLO: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to give information to the House regarding an incident that happened last week, and it actually appeared in the Daily Monitor. 

Madam Speaker, I got this information from a platform of Uganda Martyrs Students of 2000 because there are over 16 doctors in that group. There was a 59-year-old woman and they were struggling with her triplets. Unfortunately, the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) at the hospital where these children were being handled was out of oxygen. I have again got more information that there is a child struggling for his life at Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital because something called the ventilator has broken down.

Therefore, there is need to do a serious audit of our health facilities because we are losing so many children and mothers to simple things, which could have been rectified. This is the information I wanted to give the House. 

Also, let us assist this mother, whose only hope is now that child who has survived. She had quadruplets but she gave birth to three live babies and now two others have also died. She is now remaining with one child. So, let us do anything possible to save this one remaining child. She is 59 years old and she is not going to give birth to any more children. Her only hope is this one child who has survived. Therefore, this is my request to the House.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to remind the Government that this debate took place on 15 December 2011 and I would like to read paragraph 6 of the resolutions: “The Government compiles and tables to Parliament annual reports on the status of maternal health in the country with a full national maternal mortality audit report, and that Parliament shall dedicate a particular day to debate this report and propose the way forward”. There has not been a treasury memorandum on this issue.

Dr Baryomunsi, would you like to say something?

4.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable members for raising this serious matter. 

Definitely, no woman should die as a result of pregnancy complications. I know there are many assessments being done by the Ministry of Health. I will undertake to inform the Minister of Health to come even next week on Tuesday to give specific responses to the matter being raised by hon. Nambooze and also the issue of the oxygen.

Madam Speaker, it is true that this Parliament passed a resolution to have the audit. I know the Ministry of Health has information. Maybe on that day, the Minister of Health can confirm whether she is ready and then, we designate a day when we can debate that maternal health report. 

However, let me also say that Government services are free, except those offered from the level of a district hospital. It is because from the level of a hospital upwards, we have grade A and B services. Grade B services are free but should a client opt for grade A services, then a payment can be made. In health facilities below that, including health centres IV, all the services should be free. Therefore, if health workers are charging the patients, they are doing it irregularly and the Ministry of Health will definitely take action. 

Madam Speaker, the Minister of Health is going to investigate that matter and on Tuesday, she should be able to give a report to Parliament on that specific complaint raised by hon. Nambooze. Thank you.

4.32
MS OKETAYOT LOWILA (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

Madam Speaker, there are rising incidences of armed robbery in Pader. Just over a spell of a short time, we have lost lives, people have been injured, and businessmen have lost money, goods and other properties. In Acholibur Subcounty, a mobile money dealer was killed. In Alima West Village, Latanya Subcounty, people were robbed and one victim was shot in the leg. In Otok Parish, Pajule Subcounty, a cotton buyer was robbed of about Shs 4 million. Just over the weekend, in Oyuko Village, Latanya Subcounty still, businessmen were robbed and the thugs went away with about Shs 1 million, solar panels and many other items.

Initially, we thought the security people within the district would be able to arrest the situation, but it is becoming very clear that it is now beyond their capacity. There are inadequate numbers of police officers. There are some subcounties that have police posts without even a single police officer. Their mobility is also limited because they have inadequate transport facilities. Therefore, it is our prayer that the Ministry of Internal Affairs intervenes in Pader. Otherwise, if it continues at this rate, we are going to continue losing lives and properties. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Ministry of Internal Affairs is directed to address the issue in Pader especially the robberies. 

4.34
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Moroto County South, Moroto): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

Two weeks ago, specifically on the 9th of April, we experienced a lot of rain that flooded the whole of Malaba Town Council, leading to the death of two people. I know this was aired on television yesterday. It was so bad because many houses collapsed and many business people lost their properties.

This did not only end with the people there but it also affected the cross border movement between Uganda and Kenya. It led to a lot of what we would call “waiting in motion” where Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) registered many losses, to a tune of over Shs 160 million in uncollected taxes. 

Madam Speaker, this is happening because of the incomplete road construction between Malaba, Kenya and Malaba, Uganda. For your information, Malaba, Kenya, built a completely new bridge at Malaba border post and worked on the road on their side. However, for the Ugandan side, it has now taken over two years to build the road starting from the new bridge built by Kenya, leaving us with a one-lane road crossing the border. With the heavy trucks that are prone to accidents and mechanical faults, whenever one of them breaks down, Kenya and Uganda cannot be accessed because of that problem.

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that the Government moves very fast and constructs the road on our side so that we continue having the traffic flow without any problems. Secondly, Malaba Town Council should also be supported with drainage facilities to enable the flow of water since it is a low lying area.

Thirdly, my prayer is that the families that lost their loved ones, properties and houses be supported with emergency facilities so that they can at least recover some –(Member timed out.)-

THE SPEAKER: I am glad the Minister for Works is here. I do not know whether she would like to say something now.

4.37
THE MINISTER FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Monica Ntege Azuba): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. On the issue of Malaba border post, yes it is true that the section of our road between Kenya and Uganda has not been completed. We had a contractor on site but we run out of funds for one to two years. Efforts to get funds to finish that contract have been futile.

However, fortunately, we did contact TradeMark East Africa, who constructed the Busia one stop border post, and they have agreed to intervene. We are now waiting for the official response from them. Otherwise, we had tried very much for two years to get the funding for that part, but we are now getting the funds and it will be done.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you will update us when you get the funds fully. 

4.38
MS BEATRICE RWAKIMARI (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to present a statement on a very pertinent issue - the issue of teenage pregnancies in this country, which has contributed to high maternal mortality.

Madam Speaker, as we commemorate the Maternal Health Day in Uganda and elsewhere, I felt it pertinent to give this statement in the next five minutes. I am requesting that you allow me to read it for purposes of the record of Hansard.

THE SPEAKER: I will make an allowance because it touches the young people and the mothers of this country. I will give her the exception - five minutes.

MS RWAKIMARI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Maybe I will just give a small preamble. I am raising this issue because it affects women in this country. We all know that women make up more than 51 per cent of this nation. They also contribute to about 70 per cent of the economic activities like agriculture and others in this country. We also know that the women of this country have done a lot towards socio-economic development and therefore, any issue that affects women affects the socio-economic and political status of the country.

Madam Speaker, Uganda has one of the youngest populations in the world. The 2016 Uganda Demographic and Health Survey indicates that 69 per cent of Uganda’s population consists of young people below the age of 24 years. About 25 per cent of adolescent girls become pregnant before the age of 19; this is one of the highest rates in sub-Saharan Africa. Young people are sexually active either by choice or as a result of sexual violence, with the average age of the first sexual encounter estimated at 15 years. High levels of underage and forced marriages have led to higher morbidity and mortality rates of both mothers and their babies.

Madam Speaker, girls as young as 10 years have had unsafe abortions, contributing to the high maternal mortality ratio of 336 per 100,000 live births. Uganda has one of the highest rates of unsafe abortions in Eastern Africa, with an estimated rate of 54 abortions per 1000 women. Overall teenage pregnancies contribute to 25 per cent of maternal deaths in Uganda. Women and girls are at the risk of acquiring sexually transmitted diseases including HIV/AIDS; UNAIDS estimates that 500 girls are affected by HIV/AIDs every week. 

Madam Speaker, the New Vision of 15 March 2018 published a story of a 16-year-old girl who was about to be wedded to a 19-year-old young man in a Kisoro church. I suppose most of you read that story. In another story, a young girl in Kambibiri Village, Mukono District, was married at the age of 13 and has had 38 children to date. (Laughter) She became a grandmother at the age of 27. This is unacceptable! Members, you may be laughing but this could be your daughter, child or sister. Therefore, this is not a laughing matter. I thought Members would be crying instead of laughing. 

Madam Speaker, the Sunday Vision of 21 January 2018 also showed that women and girls were being raped under the guise of providing “legal” abortion services. Unscrupulous people are taking advantage of our desperate girls and women by advertising falsely that they provide “legal” abortion services. I have put it in quotes because abortions in this country are illegal.

I believe that lack of policies and clear guidelines regulating abortions are some of the major challenges to improving maternal health in Uganda and fighting teenage pregnancies, not to mention those who end up losing their uteruses and those that suffer from fistula. Fistula is a dangerous - (Interjection) - You may know but others may not. This is a situation where a woman passes urine together with faeces uncontrollably. This is unacceptable in our country. The maternal and perinatal deaths revealed that unsafe abortions are the biggest contributor to maternal morbidity and mortality in Uganda. 

Lack of access by the sexually active adolescent girls to sexual reproductive health information and services has led to unplanned and unwanted pregnancies and maternal deaths, including complications in pregnancy like obstetric fistula which I have already mentioned. Only 21 per cent of sexually active girls aged between 15 to 19 years are currently using contraceptives, with an unmet need for family planning at 30 per cent. 

Unsafe abortions place a huge strain on the public health system; for example, Government of Uganda spends approximately, Shs 7.5 billion on providing post abortion care to treat complications due to unsafe abortions. This is Shs 7.5 billion that could have been allocated to other areas of health to improve health service delivery.

Madam Speaker, I know we have talked about this over and over, but I would like to remind you that every day we lose 16 women due to preventable causes of maternal mortality like unsafe abortions. This is equivalent to a whole taxi crashing. When there are accidents all over the country, people are in awe but when 16 women die with their babies inside them, it is business as usual. This is unacceptable in this age and era and therefore, something has got to be done.

Evidence shows that every dollar spent on family planning will save $5 spent on treating complications from unsafe abortions. 
You are aware that the budget for health continues to shrink. Last year, it was about 8.5 per cent of the total budget; this year, maybe it will be about 7.4 per cent and yet we are still signatory to the Abuja Declaration, which requires us to appropriate 15 per cent of the national budget to health. 

If we are to harness the demographic dividends, young people must be healthy, skilled and economically empowered. It is therefore, imperative for us, parliamentarians, to have a paradigm shift in the way we appropriate these resources by investing in the health of young people who make up the biggest percentage of our population. That is if we are to reap from the benefits of the demographic dividends.

As I conclude, I would like to ask the Minister of Health to clarify on the following points:

    1. In the absence of regulations on sexual reproductive health, what are the specific strategies in place to address the escalating teenage pregnancies and unsafe abortions in Uganda?

    2. What is the status of the sexual reproductive health guidelines that were withdrawn from this House last year? What is the ministry using currently to guide young people on sexual reproductive health?

    3. Can the ministry inform Parliament why the policy on adolescents’ health is not yet operationalised?

    4. Can the Ministry of Health tell us about their plans to have standards and guidelines to stop maternal morbidity and mortality due to unsafe abortions?

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you very much for the opportunity. I hope the Ministry of Health will be able to guide the House and the country on this very serious issue of national importance. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Rwakimari. The Ministry of Finance published a census report and if you look at it carefully, in each of our districts there is a section which is about people aged 10 to 17 who have ever been married. When I first saw it, I thought it was a mistake but as I kept checking other districts, it was there. You have captured them in your statistics and it is very alarming. I hope it will trigger some action.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the presenter of the statement we have just received. 

I understand that today is the International Day on Maternal Health. Madam Speaker, just as you are giving us an alarming statement, it appears that the Government does not take such matters seriously. I would have expected an official report from the Government on a day like this. Uganda is being quoted in many international fora for the steps we took as a Parliament to stop the passing of the budget because we wanted the budget on maternal health to be increased. People appreciated what this Parliament did.

This day is celebrated internationally but the voice of the Government is silent. You needed a private Member of Parliament who is concerned about maternal health to come up with a statement.  The ministers are there but I do not know what they have to say.

Madam Speaker, we do not only have one minister to the docket but we have more than two. You cannot tell me that they are all so occupied with office work that they cannot respect this international day. Women are dying but the budget is not focusing on the key issues that concern the health of women. When there is a crisis, you will say that the Ministry of Finance does not give you money, but you do not articulate your issues properly.

I am not here to make a statement. I am just expressing a matter of concern and I am seeking clarification. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: I do not know who will give the clarification.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank You, Madam Speaker. Considering that today is the International Day for Maternal Health and the fact that we have received a statement, which directed all its prayers to the Minister of Health, would it not be procedurally right for us to express ourselves on this matter for a few minutes as we commemorate this important day? I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: The difficulty is that I do not see the sector ministers here. We have demanded for an update on the audit next week; let the minster come with the audit report and also respond to the issues raised by hon. Nambooze. Debate on this will be deferred to next week when the minister comes to answer. 

Honourable members, there are others who would like to raise issues but I will postpone them to tomorrow. 

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 39/01/10 TO THE MINISTER FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT

4.54
MR WAIRA KYEWALABYE (Independent, Bunya East Constituency, Mayuge): “Mayuge Weigh Bridge along Jinja Road is badly situated. It has one entry and exit and long vehicles have often had to negotiate within the main road, causing heavy traffic jam and on a number of occasions, accidents.

    i) Why did the ministry provide such minimal parking space and moreover with only one way for both entry and exit?
    ii) What measures are being put in place to expand the narrow   space and to ensure the trailers do not park alongside the road?
    iii) What is being done to ensure that the transfer delays at the bridge are limited to not more than 30 minutes?
    iv) How much money has been collected in penalties at the bridge in the last five years; and how much of it has been ploughed back to Mayuge as the host district?”

4.54
THE MINISTER FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Ntege Azuba): Madam Speaker, it is true that Mayuge Highway Bridge along Jinja Road is poorly situated, with a single way for entrance and exit, and long vehicles find it hard to negotiate. 

The weigh station at that place is commonly referred to as the “Magamaga Weigh Station”. It was installed on a site which is not ideal for this kind of infrastructure because it is a slope. The sloppy nature of the road made it challenging to have another entrance to the weigh station at the time of installation. This matter has presented a huge challenge for traffic flow in and out of the weigh station and also within the station. This has greatly contributed to traffic jam at the station and along the highway. 

Whereas the parking area is meant for holding only impounded vehicles, due to the heavy volume of traffic and slow weighing systems, the parking area is also currently being used to hold queuing vehicles. Therefore, the area is insufficient for the main purpose for which it was meant to serve. It was supposed to hold ten 22-metre trucks. However, it is unable to solve the queuing challenge resulting from the heavy traffic. 

Therefore, the solution is not to create a bigger parking area, but rather to improve the system using more appropriate weighing systems. The weigh station has been upgraded to a regional weighbridge for the northern corridor, as agreed upon at the tripartite meeting for East Africa. Under these new developments, both sides of the road will have weighing facilities. 

At the moment, Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) is redesigning the traffic flow around this weighbridge as part of the upgrade to the regional weighbridge, which will solve that current problem. In brief, we are undertaking an improvement project as explained further on. 

What measures are being put in place to expand the narrow place and what is being done to ensure the transfer delays at the bridge are mitigated? The main cause of the long and wide queues is the slow weighing systems that are used at the weigh station. Currently, Magamaga station is the busiest weighbridge on the UNRA network. It weighs between 1,000 and 1,500 vehicles daily, using a slow speed single axle weigh-in-motion weighbridge. During the peak hours, that is, between 1700 hours and 2200 hours and between 0700 hours and 0900 hours, the queues can be as long as a kilometre.

It is, therefore, recommended that a weigh station with such heavy traffic should have a means of automatically sorting vehicles that are most probably overloaded from those that are clearly within the legal requirements by weight in a process called “screening”. This system is known as “the high speed weigh-in-motion system”. It is typically installed on a carriageway or in a screening lane adjacent to the carriageway before the entrance to the weighing station. 

With the above system, as the vehicles approach the weighbridge, they are screened by sensors which are able to estimate the weights of the approaching vehicle. Only vehicles which are suspected to be overloaded are directed into a parking area using traffic lights. Upon getting there, they are weighed as those that are not suspected to be overloaded will be shown green lights to proceed without being weighed. The vehicles directed to the parking area are weighed and those that do not pass the test are impounded. 

There are also number plate recognition cameras that are used to capture vehicles, to account for those vehicles using this system. There is also a violation detection system which is used to identify vehicles that dodge the weighbridge or the screening system. 

We are currently in the process of procuring the highway weigh-in-motion system for Magamaga. It is expected that the installation shall be completed before the end of this year and once installed, the system will reduce the number of vehicles that will need to enter the parking area by more than 75 per cent. In other words, we envisage that the queues will be no more and we shall ensure that the majority of the vehicles proceed undeterred by these delays.

The installation is part of the first phase of the major improvement that is planned for Magamaga. We have more plans to remodel the weigh station; for example, we are redesigning the existing facility to create another exit, subsequently making the traffic flow smoother. This has been budgeted for in the financial year 2018/2019. 

We are also installing another weighing facility opposite the existing one, which will be dedicated to weighing vehicles headed for Malaba from Jinja. This one is planned for in the year 2020. It is also in line with the recommendations that we agreed upon at the 2016 tripartite regional weighbridge plan for East Africa. 

Regarding the financial operations, note that our interest is not to collect money but to institute punitive measures to ensure that people do not repeat what they are doing. However, we collected Shs 29.1 million in 2016 at Magamaga weigh station alone; Shs 72.5 million in 2017; and during the first three months of 2018, we have so far collected Shs 55.170 million at the same station. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Majegere, ask only one supplementary question.
 
MR MAJEGERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two questions in one. First, I wish to appreciate the minister for being frank and accepting the challenges encountered at this bridge. However, she is offering only long term plans. What are the immediate interventions? I get concerned when I find even ordinary Lorries queuing at the weighbridge for several hours, thereby losing a lot of business. 

Secondly, I do not know whether the minister herself is convinced with the answer that there is one small point for both entry and exit because of the sloppy nature of the area. I believe this would be justification to have an entry point separate from the exit point. The minister should therefore tell us if she is personally convinced about that arrangement. 

Lastly, I request the Speaker to allow the Committee on Physical Infrastructure to visit the site so that they can follow up on the minister’s commitments. They will also be able to see if there is a mechanism in place to monitor the revenue collected because you cannot tell me that in three years, we have collected only Shs 156 million there. Therefore, the Committee on Physical Infrastructure should visit the site and follow up on the minister’s commitments - 

THE SPEAKER: This is not a debate, please. You have asked some supplementary questions to the minister. 

MS NTEGE AZUBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank hon. Majegere. I said that we are designing the station to have an entrance and exit. Right now, it is only one but we are going to have two points. So, I think that will solve one of the problems. 

The other one is that we have mobile weighing scales. That is another intervention that we have and we are going to use. However, the procurement process, as I said, is 75 per cent done. Therefore, I believe that instead of spending much more money on other interventions, we need to fast-track the procurement and get the weigh-in-motion equipment in place. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: There is a request from hon. Waira that the committee should go and visit that particular weighbridge. However, I do not know whether it might be better to visit all of them in the country and give us one report because we do not know how they are performing. I think we need to direct the committee to visit all the weighbridges and check on the infrastructure as well as the income they get and give us a report. Thank you very much. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO COMMEND THE SPEAKER OF PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA, RT HON. REBECCA ALITWALA KADAGA, FOR UPHOLDING AND PROTECTING UGANDA’S CULTURAL VALUES AGAINST SAME SEX MARRIAGES AT THE 138TH IPU ASSEMBLY

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nsaba Buturo, could we use 20 minutes for the presentation and the debate. 

5.09
DR NSABA BUTURO (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Thank you.  “WHEREAS the 138th Assembly of the Inter Parliamentary Union (IPU) was held in Geneva, Switzerland, from 24 to 28 March 2018 with the agenda being sustaining peace as a vehicle for achieving sustainable development; tackling women's underrepresentation in politics; and building sustainable and resilient societies, among others;

AND WHEREAS the Speaker of Parliament, the Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, led Uganda's delegation to the 138th Inter Parliamentary Union Assembly;

NOTING THAT during the Inter Parliamentary Union meeting, an attempt was made to table and debate a motion on homosexuality without the consent of both Arab and African representatives;

FURTHER NOTING that the efforts by IPU in disregarding the views and values of Arab and African representatives on same sex marriages was an affront on the cultural self-determination and identity;

RECALLING THAT the Rt Hon. Speaker took a firm decision to vehemently object to the unfair action of tabling homosexuality on the agenda of the 138th IPU Assembly, and criticised the IPU President for not consulting Africa and Asia on such a divisive matter, contrary to the ideals of the IPU;

FURTHER RECALLING the earlier courage and firmness by the Rt Hon. Speaker at the 2012 IPU Assembly in Canada in rejecting the forceful imposition of foreign sexual practices on Africans, contrary to their cultural norms and values;

APPRECIATING the brave struggle by the Rt Hon. Speaker in defending policies and principles that shape the future direction of this great nation, and above all uphold the rights and ideals fitting into our society and the Constitution;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Tenth Parliament sitting at Kampala to:

    1. Congratulate the Rt Hon. Speaker, Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, and express its support for her commitment in upholding African values; and

    2. Appeal to the Members of the Inter Parliamentary Union and the International community to respect the cultural values and aspirations of all Members.”

I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? It is seconded by a number of Members. Justify the motion, honourable. 

DR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Speaker, we as a country and a nation are going through a very difficult period. It is a time when this nation is facing coordinated efforts, particularly by nations outside, that do want to promote homosexuality as a way of life.

We are witnessing a relentless and unprecedented attack on our value systems and beliefs. The end goal, if we are not courageous, do not resolve to stand up against these forces and choose to be uncompromising, honest, nationalistic and we allow this trend whereby external forces dictate their cultural values upon ours, is that we are going to see a situation where Uganda is dominated, exploited, oppressed and occupied. In the end, we shall stop being who God wants us to be. 

Madam Speaker, I draw the attention of honourable members to the fact that homosexuality is a repugnant and deplorable practice, which for some mysterious reasons those outside do not see anything wrong with. The majority of Ugandans do resent the idea that a man should sleep with a man and that should be a family, or a woman should sleep with a woman. We have noticed a trend where those external interests have chosen to threaten those who do not agree with them. They have used bribery and all sorts of means to try and force nations such as Uganda to accept that nonsense, Madam Speaker. 

I am sorry to say that we have another situation, Madam Speaker, where some officials in this nation have chosen to sabotage and stand with those who want to impose this obnoxious practice on our nation. However, what we saw recently was totally different. Your scintillating performance on that day when you led the delegation, as we have been told, gave us hope that it is not all lost; there are still some Ugandans who are prepared to stand up in defence of Uganda’s interests. 

Madam Speaker, you demonstrated indeed that it is possible to stand up against these interests. I am sure that you have faced a lot of pressure, perhaps been intimidated and other interests also exerted upon you, but you have remained steadfast. You are prepared to stake everything in defence of the interests of Ugandans.

Madam Speaker, I wish to bring to the attention of the honourable members that it is not your first time to stand up against these rapacious forces outside this nation. You did it in 2009, 2012 and you have done it again recently. We are proud of you, Madam Speaker. (Applause) In every forum, you have eloquently and courageously spoken in defence of our interests as Ugandans. 

Therefore, it is important that Uganda as a nation uses this opportunity - and we thank you for it - so that this obnoxious, abnormal practice, which is being imposed upon this nation, is rejected once and for all. I urge Ugandan officials to emulate you. Those who go out and are intimidated, bribed and abandon Uganda’s interests must repent and know that there is the option of defending Uganda, which you have eloquently and persistently done. I, therefore, urge honourable members to be proud of you.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I would also like to appeal to Ugandans, and in particular to the honourable members here, to resolve to reject homosexuality in all its manifestations. All the other similar distasteful practices which we have seen today in Europe and some parts of America, including bestiality and incest, are also being accepted as human rights matters. Before long, they will be putting pressure on Ugandans to do the same. 

I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving us the most precious opportunity. It has been a long time since this subject has come up and you have given us that opportunity that we hope we will use to put the last nail in the coffin of this obnoxious practice. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. As I call up hon. Hamson Obua, I would like to inform Members that during that time, the bazungu were looking for the Africans and Arabs and they told them, “We can give you money to support you in your elections. Vote with us and we will give you money so that you win in the next elections.”  I told my Members, “Where are the former Members of Parliament, hon. Fox Odoi and Sam Otada?” (Laughter)  
                
5.18
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the motion with a lot of passion. 

I would like to start with a quotation from the Bible. Genesis 2:18 says, “The Lord God said, ‘It is not good for man to live alone. I will make him a suitable helper’.” Our motto is, “For God and My Country”, and that is our biggest pillar. Above all, as Africans, we have our values. What these people are promoting is going to the core of our families and they are after destroying our families. 

As the Catholic Parliamentary Chaplaincy, we were planning to come to your office, Madam Speaker. When we went to Rome last year, we had a meeting with the Pope. As the Ugandan team, one of the key resolutions that we came up with was to start the pro-life forum of the Parliament of Uganda. We wanted you to be the key champion. Little did we know that you were going out there to stand firm and talk strongly? In my language, we say you talked without grass in your mouth. In Acholi, we say, “Iloko labongo lum idogi.” (Laughter) I have already translated it.  

You removed all the grass that you had in your mouth and spoke clearly and loudly and the whole world heard what you said. Everyone was proud of you. I watched the video that went viral and everyone said, “Yes, this is our woman”. This is what I would like to tell you, that you are a strong woman. (Applause) No amount of intimidation would stop you from saying what you said. 

This is part of the family that they are trying to affect. Same sex marriages are not African, Christian or Moslem. As a country, we are behind you. We say “thank you” and at the same time congratulate you.

I support the motion and I would like to ask my colleagues to also support this motion strongly. Let us send a very strong message to the whole world. Let us not fear some of the things they will do to us for standing firm. By the time they realise, their population would have gone down. As for us, we need to maintain our population and must have our families intact. Those who want same sex marriage, I would like to use the words of, I think it was the President of Zimbabwe, who said, “If a man marries a fellow man and they produce a child, or if a woman marries a fellow woman and they get a biological child, then I will allow that practice.” As long as you cannot give us children, remember God has given us the responsibility to be the factory –(Laughter)- I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

5.23
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (Independent, Kitgum Municipality, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here to support the motion. I would like to start by congratulating you. You have made Africa proud and have stood for African values. You have indeed made eyes roll by standing for what matters to us as Africans. In Uganda, the Anti-Homosexuality Bill was rejected on this Floor of Parliament. As a people, we have not embraced this activity -(Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, hon. Beatrice Anywar. I would like to inform the House that we stood firm and passed the Anti-Homosexuality Bill in this House. It was only the courts of law that nullified our actions. As for us, we had passed the Bill into law.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you. Madam Speaker, I thought that is what I meant, that we never agreed to these practices. 

However, I would also like to thank hon. David Bahati who originated this very important move that you have championed outside there. I keep on wondering what the problem is with our brothers and sisters beyond Africa. They think that what is good for them is also good for us. They have tried many ways to come and propagate this behaviour in Africa. We have our children in schools and many of them are at risk. Personally, I fear taking my child to a single sex school because of these practices.

Madam Speaker, as we move forward to cement this, it is also important that as Parliament and people’s leaders, we go into cleaning our own house. Let us torch in these institutions where we think the suspicion of such bad behavior is being propagated. They come with the intention of helping but end up carrying these bad practices along.

We would be happy to go, check and sensitise the youth who are falling victims of this because of their vulnerability. As I speak, I have a heavy heart. This same type of behaviour has not only gone into men to men and women to women. Two weeks ago, we had a staff of United Nations High Commission for Refugees working in Lamwo who got girls called Jennifer and Linda. Instead of going the right way, these girls have been sodomised because of the same behaviour being imported in this country. It went viral. Jennifer is right now in the theatre in Lacor Hospital. She is just passing stool uncontrollably. 

The man was arrested but later released. They just thought he was too diplomatic to do this. My prayer is that the laws of this country protect our children. Many of them are in Lamwo refugee camp hiding. He worked even in West Nile.

You can imagine this behaviour, which you champion. We should steer within our country to protect our children. We have to send a very strong message to all our colleagues and international friends where we go for meetings. If they cannot tolerate us in our African attire, norms and culture, we have not forced ours on them. Why should they force their behaviour on us? We should have a common point where we interact and do business. Where the norm and culture of Africans comes and it is tampered with, we are behind you, Madam Speaker, and any Ugandan who will stand up for our culture, we shall be walking together. They should know that as people’s representatives, we are not going to mince our words over this. We can tell them to remain with their business and their money. As long as they are going to erode our cultural norms as set up, we are not going to do business. I beg to submit and I congratulate you, Madam Speaker, an African lady.

THE SPEAKER: As hon. Wejuli comes, honourable members, last year, the Government of the United Arab Emirates collected all the homosexuals, put them on a plane and flew them to London in 24 hours. They sent them all to London. Because they are rich, those governments said nothing. They kept quiet. If it was us, you would have seen but that is what the Emirates did. (Laughter)

5.30 
MS AGNES TAAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support the motion. I would really like to, on behalf of the people of Bugiri and all Ugandans, congratulate you for standing firm to speak against homosexuality. We are very proud of you. Truth and integrity have eluded human beings in this world. It has eluded Ugandans. People think about money all the time. You cannot be bought by any amount of money in this world. You would have stood up to be paid so that you stand out to support this evil act.
As a Ugandan, I stand here to denounce the act of homosexuality as not only being ungodly but inhuman. I would like to call upon Ugandans to stand out in our families to follow our children up to schools and we see what really happens to them. Let us not be parents who are passersby. Parenting is not just about producing the child but responsibility that you take up, to look up and see how this child is growing into a responsible human being.

One of them is to be able to differentiate between right and wrong. For sure, there is no way you can stand in the world and convince people that going the other way round is the right thing to do. God gave us wisdom and made us in his own image and separated us from all the creation that he made, to give us the wisdom, the capacity to reason and know right and wrong.

Madam Speaker, we hold you high. We shall continue holding you high as Ugandans and all the women in this world. I would like to congratulate you. Thank you for standing firm. Thank you for being there for all people who cannot speak for themselves. You are a real representative of the people.

I would like to call upon all ministries, including the Ministry of Education and Sports, the Ministry of Ethics and Integrity, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to stand out and perform their role and responsibility to fight this evil act. 

Sometimes, there are things that go viral on whatsapp about our children demonstrating dances at a very tender age. There is something that we are imparting in these children. There are ministry officials at such functions and parents are happy, laughing and being entertained. There is nothing that we are doing about it. All this comes back to us. 

In Busoga, they say, “It is easy to put right a tree that is still young but when it grows up, there is no way you can bring up a branch that went the other way and put it right”. Let us all go back to the drawing board and bring up our children as responsible people. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: You know these people were very crafty. This matter was coming on the last day of the meeting and they kept on pushing the agenda down because by 6 o’clock, many delegates would have left. So, they were hoping we would go away and then they pass it without us.

What we did is, we divided the Uganda delegation. Part of the Uganda delegation was on the Uganda desk while part of the delegation was on other countries’ desk, so that in case of voting, they could vote from those other desks. (Laughter)

5.34 
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion and I would also like to take this opportunity to congratulate you for standing firm to speak for the voiceless.

Just last week, I was watching a clip on television where two boys were interviewed as victims of this act. They were lamenting about what they were going through. Right now, they wear pampers. They have to go through a surgical process but they do not have the money. They have nobody to fight for them.

What we are talking about is not a joke. It is a real issue in this country. It is becoming a serious issue in the whole of Africa and so, as Members of Parliament and leaders in this country, we must stand up with a very strong voice in addition to what the Speaker has done so far, to say no to this act without fear or favour.

Like my colleague has quoted from the Bible, what God did is enough to tell us that it is unnatural for a man to marry a fellow man; it is also unnatural for a woman to marry a fellow woman. Even animals cannot do this. Even birds cannot do this. What about us human beings? That is why when God looked up for the best companion to give to a man, He designed a woman properly. We should tell these people who go through such acts why they should not go the other way round but go to the proper way. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, there are men in the Bible who invaded the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah and practised homosexuality. What God did was to destroy these cities. This is also enough evidence that even God denounced this act in the Bible. Why should we as human beings continue practising this kind of act?

Lastly, all religious affiliations in this country have spoken “No” to this act of homosexuality. We should continue as Members of Parliament to walk with the norms and culture of our country and continue saying “No” to this act of homosexuality. Like the Member has said that the Bill was rejected, if it is possible, let that Bill be reintroduced on the Floor of Parliament and if it means coming up with very stringent measures on this act, we shall support the Bill.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.38
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion. I would like to appreciate hon. Nsaba Buturo for bringing this motion as well as the colleagues that seconded it.

We are proud of you, Madam Speaker. We congratulate you indeed and thank you for being an icon of firmness in protecting our sociocultural rights. We want to thank you for the vigilance because – as you have explained to us – people thought that by the last day, Africans would have left, are busy shopping and that Africans do not read. We want to thank you for that vigilance that you read these reports from the first page to the last. (Applause) We thank you for being a strong leader – a people leader – and that you were able to divide the team into the necessary sections for them to be able to follow up this matter to its logical conclusion. We cannot thank you enough.

We are proud as Ugandans. We are proud as Africans and – as hon. Okello said – we are proud as Christians and Muslims. We are proud that you stood up for humanity. God created man and woman for posterity. If we allow that men will marry men and women marry women, there will be no children and we will see the end of the world sooner. We want to thank you.

Our friends in the international community must know that even the poor have their dignity. They think that because we are poor we will swallow anything that they bring to us. The other day, I was in Mitooma meeting women groups and there happened to be a young man who came and I allowed him to listen and ask questions. He said, “We are sending you to Parliament. Go and tell them that our young girls are a problem to us because of the way they dress.” Because the white women go naked, our young people think that they should also go naked. Sometimes you wonder. You put on clothes that are up to the hips and you sit on these plastic chairs, for example. Is it any wonder that we are suffering very many diseases in the current world? The body is supposed to be protected by a dress.

Madam Speaker, once again, I would like to thank you and appeal to our people that we should say “no” to bad practices and we should say “no” to practices and values that are not Ugandan and practices and values that are not African. We must be able to stand firm. Thank you, Madam Speaker. Like my colleagues are saying, that Bill should come back and we pass it because we must stand firm for who we are. I beg to submit.

5.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank hon. Nsaba Butoro for the motion. I stand to support the motion and congratulate you, Madam Speaker, for having raised our flag very high both as Ugandans and Africans and for being very firm.  I have attended international meetings with you and I know you are usually very serious in following the programmes and it is good that you defeated them. They thought that Africans probably do not persevere up to the end in the meetings. I would like to say thank you very much. As usual, you have done us proud.

For the Christians – those who believe in the Bible – the Bible is very instructive on the issue of homosexuality. There are very many verses you can refer to. One of them, which I just want to read to you, is in Leviticus. For those of you who study the Bible, that book in the Old Testament is basically a reflection of God’s speeches to Moses as he led the Israelites from Egypt to the Promised Land. Leviticus 20:13 says: “If a man has sexual relations with a man as one does with a woman, both of them have done what is detestable. They are to be put to death; their blood will be on their own heads.” This was God commanding Moses as the Israelites moved. Therefore, clearly even for those who are believers, this is something detestable.

From a scientific point of view, when you engage the scientists from the West, they give misleading information that homosexuality is natural – that you are born with that affinity to commit homosexuality. However, I would like to say that there are very many studies which have been done both in Africa and outside, which clearly show that there is no genetic predisposition when it comes to homosexual behaviour. It is a behaviour, which is learnt in adult life and a behaviour, which can be unlearnt. 

Therefore, it is spread through what we call “nurture” and not “nature”. There is no evidence to show that when you go into the genetic material – the chromosomes of an individual – you will find anything related to homosexuality. It is a behaviour, which is learnt in life. One way of easily understanding it is that homosexuals do not produce through recreation. Therefore, how comes their number increases? The number increases because there is mobilisation. They just recruit and mobilise. 

The homosexuals have a very big move when you read the history of homosexuality – and they have invaded Africa. Even in Uganda here, Madam Speaker, there is a very big move. They move around. They formed committees in our universities, schools and many institutions and therefore, there is need for us as Parliament and Government to be very vigilant and make sure that we say “no” to this kind of infiltration by the homosexuals. 

I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker. If that Bill comes back, I will still vote “yes” to say “no” to homosexuality. I would like to thank hon. Bahati because when he was still a backbencher he brought that Bill and we are still very firm in saying “no” to homosexuality in Uganda and Africa. Thank you.

5.45
MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to passionately congratulate you and the team upon the spirited fight that you put to protect our moral fibre as a country. This is not surprising because your track record of uplifting our norms, culture and integrity of our morals as a country is unbeatable. You did what you have always done and I am proud of you. 

Madam Speaker, you must realise that such a thing that comes up at an international platform is part of the big plan by the promoters of homosexuality to franchise their moral virus to kill our moral fiber of not only Ugandans but Africans in general. Otherwise, when you kill the moral fibre, you are exposing someone to death early and that is why all this leads to contracting of the killer disease including HIV. 

Generally, because of the beauty of our land in Africa, our brothers and sisters could have a wish to stay here in the near future. Therefore, we must be careful. However, I would like to urge us to pick a leaf from this. In Uganda, what is happening is that pornography is at its best. We cannot continue lamenting. We have to reflect on what is on the ground. Look at pornography; we do not have good examples among our celebrities. They are the people who have stripped naked in public. They do anything even when someone’s name is dying, he or she will try to strip naked to come back into media.

Further examples include the films – for those of us who have an opportunity to represent people in the upcountry areas, there are film shows but there is a habit of increasing the volumes of those loudspeakers high outside the film shows. They are locally called bibanda. What disturbs my mind is that as they show everything, the general public is listening including our children. Sometimes, during holidays when my children are at home, I get scared. We need to look at that - I would like to request that those who wish to listen to whatever is happening in a film show should enter inside the film show halls. In fact, those film halls should have soundproofs so that they do not intoxicate the public.

In addition, on our televisions and radio stations, there are certain shows that involve mature situations. They are called soap operas and they are showed during wrong hours. My fellow parents, you will realise that sometimes you find children superglued in front of televisions watching such programmes, including our very well-known television stations yet those shows include mature situations.

Madam Speaker, we have a big challenge. I would like to urge that we should look at our responsible ministries, the security we have and other people to look at the softwares. As these people tried to bring it up from the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) level, they have also brought it down to the grassroots. Otherwise, before we know it, we shall be destroyed.

Therefore, as Parliament, we should put our feet down and try to look at what is exposing our young people. It is very funny to be watching a television programme with my child and see someone going into things that are supposed to be done by adults. Surely, it breaks my heart. We need to do something. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.50
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion to thank and congratulate you upon choosing the right path; a path of conviction not convenience. If you had chosen to go for convenience, it would come along with money. Therefore, the decision you took is of a true African. It is a decision that is Ugandan, a decision that is acceptable in Kumi, specifically Kumi Municipality.

Madam Speaker, for anyone to support homosexuality, it tantamounts to supporting sexual terrorism and violence, which to me, cannot attract any smile from anyone. I wonder how people talk about homosexuality. I have never seen a man being able to attract a smile from a fellow man. I do not know what is happening to some people. I am wondering what is going wrong. I cannot imagine it. It is unacceptable, unthinkable, unwarranted, uncalled for and it is not African at all. 

I am a hero of my own in the fight against homosexuality but there are heroes who deserve to be thanked and that is you,   Madam Speaker. Together with hon. Bahati, I consider him to be the unsung heroes because he brought the Bill here. I am quite aware that there are countries to date he cannot go to because of the Bill he brought to the House. Therefore, we would like to express our gratitude without reservation to congratulate the two of you, for being the stars of this country. (Applause) You stood with us and we would like to appreciate. Most often, I disagree with you, hon. Bahati, especially on the issue of loans. However, on the issue of homosexuality, I agree with you in totality. (Laughter) 

I would like to conclude by saying that people of Kumi Municipality do not condone any act of homosexuality. We stand with you and those who say the right way is the biblical way; man to woman and woman to man not the other way round. It is impossible. For us, day and night, that is the stand we shall maintain. For God and My Country. Thank you.

5.52
MR PAUL AKAMBA (Independent, Busiki County, Namutumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. Allow me thank hon. Nsaba Buturo, for moving this motion. I rise to support the motion. I was privileged to be part of the delegation the Speaker led to Geneva. It is worth congratulating the Rt Hon. Speaker because it was a battle. There was a clear design to defeat the African interest. Right from the sectoral committee meetings, they did not want to hear anything negative about homosexuality. They put the issue to vote at the sectoral committee without quorum despite resistance from the Members the Speaker designated to that committee; they said this is done.

They were willing to offer any amount of money as long as their cause was accepted. They were willing even to offer to members that they would come to their countries and help them win elections. However, we were very firm that we had the commander and indeed, when it came to the General Assembly Meeting of the IPU, we were very confident that nothing would go in a mess. We took the whole day – they were discussing useless things and bringing up matters for the purposes of delaying the issue, such that Members could get tired and go away. Indeed, by the time the motion was read, most of the African delegations had left but the Rt Hon. Speaker was still seated with her team. (Laughter)

Honourable members, I must tell you that she was equipped with all ammunitions to shoot it down. (Applause) If that had failed, she was equipped with the issue of quorum because the manner in which it was smuggled was not proper. In fact, there was no quorum. At all costs, it was going to be shot down by none other than our honourable Speaker. (Applause)

I observe that we are at a risk because we are a country that does not support homosexuality. None of the religions that we have in Uganda support homosexuality and without a law, we are at a risk of these people infiltrating the country. 

I know hon. Bahati, now being on the frontbench, may not bring this Bill. However, very soon I may seek leave of the House to present a Private Member’s Bill. We need the law to guard our country and our generations against this vice of homosexuality and on this, I am very determined. 

Colleagues, when I seek leave of the House, I request in advance that you support me because it is for a good cause. Thank you, Madam Speaker. I congratulate you.

5.57
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to congratulate you for being a courageous woman in defending our values and what counts for us as Ugandans and Africans at large.

It takes a very courageous woman to go out there and stand firm in the face of the whites against what is “un-African”. I would like to join my colleagues in congratulating you and thanking you; we are behind you.

Madam Speaker, when I was campaigning to come to Parliament, this was one of the things that the voters told me to come and be on the guard. I am together with you and my other colleagues to make sure that we guard our children and country and Africa.

These people want to attack the institution of marriage; they want to redefine what marriage is. I do not understand what they mean by being “husband” and “wife” when they are both men. I do not know where they fall exactly because I do not want to be displaced. When I look around in Parliament here, I do not see any woman who is so handsome enough to become my husband (Laughter).  Therefore, I would like to safeguard my position as a woman and what belongs to me.

We have to be watchful on what goes on in our institutions because many a time, we have heard this vice spread quietly in some of these boarding schools, including primary and secondary schools and also in other government and even private institutions.

We have to liaise with the local governments because this thing goes right up to the local governments. They go in the name of opening schools and indirectly spread this vice; paying school fees for the needy children yet they are trying to promote homosexuality and gay relationships. 

Finally, we have to stand behind the churches to make sure that we help them wherever we go to talk about this vice and talk against it and make sure that we stand together. Together, we shall overcome this vice. I would like to thank you so much for what you have done for our country. 

6.00
MR HERBERT ARIKO (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Nsaba Buturo for this motion. I stand here to second the motion and to support it for three core reasons:

First of all, your actions define what they call good leadership. Secondly, what you did, according to the writings of Henrik Ibsen, points to what they call daring, for without fear of public opinion. Indeed, you did not take a neutral position in the time of moral crisis. 

Many times as leaders, we are faced with a moral crisis. We are faced with situations where our actions and words are supposed to guide society and indeed many times, leaders do not stand out. Dante, an Italian poet said that the hottest part in hell shall be reserved for those who in a time of moral crisis shall preserve their neutrality.

You did not remain neutral even when it was difficult for people to say; even when you were in the midst of people who are the promoters of homosexuality; you indeed mentioned and stood firm. We, therefore, support leaders such as yourself and indeed, you defined what good and exemplary leadership means.

Therefore, as a proponent of the natural school of thought, I would like to say that a law should not only be proper but it must take into consideration the moral fibre of such a society. I, therefore, in supporting this motion, wish to propose that the Bill or the Act which was nullified by the court then, needs to not only come as a thought, as my honourable colleague said,  but it must become one of the urgent businesses of our agenda in this House. (Applause)

Section 145 of the Penal Code Act under natural offences prohibits unnatural acts of sex but it is insufficient. We would like a law that takes and brings culpable all those who abet, procure, promote and finance homosexual activities. Therefore, as we commend you for your actions, now that hon. Bahati is encumbered with the position that he is in, we would like, together with honourable colleagues of like mind, to reintroduce a Bill that prohibits homosexuality in this country. I thank you so much.

6.05
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of this motion and I also support it. I would like to thank and congratulate you for being courageous. You were able to say no to homosexuality. Outside there where those people who like it were looking at you, you did not fear what would happen to you after. Thank you for that courage. (Applause)

Homosexuality is unnatural in humans and even those who practice it know that it is bad. However, there are a few disgruntled people who failed in their marriages and decided to console themselves. Then, they spread homosexuality to people to claim it is a human right. These are failures in life. 

God has created all these different parts for specific purposes; the mouth is for eating, the ears for hearing and the sexual organs for procreation. (Laughter) Have you ever seen anybody eating through the ear? No, you cannot; it is unnatural. Therefore, it is the same with the anus; you cannot use it for sex. It cannot work, Madam Speaker. That is why as Africans, we stood firm and said no to homosexuality and we shall continue to say no. 

We passed the Bill which the President signed in a very big ceremony but some few people among us who love money were bought and they worked hard to squash it through the court. The Bill was signed; we need to bring it here and pass it. I do not know why you are delaying. We need to pass this Bill again so that we bring to book those people abusing our children in schools, homes and everywhere. We must say no to homosexuality –(Member timed out.)

6.07
MS PROSSY MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Rubanda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also stand here to support the motion and to thank you so much for what you did. I remember that evening as they showed on TV how you talked to them while you were seated at the back; I was making noise in your support. 

Madam Speaker, what hurts me the most is that - I think the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should have been fully represented here. It is because homosexuality mostly affects the youth in schools and it hurts so much when you meet a parent whose kid is involved in homosexuality. 

I remember I met a young boy and as we were sharing, I realised the boy was speaking like a girl; he had a lot of makeup and hair. I kept wondering and after he had left the room where we were, one of my friends told me the parents chased him from home because they could not take it.

Homosexuality is really affecting the youth; our children in schools need to be helped. We are now trying to talk about it at a very high level but when you go down, what is happening is alarming. They used to talk about only single sex schools but it is now going as far as mixed schools because a lot of money is involved.

You stood up with other Members who were there to challenge it. However, children are given money by those rich people who are coming in because they know the youth can be bought with any amount of money- (Member timed out.) 

6.10
MR RICHARD GAFABUSA (NRM, Bwamba County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support this motion and I will begin by thanking hon. Nsaba Buturo for raising this motion. I take this opportunity to join my colleagues to passionately congratulate and thank you on behalf of the people of Bwamba County.

When this matter came, we were all watching TV and my people said that if the Speaker, Rebecca Kadaga, came to Bundibugyo, we would crown her our queen. (Laughter)

I would like to associate myself with the proposal to urgently bring back and enact a strong law against homosexuality. Why? I would like to agree with what the minister said about the scientific view about homosexuality. Sociologically, homosexuality is an act of social deception. It is not natural at all. 

Social deception is a process by which we try to make wrong right or we make right wrong. It is through a process of learning. The reason we need a strong law now is because the engineers of this act are very strategic, deliberate and structured in what they are doing.

An act of sexual deception has about six stages. What we should guard against is to be allowed to be taken through these six stages of social deception. The first stage is what we call the shocker stage. The first time you heard about homosexuality, you must have been shocked that a man can sleep with a fellow man –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

6.13
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We congratulate you for standing strong internationally. It would not have been very easy. 

When we go to the Bible which was brought by those missionaries, there is no wisdom in men sleeping with fellow men or women sleeping with fellow women. However, it is again the missionaries who brought homosexuality and lesbianism. 

I heard that in Germany, they have even accepted incest. It is very immoral. I am a biologist and biologically, close relatives cannot actually produce strong children. That is inbreeding which is not allowed; it is very bad. 

Homosexuality has spread because of poverty. They use our young people; they lure them with good money and sometimes send them abroad. Therefore, we must be on watch. 

To parents, we need to help our children with assertiveness. It is usually children that are very humble that are taken away quickly. Humility is good but they must be assertive and stand their ground. 

We should try to train our children early. When we leave our children to their surrounding - right now, we have information technology; it is very good but it also has its bad side. It is because IT exposes -(Member timed out.)

6.16
MS BRENDA ASINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion and congratulate you for what you stood for. This issue of homosexuality is something that is common and eating up Uganda slowly but surely.

We have some institutions mostly single sex schools where a lesbian who has been found in the act is suspended for a week and someone who has stolen a pen being expelled from the school. 

There are some students who are given money to come to school just for this cause. We have to fight this vice and it would be better if we put up a campaign against homosexuality. When bringing this Bill, I pray that my colleagues also bring the Bills against bestiality and incest such that we can finish these once and for all. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us move to close with Commissioner Ogwal.

6.17
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, we have been heard and it doesn’t matter whether we all speak. We are all in agreement that all Ugandans are proud of you representing them – (Applause)

I say this because when our voters hear us talking about this thing in a united manner, it means that we are true representatives of the people. There are times that they think we are too intellectual to understand what they feel but as a true Ugandan daughter, we are very proud to see you behave like a Ugandan wherever you are.

Madam Speaker, when we talk about the issue of homosexuality, I would like to remind Ugandans about two things. First of all, I remember some years back, a woman would not put on jeans and walk freely on the streets of Kampala, Kamuli and worse still in Lango. However, today you can put on trousers either tight or baggy and nobody cares.

Therefore, if we overlook what is happening now, time is coming when homosexuality will be a normal practice in our community. However, how do we deal with it? We have talked and I know what you feel and you know what we all feel and we know what our people feel. Unless we have a strong law that will stop each and every one - it doesn’t matter where you are - from practicing homosexuality, it is spreading like paraffin.

It is very sad that already this homosexuality is spreading clandestinely and we know it. In the churches and schools, it is happening yet there is nothing we can mention about it. 

I would like to urge my colleague that it is not about Africanism, culture or tradition; it is about preserving our values. What makes you different from others –(Interjection)– exactly from animals? I used that language in ACP-EU and hon. Michael Cashman from UK almost hit me because we used to debate with him personally since it had become personal.

I said, if a male dog knows where a bitch is before they can practice what they want, it means you put me below animals to go for another woman. I remember in the Pan African Parliament, a South African lady was advocating and justifying why South Africa has adopted that culture and I asked her, can I divorce my husband and you remarry me? The woman said, “Yeah, you look very beautiful but I do not know whether I will handle you” –(Laughter)

Therefore, people know what we feel and they will not try you when you know you cannot tolerate the culture. We have to preserve our values; even God has supported us on that. 


I would want to conclude by saying that let us not just talk. Let us bring this law into existence and we pass it. This time round, nothing will go wrong. We will do a roll call by eyes, by division of the House and we will see those who are going to hide and we will expose them. Bring the law and we pass it and then we will go home and talk to our voters on why we adopted it. Members, let us not bury our heads in the sand.

Some years back, our Speaker was condemned and ridiculed because of that position but if we stand firm as a country, we will prevail. May God bless you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know that the topic is very important but we need to close. There is overwhelming support. I put the question that the motion be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wanted us to go to item six but I suggest we receive it when we are a bit fresh so that we can debate it from a point of information. House is adjourned to 2 o’clock tomorrow afternoon. 

(The House rose at 6.20 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 12 April 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) 

