

Tuesday, 14 April 2020

Parliament met at 2.18 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. As you will note, we have now come to the tent, having moved, first from the Parliamentary Chamber to the Conference Hall, and now to the parking lot. This is to ensure that we are able to accomplish our obligations within the Constitution but at the same time, to keep safe. 

We are getting support from the Ministry of Health and all the Members will be issued with masks to enable them to participate comfortably in the proceedings. 

Honourable members, an impression has been created that we do not want to go away. Hwwever, we are not here because we want to be here but we are here because we have constitutional obligations, which we need to accomplish. 

Part of the work this week will be to actualise Article 152 of the Constitution, dealing with taxation. The Constitution, under Article 152, provides that no tax shall be imposed, except under the authority of an Act of Parliament. So, it is only Parliament that can impose those taxes. Therefore, we are due to debate the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, Stamp Duty Bill, the VAT Bill, Tobacco Control Bill, among others. These will be brought to us by the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Additionally, we are going to sit, under Article 155(4), to receive and process the reports from the Committee on Budget. Article 155(4) provides as follows: “At any time before Parliament considers the estimates of revenue and expenditure laid before it by or on the authority of the President, an appropriate committee of Parliament may discuss and review the estimates and make appropriate recommendations to Parliament.”
So, we shall receive this from the Budget Committee.

Thirdly, under Article 156(1), “The heads of expenditure contained in the estimates, other than expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund by this Constitution or any Act of Parliament, shall be included in the Bill to be known as an Appropriation Bill, which shall be introduced to Parliament to provide for the issue from the Consolidated Fund of monies necessary to meet the expenditure and the appropriation of those sums for the purposes specified in that Bill.” So, we shall also be debating the Appropriation Bill.

Honourable members, on your behalf, I would like to extend our appreciation and commendation to the health workers who have been at the frontline in the battle to contain the spread of COVID-19. We know that a number of Ugandans have been cleared and some have been discharged. Quite a number who are in quarantine, have also gone home. 

So, we would like to really thank our health workers for a job well-done. I want to add that we are also supporting the Ministry of Health, in addition to the ambulances. The parliamentary fleet of buses and coasters have been placed at the disposal of the Ministry of Health to transport the health workers here within Kampala. As you know, many of them do not have transport. So, that is also the contribution of Parliament.

The last matter, has to do with the MV Kalangala, our ferry has been taken to Mwanza for service. I do not know when we shall develop our own capacity. Since Financial Year 2015/2016, we have been waiting for the establishment of the Maritime University in Namasagali. I have checked with the Budget Committee and I understand it is not even provided for, five years, after a decision was taken by the Parliament that this should be done. 

If we had our own Maritime University, we would not be sending our ships and ferries to Tanzania, for simple things like servicing. However, here we are. I do hope that the Budget Committee will take note of this. It is a long outstanding pledge by the Government to establish the Maritime University. Thank you very much.

Now, honourable members, this is just to remind the whips that as you can look at the spacing, we only expect 80 members of Parliament to be here. I have seen a number of parties who have exceeded their pro rata allotment. I am just saying it is only 80 Members of Parliament. If you submit more than your percentage in the House, you will have to ensure that they get out. So, we shall go pro rata according to our numbers, within the House.

It is only 80 Members and the Cabinet should not exceed 10 Members. Only Members who have business on the Order Paper will be able to get an opportunity to sit in the Chamber.

2.26
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of national importance. Last week, from Thursday to date, Arua has been making news once again. This has been in regard to a nurse who wheeled a patient for a distance of about 3 kilometres to Arua Regional Referral Hospital, from Ediofe Health Centre III. 

Madam Speaker, it is a long story but because of time, I will go to the gist of the matter. This lady was faced with a situation where she had a patient who was doing badly and the patient had been referred to Arua Regional Referral Hospital. The health unit had requested for an ambulance from the district taskforce. Unfortunately, there was a delay in availing this ambulance for taking the patient to Arua Regional Referral Hospital. 

As the situation of the patient was deteriorating, the Health Unit Management offered a wheelchair to the attendant of the patient to wheel the patient to the regional referral hospital. Now, because the nurse knew the patient, she felt empathy and decided to assist the attendant of the patient and wheeled this patient from Ediofe Health Centre III to Arua Regional Referral Hospital and she did it successfully. 

Madam Speaker, as this nurse rolled the patient to the hospital, somebody took the picture and put it on social media. The picture went viral; it attracted both local and international comments. Some were in appreciation of her heroic act, while also condemning the district taskforce for not having acted in time to avail the ambulance to take the patient. 

We thought that this nurse would be positively recognised by the district taskforce and also commended for the selflessness. Instead, the following morning, the deputy RDC - who is also a member of the district taskforce - drove to the health unit and searched for this lady up to her place of residence and threatened to de-register her and also to close the health centre, claiming that the act of wheeling this patient to Arua Regional Referral Hospital had put Government in bad light. 

This threat caused a lot of fear. The lady went into hiding. Actually, the deputy RDC summoned her to come to the district taskforce meeting the following day, which was Sunday. When this matter came to my attention, I picked it up. I looked for the lady’s telephone number because after being threatened, she switched off her phones. I had to use other people to look for her until I got access to her and confirmed from her that indeed the deputy RDC had gone with a team of soldiers and intimidated her and she was, therefore, in fear and in hiding. 

When I called the DHO, he narrated to me where the fault was and I advised on what they needed to do. What this lady did was out of humility and, therefore, did not deserve any harassment; she should instead be encouraged. 

As we speak, yesterday, the father of the lady went to the RDC to find out – he went to her home and did not find her and he got scared. He thought his daughter had been abducted. Instead of the RDC handling this man in a calm manner, she threatened to arrest the father of the lady. 

The situation became a bit tense. The relatives became chaotic. They actually wanted to storm the RDC’s office this morning. I thought the behaviour of the deputy RDC was uncalled for.

I wanted to put it to Government that in this critical situation, we expect Government to particularly guide the district taskforces on how they should handle health workers. For a nurse of a private hospital volunteering to roll a patient on a wheelchair for a distance of three kilometres and instead of being recognised as a heroine she is victimised and harassed, is shameful. 

We have heard cases where some of these RDCs have been slapped and others have been locking offices of LCV chairmen. I think it is high time we streamlined how these district taskforces should act. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, is the issue of facilitation for the district taskforces. Many donations have been received but some of the issues - for example, the poor coordination - are due to lack of vehicles. What are all these vehicles that have been received by the Prime Minister doing here? They should be sent to the districts – 

THE SPEAKER: What are your prayers?

MR ATIKU: My prayer, Madam Speaker, is to attend to this nurse’s situation. This is a lady that should actually be recognised and appreciated for exemplary exhibition of what our health workers are doing on ground. I, therefore, would like to put it to you and Government that instead of this lady being threatened and scared, she should be appreciated. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to appeal to you to take this matter up so that we can help this lady instead of instilling fear and discouraging people from offering support when indeed the support is needed. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. I saw the lady and I commended her. I will nominate her for an award – I know Labour Day will not take place but I will nominate her for an award on 3rd June. (Applause)

In the meantime, the Minister for the Presidency should take up this matter. They should be assisting her to do her work instead of intimidating her. Please inform the Minister for the Presidency to handle that issue. 

I had indicated that the Ministry of Health is sending us some masks; I have just received them. They are 500 pieces and are reusable; so you can wash them and use them again after. They will be distributed. They are made here in Uganda, from NYTIL. This is more “Buy Uganda, Build Uganda”. (Applause)

2.35
MR MOSES WALYOMU (NRM, Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the deliveries of COVID-19 supplies by the National Medical Stores (NMS). 

On 8 April 2020, I received a message on my phone from the National Medical Stores, indicating that they had delivered supplies of COVID-19 to Jinja District. They went ahead to indicate the person who received these supplies. I contacted the District Health Officer, Dr Dyogo, and to my surprise, he said he had not received anything from NMS. I then contacted Baguma, the one they claimed had received the supplies for COVID-19 for Jinja District.

When Baguma declared what he received, I was surprised. He received - for the entire Jinja District - one pair of Ebola safety goggles. The National Medical Stores claimed that these are supplies for COVID-19 for Jinja District yet he received one Ebola disposable cover-up, one Ebola disposable surgical gown, one Ebola protective apron –(Interjections)– Yes, Ebola. That is what he received.

The message was that they were supplies for COVID-19 for Jinja District but I am telling you what Baguma received. He also received one pair of gumboots, 25 pairs of disposable medical inspection gloves, one infrared thermometer, 100 pieces of bio-hazard bags, one ORS sachet for the whole district – moreover it is Jinja District, with a population of over 500,000 people. He also received four tins of panadol, equivalent to 4,000 tablets. He received five tins of flagyl for the whole district – those are 5,000 tablets. He also received five tins of Ibuprofen.

Madam Speaker, I do not know whether the deliveries were for the district or one hospital only. When I consulted Baguma, he said he is not the district stores assistant –(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: What are your prayers?

MR WALYOMU: Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Health should follow up on the deliveries and the COVID-19 supplies to our districts. Secondly, adequate COVID-19 supplies should be made to our district hospitals. Thirdly, drug supplies should be in line with the requisitions from the districts. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Ministry of Health is required to establish the situation surrounding the COVID-19 supplies to Jinja District and come and update this House, maybe, by the end of this week. Let us have hon. Lamwaka for two minutes.

2.41
MS CATHERINE LAMWAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Omoro): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance. On 12 April 2020, Omoro District was hit by heavy rains and strong winds that led to massive destructions in the communities, particularly Lalogi Trading Centre in Lalogi Subcounty. The rains and strong winds destroyed roofs at Lalogi Health Centre IV, which is the biggest health facility in the district. The roof of the outpatient department was totally blown off. The roof of the hearth clinic was blown off. At the maternity ward, four solar panels of 190 watts were all damaged. These solar panels were the ones supplying power to the maternity ward.

Madam Speaker, it is unfortunate that last night, we had about five mothers in the maternity ward for delivery and they could not be helped because there was no power. The health workers had to use a torch. The same rains and winds destroyed about 10 houses in the neighbourhood of the health facility.

My prayer is the Ministry of Health should quickly move in, to restore the conditions of this health facility as it is the biggest in the district, especially now that we are struggling to fight COVID-19. This facility serves Omoro District, Oyam District and part of Pader District.

Another tragic event in Omoro District is that, as we fight against COVID-19, up to 47 per cent of the community does not have access to safe and clean water. The district relies on borehole water and we have 511 boreholes. However, 243 of them have broken down. My prayer is that the Ministry of Water and Environment steps up its effort so that they are able to compliment the fight against COVID-19, as the Ministry of Health is doing its work. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Despite COVID-19, the Ministry of Health should take interest in the damage to Lalogi Health Centre IV and take remedial measures. The Ministry of Water and Environment should also ensure that safe and clean water is available for the people of Omoro. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON ACTIONS TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT OF UGANDA ON THE RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO APPROVE THE BILATERAL AGREEMENT SIGNED BY THE GOVERNMENT OF UGANDA AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH SUDAN CONCERNING PAYMENT OF MONIES OWED TO UGANDA-SOUTH SUDAN TRADERS BY THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH SUDAN

THE SPEAKER: Minister in charge of finance? Is he the one I see going away? Where is he going? (Laughter)

2.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, on this item, we had agreed that hon. Matia Kasaija would respond. Therefore, we are calling him to come. 

THE SPEAKER: They are going to look for him. Yes, hon. Macho.

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, I have risen on a matter of procedure concerning the behaviour of the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Many times, issues concerning finance come on the Floor of Parliament and the state minister, David Bahati, has categorically said that those issues are going to be presented by his senior minister. However, often times when it comes to his turn, the minister dodges. I do not know whether we are proceeding well. 

I do not also know whether the Prime Minister is in charge of the Cabinet. Whenever it comes to issues of finance, the minister runs away. He runs away in a kangaroo way. You cannot leave your deputy minister behind without a reason on such a matter of national importance. Many people are suffering because this issue has been postponed for many times.

Therefore, the Prime Minister should give a statement on this matter. This is a total demonstration that some ministers in this Government are above the Prime Minister, unless he comes and tells this House that he is managing the Cabinet. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Prime Minister, this matter has been on the Order Paper for almost a fortnight and the minister had undertaken to respond. Therefore, please, arrange for him to come before we close business today.

Let us go to Item 3(II) – I hope he is not the same person to respond.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON FAILURE BY THE GOVERNMENT OF UGANDA TO COMPLY WITH THE FINANCIAL ACTION TASK FORCE (FATF) POLICIES AND SUBSEQUENT SUSPENSION OF UGANDA PASSPORT HOLDERS RESIDENT IN THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH KOREA FROM REMITTING MONEY USING WESTERN UNION AND OTHER REMITTANCE SERVICES

2.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, on this issue of South Korea and our country being blacklisted, we crosschecked whether Uganda is blacklisted and we found that we are not blacklisted. There is only one issue, which we are supposed to work upon and once we correct it, we will be fine.

However, there is nothing like being blacklisted. Therefore, we would like to undertake to get in touch with that particular individual who cannot transfer money from South Korea to Uganda so that we can find out what the problem is. Otherwise, we are not blacklisted. In other words, we can transact freely across the world. (Interruption)

MR ILUKOR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give to the honourable minister is that the information is very available and the minister is aware that Uganda was suspended for failing to fulfil certain conditions.

Madam Speaker, it was because of that suspension that our citizens in South Korea are unable to transact any business as far as remitting money to Uganda is concerned yet the minister is here telling us that Uganda is not blacklisted and that there is only one thing that they need to correct. When are they correcting that thing? Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, each time you want us to handle the issue of the FATF, you stampede us and we work fast. We enacted the law and even amended it. What is that thing that  is still remaining? I know it is not in our hands. Let me first hear from the minister.

2.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES)(Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have had the opportunity to attend most of the Anti-Money Laundering and FATF meetings. 

Madam Speaker, if you will recall, last year, there were two clauses that FATF requested us to amend in our Anti-Money Laundering law and that was done. Having completed that process, Uganda migrated from the grey area to an area, where we are able to transact freely in all the countries in the world. 

As my colleague has said, we need to investigate this particular incident and find out what the reasons are. However, as far as Government is concerned, we have been removed from that grey list into an area where we are able to make financial transactions across the world without hindrances. I can therefore confirm that this stumbling block was removed last year when we amended those two clauses.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter was raised early last week and we expected answers. Hon. Bahati, you undertook to respond to this issue. 

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, one of my constituents called Ziremawa is in a situation that is prevailing in South Korea, which hon. Elijah Okupa talked about. The information that was given to him was in regard to Anti-Money Laundering. 

Madam Speaker, I was in Denmark in February but I was not allowed to change money. They told me Uganda is one of the countries blacklisted for non implementation of the Anti-Money Laundering laws and therefore, I couldn’t exchange more than US$ 500. This has not only happened in South Korea but even in Denmark.

Madam Speaker, this is a real situation. I do not know whether you will say that there is a slight thing that is in Denmark, which is different from what is happening in South Korea. I think there is something that the ministry needs to work upon to manage what is happening. Otherwise, this is going to cost majority of Ugandans wherever they are. Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, what we can do, as Government, is to promise to handle this matter with the countries mentioned here - South Korea and Denmark - and come back to this House. Otherwise, as far as we are concerned, we are not blacklisted anywhere yet our citizens are being blocked from transferring money. The best we can do is to take it up with the embassies, find out the problem and then we can come back and inform the House.

THE SPEAKER: Can you give us a response next week?

MR BAHATI: Yes, we can get the response next week.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, next Tuesday. Item 3(4).

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON FAILURE BY MASAKA REGIONAL REFERRAL HOSPITAL TO ATTAIN THE MINIMUM 50 PER CENT PASS MARK ON THE CERTIFICATE OF GENDER AND EQUITY COMPLIANCE IN RESPECT OF THEIR POLICY STATEMENTS AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2020/2021

2.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we agreed as a House that the responsible minister, whose department failed to comply with the Certificate of Gender and Equity, should come and answer. I think it is the Ministry of Health that is supposed to answer why Masaka Regional Referral Hospital did not comply with the law. Otherwise, our job was to present these institutions, which we did in the last Sitting.

THE SPEAKER: Similarly, Item 3(b) is also under Ministry of Health. Reflect it on the Order Paper tomorrow. Ministry of Foreign Affairs are not here. Please advise them to be in the House tomorrow.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Bahati has said that the line ministry should be the one to explain yet, as far as hon. Bahati and I know, when his ministry is processing any form of clearance to any ministry such as the Certificate of Financial Implications, there are conditions that they consideer. Hon. Bahati  should explain to this House the conditions that they consider before issuing the certificate and before pushing that blame or responsibility to the line ministry.

THE SPEAKER: This was a certificate of Gender and Equity compliance.

MR NZOGHU: I am asking him to tell this House what they consider to give out a Certificate of Financial Implications to any ministry, department or agency. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I wish hon. Nzoghu had read the record of the House then he would ask the right question because we are talking about the Certificate of Gender and Equity. So, as a requirement of the Public Finance Management Act, before we submit the budget, each department and agency should comply with this.

The institutions listed here did not comply and we agreed as a House - according to section 78 of the Public Finance Management Act, to give an explanation to the House. I do not get clearly what hon. Nzogu is asking but I can have a bilateral after this House to understand him better about this matter.

THE SPEAKER: I will cross-check with the law and come back to you.

3.00
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, PWD Representative Central): Madam Speaker, I rise on a similar issue relating to the issuance of a certificate of Gender and Equity. This is a very important provision in the Public Finance Management Act.

Currently, we are in a situation where we are saying that without a statement coming before this august House, we will not be able to consider for appropriation the votes for the four entities. They are not our words but of the Public Finance Management Act. If this statement is not obtained here, we will not be able to proceed with the appropriation for the votes for Masaka Regional Hospital, Uganda Virus Research Institute, the Uganda Mission in Germany and the Uganda Mission in South Africa.

These are very important institutions and yet we are required to do appropriation very soon. I am tempted to believe that the minister of finance is right to say that other entities are responsible for giving an explanation. However, it is very important for me to remind the minister of finance that the Certificate of Gender Equity was tabled in the House by the minister of finance. The minister will be moving or asking this House to approve the funding for these entities we are talking about. 

My understanding is that it is the minister for finance who will be required to defend the budget and also come here and explain to us why the entities failed to meet the requirements for issuance of the Certificate of Gender and Equity. I am tempted and believe that it is the minister of finance to come here and make the statement. Thank you, so much.

THE SPEAKER: I also remember that earlier, the senior Minister of Finance had to explain certain things relating to some agencies but bring me the law.

Honourable members, section 13(i)g of the Public Finance Management Act states, 

“(i) a certificate issued by the minister responsible for finance in consultation with the Equal Opportunities Commission certifying that the policy statement is gender and equity responsive.”

(ii) 	“Specifying measures taken to equalise the opportunities for men, women, persons with disabilities and other marginalised groups.”

So, minister of finance, it is your responsibility. You are the one who issues the certificate.

MR BAHATI:  Madam Speaker,as you will recall, when it came to the policy statements, there were ministries that had failed to submit the policy statements in time and you referred the House to section 78 about failure to comply with this Act.

In the same spirit, you again directed that those who failed to comply with the Certificate of Gender and Equity should also give an explanation, just like those that failed to submit the ministerial policy statements in time did.

We issued the certificate and said, these ones had failed. We cannot be the same people to come and explain why these institutions failed when they are around.

THE SPEAKER: Now let me draw your attention to section 78 of the Public Finance Management Act; 

“Liability on failure to meet requirements

(1) 	Where any institution or department of Government which receives public money does not meet the requirements of this Act or contravenes this Act, Parliament may request the minister responsible for the institution or department to make a report to Parliament with an explanation on the matter.”

The minister responsible for the sector is the one who is supposed to explain the failure to comply.

3.05
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I remember when they were presenting the statements, I rose to speak about the matter and you guided that it would be dealt with at committee stage. We moved past the committee stage and we are back to the House and I see the Prime Minister comfortably seated because this becomes a responsibility of Government.

We assume that the Prime Minister should superintend over the minister but if the minister and the entire technical team has slept on the job and we are wasting time in the House, then it is timely that the Prime Minister apologises to this House. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, i think you need to crack the whip. These are obligations which we agreed to in the Act and it was a Bill brought by the Government; this is what you wanted us to do and it is what we have done.

3.07
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Madam Speaker, before the Prime Minister makes a statement, it is important for each MDA to be accountable on how it plans its budget to cater for all the ingredients of equity as assessed by the Equal Opportunities Commission. This is because it is that entity that knows how their programmes and policies are engendered and for them to prove to the Equal Opportunities Commission how the interventions seek to create and eliminate all forms of gender discrimination.

Therefore, it is important that every entity of Government that receives public funds be held to account on how its interventions and policies are engendered and how they give opportunities to all classes of society.

So, while I agree that Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has a responsibility because of being the overall in-charge of the budget, Madam Speaker, I request that the responsibility remains on each MDA. That is what the Equal Opportunities Commission, which is empowered by law, assesses. They assess the ministerial policy statement of each entity. 

Madam Speaker, I request that even as the Prime Minister gives a statement, the responsibility remains on each entity to ensure that the programmes are equitable and they eliminate all forms of discrimination. That is how social protection and social equity will be guaranteed across the board. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Health is required to come here tomorrow to update us on the failure by Masaka Regional Referral Hospital and also the Uganda Virus Research Institute’s failure to beat the benchmark. Ministry of Foreign Affairs should come and update us on why the missions in Germany and South Africa have failed to meet the benchmark.

Is the Ministry of Foreign Affairs here? 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON FAILURE BY THE UGANDA MISSION IN GERMANY AND UGANDA MISSION IN SOUTH AFRICA TO ATTAIN THE MINIMUM 50% PASS MARK ON THE CERTIFICATE OF GENDER AND EQUITY COMPLIANCE IN RESPECT OF THEIR POLICY STATEMENTS AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FY 2020/21

3.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS) (Mr Henry Oryem): Madam Speaker, I am here to respond to the issue of the matter of the Equal Opportunities Commission on some of our missions like Berlin in Germany and Pretoria in South Africa.

Madam Speaker, let me first apologise on behalf of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for being absent last week, when we were on the Order Paper. We should have made this very important intervention.

The report of the Equal Opportunities Commission on the compliance of the MDAs to gender and equity issues during preparations of the policy statement for Financial Year 2020/2021, has noted that our embassies in Pretoria in South Africa and Berlin in Germany were not compliant with the requirements of gender and equity in budgeting.

The ministry has continued to prioritise gender and equity issues and in this regard, is working closely working with the Equal Opportunities Commission. We are confident that our assessment will show promise. The two missions have and were instructed to revise their submissions accordingly and submit again by end of business on 9 April 2020 for the Equal Opportunities Commission to approve the assessment. We had asked them to submit by the 9th.

We received clearance from the Equal Opportunities Commission for the mission of Berlin and are still awaiting clearance for the re-submission for Pretoria. So, the Equal Opportunities Commission has cleared Berlin as having satisfied and having resubmitted. The challenge is now we are still waiting for the one for Pretoria.

The ministry, working with all our missions abroad, will continue to focus on this important issue to achieve full compliance. Madam Speaker, we appeal for the passing of the budget of the two missions of Berlin and Pretoria, subject to the improved assessment and clearance of Pretoria which is pending. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you know the Committee on Budget is already working on those sector budgets. You need to move fast. You should either reach the committee today or tomorrow before they come back to report. You heard the chairperson of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development saying they are not going to support your budgets if you do not comply.

MR ORYEM: Madam Speaker, let me once again apologise. However, I have put pressure on Pretoria to make sure they submit to the Equal Opportunities Commission. I am confident that by close of business tomorrow, we should have had clearance from Pretoria. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE ESCALATING PRICES OF FOOD AND OTHER ESSENTIAL COMMODITIES IN THE WAKE OF THE CORONAVIRUS SCOURGE WITH ITS ADVERSE IMPACT ON THE SURVIVAL OF CITIZENS

THE SPEAKER: Is the minister not here? Let us go to item five.

LAYING OF PAPERS IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 31 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

    I) SUBMISSION OF THE CORRIGENDA TO THE DRAFT BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2020/2021

3.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to submit the corrigenda to the draft budget estimates for Financial Year 2020/2021.

MR KATOTO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. I am sorry to take you back but it is a matter of life and death. As we speak now, the minister was called here to talk about the escalation of prices of essential items.

In the morning, I received a call from my constituency. People were asking me what is happening. When I was vividly listening to the President, he did not mention anything about such. For example, a packet of salt which used to be Shs 600 is now going for Shs 2,000.

I received a call from my constituency and I felt that since the matter had been mentioned here, the minister would come and at least politely urge the business people or maybe get remedies of how to contain such.

Madam Speaker, the point of procedure I am raising is that if necessary, we should at least have something about that to be mentioned in today’s sitting. We all know we are in difficult moments but we should at least consider what people are going through. I thought that through you, Madam Speaker, you could use your powers to at least make sure that the minister comes here and tell us what can be done. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter has been on the Order Paper for some days and that ministry has got three ministers. Prime Minister, we want the trade minister or any of her assistants to be here before 4.00p.m. because this matter is urgent.

    II) MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2020/2021 FOR MINISTRY OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS

3.17
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mr Jacob Opolot): Madam Speaker, in accordance with Rule 131 of our Rules of Procedure, I beg to lay the report of the Committee on Education and Sports on the Ministerial Policy Statement and budget estimates for the education sector for the Financial Year 2020/2021.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. It is submitted to the Committee on Budget for perusal and report back.

    III) REPORT ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2020/2021 FOR THE HEALTH SECTOR 

3.18
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Michael Bukenya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I request that before I lay the report, I am given two minutes to mention two important things, which I thought were important anyway. 

Whereas we are going through the COVID-19 pandemic, a lot of Ugandans, including myself - and I am sure Members of Parliament here - thought we would use this as an opportunity to take extra care of the health sector. Unfortunately, based on the submissions and provisions from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development - which we would like to appreciate for the Supplementary Budget anyway - the Executive is not much committed to improving the sector despite what has been shown during the COVID-19 pandemic. 

Whereas the committee worked on the policy statement, I would like to call upon this House to take upon the responsibility of working on behalf of Ugandans to remind the Executive that maybe God brought this virus to alert us on what may come in future. Consequently, we need more allocation to the sector. 

Madam Speaker, I do not want to say much but I can take you briefly through a few things that are not very expensive but they have not been funded, noting that Government of Uganda’s funding of the sector increased by only about Shs 62 billion. I know the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will, however, tell you that it is more because of external financing, which is on capital development. 

To start from Kampala, Kawempe Hospital is operating at 35 per cent staffing because they have no wage bill. Kiruddu Hospital, for the last three years, has not completed their sewerage issue. Someone is mentioning upcountry – In health centres IV, Government trained anaesthetic officers and anaesthetic assistants. They require about Shs 3.3 billion to be employed and yet the finance ministry has failed to provide the wage for Government-trained health workers. 

Health centres IV do not have refrigerators to keep blood for surgery. As a result, they end up sending patients to Kampala. However, they require Shs 2.2 billion to install these fridges but the money has not been availed. The list is long. Even for the ambulances that are being bought during COVID-19, there is no provision to run them during the next financial year. 

I beg the indulgence of this House and your Office, Madam Speaker, that you find a way through the Rules of Procedure, to make the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come up with something to show that the Executive cares for Ugandans. I have only mentioned three out of 30 unfunded priorities that are equally important. 

With that brief summary, basing on Rule 131 of our Rules of Procedure, allow me to lay, with a lot of pain, the report of the sectoral Committee on Health on the Ministerial Policy Statement for the Financial Year 2020/2021. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson. 

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Abdu Katuntu raised a procedural matter in relation to realigning the budget we are dealing with to take into account COVID-19. I recall you alluded to the fact that the ministerial policy statements as presented then did not take into account the effects of COVID-19 on the sectors. 

I am alive to the fact that we have been appropriating money for, for instance, defence – if you look at the classified expenditure, it is allocated Shs 3 trillion. They have been preparing for a war, which they will never fight and they are not fighting. When we look at the presentation of the chairperson of the Committee on Health and what the President himself and the Minister of Health said, it is clear the war that we have all been rallied to fight now is on COVID-19.

Therefore, I am wondering whether it will be procedurally right for us to even proceed with these budget statements without taking into account all the needs of the health sector. I seek your guidance on that, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. I expect that when the budget committee reports, we will be able to discuss some of these things. 

3.24
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri Municipality, Bugweri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think this is a very serious institution. We should not be going through some ritual or an exercise in futility. The reality today is that we are faced with COVID-19, which has affected literally every sector, including revenue collection and our expenditure. The budget, which was laid the other day - plus all these reports - do not reflect what is actually going on. I have had the opportunity to read most of the policy statements, including what came from our side. They do not reflect the reality of today.

I think it is time for the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to go back to realign this budget and we discuss something which we know is going to be implemented. Right now, we are going through an academic exercise. We are just laying papers and reports. 

Madam Speaker, I sympathise with the chairperson of the Committee on Health because he knows the magnitude of the problem –(Interjection)- I will yield the Floor –(Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, hon. Katuntu. I also would like to thank the Speaker. I am very sure none of the ministers who always go out of this country for treatment has gone away. That means they have been going to Mulago Hospital, Mbale Hospital and the rest. 

So, the information I would like to give hon. Katuntu is that for us as Parliament, today, we must make a budget which will ensure that our health sector performs better. Nobody can go to school when he is sick. Nobody can go to dig when he is sick. 

Therefore, the information I am giving is that the current budget, which we want to pass, is basically a ritual. However, COVID-19 has opened our eyes. It should, therefore, be an opportunity for us, as Parliament of Uganda, to take a decision on the health sector. 

Thank you, hon. Katuntu. 

MR KATUNTU: I know, Madam Speaker, that we are faced with timelines of the Public Finance Management Act but we must look at the reality. I do not know what the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development is coming up with but even the taxation Bills that are before us do not reflect the reality. I do not know whether they have considered those Finance Bills and they are coming up with a report, which is progressive. Or are they referring the taxation Bills back to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to have them looked at again so that what we pass is reflective of the current situation? We need guidance at this point, Madam Speaker. 

Why are we going through an academic exercise? Why doesn’t the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development recall those statements so they can bring realistic figures and estimates? Why can’t they instruct all the accounting officers in ministries to look at the priorities of their budgets and resubmit policy statements to this House for consideration? (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we shall do that when the Chairperson of the Budget Committee reports; they are going to report on every sector. Let us not go by anticipation. I have taken note of the issues. As you know, Parliament has always made health a priority. Since the Ninth Parliament, we have been supporting the health sector and so we shall be alive to it as the reports come in.

I saw the Minister for Education and Sports. What happened to Namasagali University?

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, before the minister comes in, I think we should benefit from him. I remember watching a programme on television where his senior colleague said that the schools are going to open on 27 April 2020. Is it still the case because, as parents, we have been preparing our kids to go to school on 27 April 2020? 

3.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr J.C Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Where Namasagali is right now, the premises are being occupied by Busitema University. However, there is an offer for Government to set up a university called Busoga University but at the moment – 

THE SPEAKER: No! Honourable minister, Busoga University is different from Namasagali University. The Namasagali University resolution was passed in 2015 and we have been asking why you have not established it. It should have been in the 2015/2016 budget; it has nothing to do with Busoga University. 

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, the problem has been funding, which we have not been able to secure. That is why I am saying that, currently, Busitema University’s programmes are being conducted on the Namasagali Campus. Nevertheless, the Government is still committed to setting up Namasagali University, as per the Parliament resolution passed some time back. 

Madam Speaker, the minister’s statement was very clear about the opening of schools. We came up with a plan on assumption that things would get back to normal soon. That is why it was very important for the country to listen to the guidance of His Excellency, the President, which he has ably done today. Because of the new guidance given by the President today, the Ministry of Education and Sports will go to plan afresh based on today’s President’s guidance. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. 

IV) THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FY 2020/2021

3.32
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES (Dr Keefa Kiwanuka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table, the Report of the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources on the Ministerial Policy Statements and Budget Estimates for financial year 2020/2021. This covers the Ministry of Water and Environment and the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and related agencies. I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The Clerk is asked to take note that the name of that committee was changed from “Natural Resources” to “Environment and Natural Resources.” In future, please reflect it that way. Thank you. 

Okay, the report is sent to the Budget Committee for perusal and report back. Similarly, the health budget is also sent to the Committee on Budget for perusal and report back.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO SUSPEND RULE 24 OF RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

3.34
MS VERONICA ERAGU (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to move a Motion for a Resolution of Parliament to suspend Rule 24 of Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. This motion is moved under rules 16 and 55 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

The motion reads: “WHEREAS on 9 April 2020, the Rt Hon. Speaker issued guidelines on the conduct of sittings of Parliament and committee meetings during the COVID-19 Pandemic period, wherein, the Speaker guided that sittings of the House shall only be accessible by 100 Members of Parliament; 

AWARE that Rule 24 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament provides that the quorum of Parliament is one-third of all Members of Parliament entitled to vote and Rule 96 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament designates voice voting as the default method of voting, except where the rules expressly provide otherwise; 

NOTING that the quorum prescribed in Rule 24(1) cannot be attained with the current guidelines requiring 100 members given that one-third of all members is 148 members of Parliament; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this House that Rule 24 is suspended for the duration when the guidelines issued by the Speaker are enforced.”

I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Okay, it has been seconded. Can you speak to your motion? 

MS ERAGU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In normal circumstances, this is not a motion that would require a lot of justification, particularly, considering the situation we find ourselves in today because of the COVID-19 pandemic because we are operating under very stringent measures. 
We have all the honourable Speaker’s guidelines, the health guidelines issued by the Minister of Health and above all, the presidential guidelines.

However, in all this, we have this budget to process and work through. We cannot plan for a full time House. We cannot also plan for more than 100 members at a time. 

Therefore, my justification is that we suspend some of the rules - and Rule 24 is one of those - that can be suspended. It is not among those rules that cannot be suspended. 

Madam Speaker, I invite you to see the problem and the situation that we are operating under in this light. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Earlier on, I wanted to raise it as a procedural matter but still, I will raise it. Our Rules of Procedure draw its mandate from the Constitution and Article 88 of the Constitution provides for this Parliament to have quorum. 

Therefore, the procedural matter I was raising is whether it would be proper for my honourable colleague to come here and suspend a rule that is subject to a constitutional matter, yet she does not have anything to do with an amendment of any provision of the Constitution on the Floor of Parliament. Madam Speaker, I beg your guidance on that.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think the member informed you that the particular rule is not entrenched; it is not one of those that require a constitutional amendment. 

However, honourable members, let us be reasonable. We cannot sit more than 100 people in this Chamber now. You know that and yet we must work. Please, be reasonable. (Applause) 

MR WILFRED NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, I believe that even without delving into the motion that hon. Eragu has brought, rule 8 of our Rules of Procedure gives you the authority to make directions, as you did, and which you did rightly. 

Going by the provisions of Rule 8 alone, I believe we would proceed in the right way without necessarily going to debate the motion by hon. Eragu. 

For that matter, I would beg honourable colleagues, let us adopt that motion and proceed in the circumstances and go to the crucial aspects of our being here, which is legislation. Let us deal with the tax Bills and move forward.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I wanted to be buttressed by the support of this House. I put the question that the motion be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Can we now receive the report?

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is true that we are acting under very difficult circumstances. I think, as a House, we agreed on that. Having adopted hon. Eragu’s motion, where does it leave the issue of quorum? Is it that we now don’t need quorum at the time of voting or we are adjusting quorum?

THE SPEAKER: We are adjusting quorum. 

MR KATUNTU: I would like us to do things in a correct way. If we have said okay, we don’t need that quorum, what quorum do we need because our numbers have diminished by this motion?

THE SPEAKER: One-third of the 80.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, then the record should be clear such that we are aware that now the quorum needed shall be this.

THE SPEAKER: One-third of the 80. Please, present the report.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE STAMP DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

3.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion that the Stamp Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2020 be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Okay, the motion is seconded. What is your justification?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I thought it was in the spirit of the new situation we are in that we could go straight to the report. We submitted these tax Bills and we have had interaction with the Chairperson of the Committee. 

It is true that there are so many unknowns during this period. We agreed, as a House, that we should go ahead and if any amendments or adjustments are needed in future, we will come back and amend. However, the committee has looked at the tax Bills and they have made some amendments in the context of the situation we are in. I don’t think that I need to labour a lot. I would like the House to get a report from the committee then we debate the Bill. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

3.44
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development considered the Bill entitled, “The Stamp Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2020” and made the following observations:

    1. The Stamp Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2020 proposes to amend Schedule 2 of the Stamp Duty Act, 20l4 by imposing Stamp Duty of Shs 100,000 on payment of a professional license or a certificate. This is intended to enable Uganda Revenue Authority obtain necessary information about professional service providers for purposes of enhancing their tax compliance and supports Section 135(3) of the Income Tax Act, which requires a Taxpayer Identification Number before a license is issued.

2. 	Currently, there is nil stamp duty chargeable in respect of an instrument executed by an operator who carries on business in agro-processing, food processing, medical appliances, building materials, light industry, automobile manufacturing and assembly, household appliances, furniture, logistics and warehousing, information technology or commercial farming and meets the following requirements, among others: 
(a) 	Invests US$ 1 million in case of citizens (includes all East Africans) and US$ 10 million in case of foreigners.
(b) 	A total of 70 per cent of the raw materials used are locally sourced, subject to their availability.
(c) 	Directly employs a minimum of 100 citizens.

3. 	Clause 2 under paragraphs (b) and (c) seek to extend the exemption and classify, such incentives should also be enjoyed by companies with-
    a) capacity to at least source 50 per cent of locally produced raw materials subject to availability;
    b) capacity to employ a minimum of 100 citizens. 

4. 	The requirement to employ at least 100 citizens is superficial if it is not well qualified. For example, some companies need not to employ 100 employees yet their contribution to Uganda’s GDP is much more that the companies employing 100 or more citizens in the least paying jobs and reserving the top, well-paying jobs for foreigners. 

	This defeats the purpose of this incentive which is intended to promote employment of citizens. The number of 100 citizens should be expressed as a percentage of the entire workforce as is the case with exemptions under the Value Added Tax. 

5. 	The exemption should only apply to those companies ready to reserve 70 per cent of the total wage bill for the citizens. This will ensure that more citizens are employed in skilled labour. 

6. 	Stamp duty of 0.5 per cent of the amount of a loan is charged on mortgages and debentures thereby making the cost of doing business high and discouraging investments. It is unfair for a person borrowing to lose 0.5 per cent on the loan value to stamp duty yet they already have financial difficulties. 

The committee recommends as follows;

    1. For any investor to enjoy the proposed incentives, the additional following requirements must be met:
    (a) A percentage rate of 70 per cent citizens be used to replace the current number of 100 citizens. 
    (b) Citizens employed by the company should earn 70 per cent of the total salary budget for a particular financial year.

    2. The Stamp Duty Act be amended to stop charging stamp duty on mortgages and loans.
    3. The Stamp Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2020 be passed into law subject to proposed amendments. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move. 

I would like to lay on Table, a copy of the original committee report together with the minutes and other documents which we used to scrutinise the Bill. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to thank the finance committee and the members, especially for spending the Easter here working on these taxation Bills. Thank you very much. The report has been signed by more than the necessary one-third of the members. If you have any comments, honourable members, you are free to make a contribution. 

3.52
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chair of the committee for the good report. 

I would like to put the House on notice that I intend to move an amendment at committee stage as per one of the conditions for benefiting of that exemption; that a company must not repatriate profit for a period of 365 days – one year. I beg to submit.

3.53
MS SYDA BBUMBA (NRM, Nakaseke North County, Nakaseke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the very good report. I have a concern on the exemption based on employment. 

Some years ago, telephone companies were given tax exemption on employment of people with disabilities. It was grossly abused. The people with disabilities who were employed were the lowest cadres. They were just vending airtime cards. We removed that exemption because of that abuse. 

The reason they gave was that we did not have enough of them qualified to take up management jobs. 

On top of the 70 per cent of the total wage bill going to locals, I think these people must have a programme for training locals because eventually, the locals must take over. 

Therefore, I propose that in addition to the 70 per cent of the wage bill, there should be a training programme to enable the Ugandans to take over eventually. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.54
MR JAMES MAJEGERE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The chair is proposing that they stop charging stamp duty on mortgages and loans. However, the word “loans” is not in the signed report. I therefore need some clarification because the two are different – the general loans and mortgages are different.

3.55
MR DAVID MUTEBI (NRM, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a well thought out report with regard to the provision of these incentives. 

Given the circumstances under which this economy is running now and what we anticipate in future, we need incentives more than we have ever needed them. However, they must be well targeted and focused as the committee has indicated. 

There has been that reliance on the numbers of employees, for instance, the 100 which many of these investors were able to raise, but in the actual value of what the employees obtain from that employment, it has not been worthwhile. Therefore, considering that percentage of the overall salary of 70 per cent is something beneficial to Ugandans. 

Looking at investments, companies at this point in time need more tax incentives and holidays and even lower interest rates than we have at the moment. Therefore, imposing any extra charge on their business, for instance, on a loan, would be directed to the end user – the customer - which would make businesses more difficult for businessmen to proceed. 

Therefore, the proposition of doing away with that kind of cost is worthwhile. I therefore would like to support the position of the committee regarding the basis for provision of incentives in order to appreciate what comes from the investments. I also support the position on doing away with the cost on the loans. Thank you.

3.58
MR JONATHAN ODUR: (UPC, Erute County South, Lira) Madam Speaker, I have a particular issue with the proposal in the Bill to introduce the professional licence or certificate of Shs 100,000. The chairperson of the committee has justified it by saying that, one, it will enable URA to know the taxpayer better and two, it will enhance compliance. 

Madam Speaker, if you want to know the taxpayer, you register them using the tax identification number, which in itself is free. Therefore, there is no justification here to charge a lawyer or an accountant, who is also being charged by the law council, allied health services, etc.

Secondly, if you want to enforce compliance, you can introduce a requirement for them to present a tax clearance certificate. You do not have to charge them for the tax clearance certificate. If you want to block them from practicing, you can put it as a requirement for them to introduce their tax clearance certificate. Charging them Shs 100,000 means you have now cleared them of the taxes they have been avoiding. I see a conflict in that matter – you are charging me Shs 100,000 to say that I am now tax compliant, yet I have been avoiding taxes. 

Therefore, I move that this particular provision be replaced by a tax compliant certificate or we waive it completely. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Does the chairperson wish to respond before we go to the committee stage?

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Speaker, I take note of colleague’s concerns. However, we could have also mentioned to the House that this is a source from where Government could raise some revenue. 

The Member also mentions that professional practitioners pay a lot in licence fees to their professional bodies. This is true but I would also like to give information that two years ago, we exempted all these professional bodies from paying income tax. Therefore, it is important for the House to think through this. If we are to build Uganda together, there are some areas of tax where we should –(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I remember that the exemption we gave was in respect of the professional bodies and not the individual members. For individual members of the professional bodies, especially those bodies which are statutory in nature like the legal profession where I come from, we pay licence fees annually. Therefore, if you subject us to also pay stamp duty annually, would that not amount to double taxation? 

In view of the litigious nature of our characters in society, don’t you think we will subject this Bill to litigation for double taxation?

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I belong to the Institute of Certified Public Accountants. The licence fee we pay is not taxed and it is an income to the institute. That is why I said this income is exempt from income tax. This stamp duty is going to the tax body and henceforth the Consolidated Fund as revenue to Government. 

That is why we are inviting colleagues – we know that nobody would be willing to pay tax but it would also be important to appreciate the values that taxes contribute to the growth of this economy. We are saying, if you are a professional, can doing away with Shs 100,000 per year stop you from practising? I appeal to colleagues to appreciate this and we raise some revenue 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the point being raised is about double taxation. In the legal profession, actually, lawyers pay income tax like any other. However, what is this particular one which you are raising? It is not like Government must look and find a way of picking money from everywhere. There must be logic. The incomes of these lawyers and accountants are already being taxed –(Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Speaker, I would like hon. Katuntu to clarify whether the fee that professionals pay is a tax. I would imagine that it is a professional fee and that is why the committee thinks that accepting this proposal of Shs 100,000 on a stamp – the other one is a fee and this one is a tax, leave alone the income tax you talked about because that is a constant.

MR KATUNTU: I do not know whether I got the question. Was the question from hon. Franca Akello whether stamp duty is a tax or not? Of course, it is a tax. I do not know how you define a tax but a tax is an amount you have been compelled to pay by law. The issue is actually not the amount but the principle. Why should you tax somebody twice?

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee because he is looking for avenues to bring in money. When we see such an avenue, honourable members, we should embrace it. The people they are going to charge are people who are earning heavily. In Kampala here, for example, when you go just to consult a doctor, there are places where you pay Shs 100,000. If members of our communities and villages are paying mobile money tax, why do we want to defend people who are earning a lot of money in Kampala? 

I request Members that since the money –(Interjection)– I am well informed. Madam Speaker, since the chairperson is proposing to get money from professionals and not peasants, I think we should accept that. Honourable chairperson, I think Shs 100,000 is very little. I request that you adjust the amount to Shs 300,000 or 200,000. I beg to submit. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Bill be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE STAMP DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

MR NIWAGABA: This particular clause 60A, in my view, will contradict the provisions of section 4 of the Income Tax Act. Madam Chairperson, under section 4 of the Income Tax Act, any person who is a taxpayer pays tax from his income. If we impose another tax in addition to this under the Income Tax Act, that will amount to double taxation.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, we are on clause 1, which is on commencement. I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 2 as follows:

1. 	Insert new paragraphs immediately after paragraph (a) as follows:
(a) 	“by substituting for item 60A(b)(i) the following:
‘(i) 	a minimum investment capital of $10 million in the case of a foreigner or $300,000 in case of a citizen; or $100,000 for a citizen whose investment is placed upcountry.’”

Justification:
	
1. 	To ensure that this benefits a larger proportion of the local economy. This can also be instrumental in enhancing and strengthening forward and background linkages between the free zones and/or industrial parks and Uganda's farmers, who comprise 80 per cent of the local economy.

2. 	It encourages development and investment in the rural areas as opposed to concentration of investments in the towns. 

(b) “In 60A(b)(ii) by inserting immediately after the words ‘commercial farming’ the words, ‘tyres, footwear, mattress or toothpaste’.”

The justification is to extend incentives already under other tax laws to manufacturers of tyres, footwear, mattresses or toothpaste as part of the drive to industrialise the country and replace imports. 

2. 	Delete paragraph (b).

The justification is that the current requirement of 70 per cent for locally-sourced raw materials should not be reduced to 50 per cent.  

3. 	Under paragraph (c), substitute for item 60A(iv) the following:

“(iv) employs at least 70 per cent of its employees being citizens earning an aggregate wage of at least 70 per cent of the total wage bill.”

The justification:

1. 	The number of 100 citizens should be expressed as a percentage of the entire workforce as is the case with exemptions under the Value Added Tax Act.

2. 	The exemption should only apply to those companies ready to reserve 70 per cent of the total wage bill for citizens. This will ensure that more citizens are employed in skilled positions.

    4. Insert new paragraphs as follows: 
    5. 
“by substituting for items 27, 30, 33 and 37 as follows:
Debenture – whether a mortgage debenture or not, being of a marketable security - of the total value, Nil.
Equitable Mortgage – of the total value, Nil.

Further charge - any instrument imposing a further charge on mortgaged property - of the total value, Nil.

Instrument – for any loan, Nil.”

The justification is that it is unfair for a person borrowing to lose 0.5 per cent of the loan value to stamp duty, yet they already have financial difficulties.

Madam Chairperson, there is a small correction to make in (a) (i) where I read $100,000 instead of $150,000. I beg to submit.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am proposing an amendment to be inserted immediately after 60(b), I think it will be (v), to say that benefits shall accrue to an investor who has not repatriated profits for a period of 365 days. 

The justification is that most investors who come to Uganda get free land and tax incentives. Once they make profits, they start profit repatriation. If we leave this clause in the format that has been proposed by the chairperson of the committee, it will still leave them with the latitude to some extent. However, if they stayed in the country with the profits they have made for at least a year, they would have invested it in the country and the country would have benefited. I beg to submit.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I heard the chairperson of the committee say that one of the justifications is that those borrowing are having financial difficulties. Is it your understanding that whoever goes to borrow has a financial difficulty? I think that is wrong.

Madam Chairperson, you may borrow – and actually, the majority of the people borrow for purposes of investment and not necessarily that they have financial difficulties. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, on the proposal by hon. Mwiru, it is important for him to appreciate the fact that we are running a liberal economy, which has advantages and disadvantages. One of the reasons our economy is growing is because we liberalised it to attract as many investors as possible to come and invest here without any restrictions, like taking away the profits they have made.

The proposal from hon. Mwiru will discourage investors. It will also be a policy reversal. I would propose that we first agree on the policy before we propose these amendments to tax Bills. It is a very huge thing for us to just restrict investors in that manner through tax measures rather than having a broader policy as a country. The timing of this proposal is not good because it is contrary to our policy of liberalisation.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, this debate has been on for more than 20 years. When will the time be right?

MS BBUMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I welcome the incentives to encourage investment in the rural areas. They will help us to decongest the towns and add value on what is produced.

Based on value addition, I would like to propose that as we give incentives to local investors or whoever is investing more than $100,000 in the rural areas, we must qualify it that they must be using local raw materials. Otherwise, we shall begin getting plastics manufactures setting up their factories in rural areas because of these incentives yet we want to add value to what we produce in agriculture where we have a comparative advantage. I would like qualifications to be added to that. Thank you.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to support the position of the committee on why we should remove stamp duty when borrowing. For anybody to borrow either for investment or other purposes, it means they have a constraint.

According to the other law, when you borrow, the money you borrow is also taxed; you have to pay the stamp duty fee. That means I pay a charge upfront for the money I am borrowing. However, the committee is saying, why do you charge that person before they start their business? Wait to charge them later. That is why they proposed that.

Secondly, I want to make a correction. We proposed for those who are in town, for example investors in Kampala and Wakiso, the difference for locals should be around $300. However, for those encouraging people to go into rural communities, where they can use local raw materials and the communities benefit, we lowered it to Shs 100,000.

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. The purpose of the Stamp Duty Act is simply to raise revenue. In the report, the committee is saying that registration of mortgages, which is until now a subject of 0.5 per cent, should be scrapped. However, the committee has not told us the financial implications of this. 

We have been raising money in the region of Shs 7 to 8 billion from that item alone. It would therefore mean that we would have to look in the budget, in the wake of the new measures that are being proposed, to see where to find that money. 

Times are hard. The Chairman of the Committee on Health was here and made a passionate case for the increase of the budget for the health sector. Many things are going to require attention this year and in the forthcoming budget on account of the COVID-19 situation. As we debate the cutting down of measures to raise revenue - (An honourable member rose_) - we should also pay attention –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, you will be debating your own report. You are a member of the committee; allow the Members to speak.

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We have to pay attention to the fact that we will need this money. If we remove this - and I am not talking about the justification for having stamp duty on mortgages; I am asking where we will get the equivalent amount of money that we will forego if we make this amendment. On those premises, I do not support the committee’s position on this matter. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Chairman of the committee, is the incentive limited to those who are in the free zones and the industrial parks? I would like to know where the other Ugandans are going to fall on this issue.

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The committee, in (i) (a) is proposing incentives for a citizen whose investment is placed upcountry. 

I need clarification on what the committee means by “upcountry”. This is because even as we are debating, it is already creating confusion. In its justification, the committee appears to refer to upcountry as being rural areas when in actual sense it does not necessarily mean so. In some cases, others are referring it to mean towns.

Madam Chairperson, it is very important that the law is very clear and devoid of any ambiguity, so that the person reading the law should know what is really meant by “upcountry”. If need be, I would propose that the word “upcountry” be defined as areas outside the greater metropolitan areas of Kampala, so that there is clarity on what they mean. “Upcountry” means areas outside the Greater –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, hon. Othieno, for giving way. Madam Chairperson, in the definitions in various laws, “upcountry” means areas outside Kampala, Wakiso and Entebbe. If you look at the capital allowances law and Income Tax Act, it is there. Therefore, in the Stamp Duty Bill, we should also define it to mean the areas of Kampala, Wakiso and Entebbe.

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. Madam Chairperson, I have another issue, which I would also like to raise. When it comes to (iv), where they talk of employees being citizens earning an aggregate wage of at least 70 per cent, my understanding is that this provision is intended to help indigenous Ugandans so that they can also benefit from the proceeds of these investments. However, I am also aware that our laws allow for dual citizenship. There is a greater possibility of these investors defeating this very provision by –(Member timed out.)

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, I am a member of the committee but I would like to give information –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you a member of the committee? You will inform another Member; you cannot take the Floor yourself. (Laughter)

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I rise to support the committee on the issue of relief from stamp duty on mortgages. Uganda should support businesses to come up by raising capital. Raising capital in Uganda is very hard for some sectors, especially agriculture. Somebody has gone to the bank to get a mortgage to be able to invest, get profits and at the end of the day, pay tax. However, we want to get tax even before somebody invests.

I think we should create a very good atmosphere for businesses. I know the honourable minister is very concerned about the revenue side, but we are over considering the revenue side without looking at businesses that we want to go beyond their first year birthday so that we get more tax as a country.

Secondly, I would like to support hon. Mwiru’s amendment. Countries surrounding us have got policies where they do not even allow other nationals to own companies if the nationals of those countries have no shares in those companies. We are now allowing countries to repatriate all their profits without putting a cap. I think it is high time we revised this, Madam Chairperson. That is the reason I am supporting hon. Mwiru.

MS ADONG: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to support the tax Bill proposals by saying that we should really give incentives to investors that are investing upcountry. However, as my colleagues have said, there should be mechanisms of monitoring these investors. Many times, it has been shown that these investors register with URA or with Uganda Investment Authority and are granted these provisions but they end up changing their positions. 

Without mentioning the name of any investor, in Nwoya District we have an investor that hoodwinked URA that they were going to use local materials, especially cassava. They went on mobilising people to grow cassava saying that they were going to process it. They set up a factory but before we knew it, they changed and they are now importing their raw materials from outside for manufacturing stoves and the other things, departing from the original position. Therefore, if we grant them incentives that they are going to use local materials and employ local people, what mechanism is there to ensure that these investors stick to their position? 

I thank Government by encouraging investors to put up industries upcountry because it will help to decongest the city and also bring development upcountry. My only worry in that area is that we have always been cheated as Ugandans because they know that whatever they do, they can hoodwink us. We then end up losing yet we are losing taxes at the same time. I beg to move.

MS ALUM: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I rise to first of all support the position brought by hon. Syda Bbumba about local training. Many a time, companies hide behind lack of expertise. I would like us, at this point in time, to put it as a requirement for investors to make sure that our local people are also included in business.

Madam Chairperson, we went to Ghana some time back and we were taken to visit the hydropower project. We realised that the local people were trained by the investors. When the investors left the country, these local people were able to make sure that the investment continued running. 

Secondly, on the issue of 50 per cent local products subject to their availability, I feel that this can be abused. Let us say 50 per cent of the local materials should come from within the country. If we say 50 per cent subject to availability, this can easily be abused. I feel we should simply say 50 per cent of local materials and that is it.

Finally, we are in a very difficult time where countries are trying to bail out their citizens. This is the right opportunity to really help those small businesses that are in distress. Therefore, I support the proposal that 0.5 per cent on loans should be scrapped. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think a lot has been said about clause 2 on incentives to industrial parks and free zones; what about the other citizens?

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, the information I would like to give the House is that even these industrial parks are fenced off. Mbale Industrial Park, for example, was given to an individual who is developing it. Actually, he sells space to people. So, without money, people cannot access it. It is not like Namanve Industrial Park where you apply to Uganda Investment Authority. Whereas Government put all the incentives there, it is for an individual; you have to apply to an individual to allocate you space on his terms. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I am raising this because last financial year, we had a similar situation where I think the incentives were to be given to someone who has invested in a free zone or an industrial park. However, these are not the only investors. There are other investors who are not in industrial parks; where are their incentives? 

MR MUKITALE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. My preliminary seeking of procedural guidance is to the effect that the Government should make sure that as we go through the tax Bills, we do not discuss those Bills just to raise money per se but that the Government presents to this House the tax policy, contextualising the times we are in. We cannot just continue discussing tax Bills for raising money per se without contextualising the tax policy - not only for raising revenue but also for increasing production and consumption in some areas and prohibiting in other areas.  

Related to these incentives - Hon. Musumba sometime back was moving the Physical Planning Bill and we said it would have been very prudent if at this point in time, we have the National Physical Development Plan in place, with economic zones and regional cities, so that we incentivise investment in all regions. Remember, at this time now, some of the people you are calling foreign investors may relocate because of the difficulties in the globe. 

Therefore, it is very important that we posture ourselves as an investment destination. Instead of just looking for taxes, incentivise plough back. For those who make profits, incentivise them to plough back the profits here and make them domicile as opposed to them running away. I think those areas need a tax policy, need local content defined, and also need the National Physical Plan in place instead of just bringing piecemeal tax Bills. 

Madam Chairperson, I seek your procedural guidance.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. On the issue you have raised, the Stamp Duty Act which we are amending has a provision that reads as follows: “An operator within an industrial park or free zone or an operator of a single factory or other business outside the industrial park who meets the following requirements…” So, we are just making additions. Therefore, Madam Chairperson, your concerns are already addressed in the existing provisions. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourable members, it is coming to 5 O’clock. We need to – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. What I would like to tell the people of Uganda is that to qualify as an investor, - There are very many investors even in the villages but they have not registered with the investment authority. So, for you to get these benefits, you should register with Uganda Investment Authority, as per the law. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 2 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NIWAGABA: There was a very good proposal from hon. Syda Bbumba, which was supported. There was also a proposal from hon. Mwiru. So, which amendments are we talking about? Are they the amendments by the committee only or also the amendments by the Members? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, when I call the clause, it is up to you to stand up. We have not yet voted. Are you standing on clause 2? Move the amendment then. I know we are working fast but sometimes, I really wish we could send these amendments so that we can look at them to see how they fit in.

MS BBUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I wish to propose an amendment on clause 2(b), where there is incentive for the local investor, to include, on top of the employment of 70 per cent of local staff, training for the locals to help them advance the ladder. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that a new amendment be introduced as proposed –

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I move an amendment on clause 2(b) to insert sub-clause 2(b)(iv) on the incentives to say that an investor who will benefit from this incentive will be that one who will not have repatriated profit in the past 165 days. 

The justification is that whereas we are in a liberalised economy, since most of these investors have accessed free land, tax holidays and tax incentives, once they have made profit, it should be reinvested here for 365 days. After that, they are free to repatriate.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, I thought we could capture the proposal being raised by hon. Bbumba in the regulations. The principle has been adopted - to give incentives to people who are investing in the rural areas. Therefore, to put in the principal Act that the investors must provide training and all this is really – I can see the Shadow Attorney-General nodding in support of me; I do not know why he cannot stand up to do that. Hon. Bbumba, I think we can capture those elements in the regulations and they would fit in very well, rather than overburdening the principal Act. 

Madam Chairperson, somebody can go to Kamuli and put up a factory there. Even if he is not using the local materials from Kamuli - assuming that they are not there - he is providing employment to the people of Kamuli. It is something that we need to study. 

That is why, Madam Chairperson, earlier on we had said – but we are in this circumstances – that for new proposals to come on the Floor of the House without analysing them properly might create a challenge. I see that we are burdening the principal Act instead of putting them in the regulations. I beg to seek your concurrence, hon. Bbumba.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think we are also bending our rules. We had said that anyone who has an amendment should circulate it early enough so that we can look at it and see how it fits in. 

MS BBUMBA: Madam Chairperson, this amendment is very important. These are bad times; we had no opportunity to submit them early. However, I concede, provided the amendment is not going to be lost in the regulations. 

This is one of the reasons why we have these foreign companies providing plumbers and even people who fry kabalagala. They use the excuse that we not have the skills, that our people are not trained.  We, therefore, want to make it a requirement for them to train our people such that after a few years, they have no excuse to continue employing those foreigners. If my proposal is going to be captured in the regulations I have no problem, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you committing that it will be in the regulations because it is important for us?

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, I do commit that those good proposals from hon. Syda Bbumba, the former minister of finance, will be put in the regulations.

On hon. Mwiru’s issue, Madam Chairperson, I really want to implore this House that we first consider the policy of restrictions on the liberal environment that we have before we put that capping of the capital flight for only two months. It does not really make sense that you are limiting somebody for only two months and then you – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, it is for a year. 

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think the honourable minister should liaise with his counterparts in the East African Community. In Kenya, it is now a requirement; you do not just repatriate money in that style. 

The information I would like to give to the House and the minister is that Kenya and Ethiopia – and you have been travelling in and out of this country, so you must have picked this up.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, why should an investor be bothered about one year? It is like using us an address; you just get an address and then start repatriating. Where is the commitment to this country? 

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, the amendment proposed by hon. Mwiru touched on fundamental policy and the way this Government has marketed itself. That amendment is now proposing that an investor who comes here – remember we freed the capital account; we said that this is a liberalised economy and the investor should come with his money and go with it, as and when he wants to take it.

To say that, now, within the first 365 days you should stay here with your money and not take it anywhere, is a fundamental change of policy. 

I would like to propose, Madam Chairperson, that the Government studies this against the existing policy. The information that has been given to this House is that it is happening in Kenya and other countries. We also need to verify it so that we do not make a mistake in terms of this particular matter. 

I, therefore, move that we advance as per the report of the committee and we study this matter. We can come back to it probably in a year or so. Thank you. 

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I have not said that we are doing away with profit repatriation per se. I am only saying that for a period of 365 days – you see, we are talking about someone taking advantage of an incentive. Why should someone repatriating money immediately take benefit of an incentive? I do not understand it. 

MS OPENDI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to appreciate the point that hon. Mwiru is making. However, we should all know that we have been out there trying to market Uganda as one of those destinations that investors should actually look at. 

One of our strengths that we have been putting out there is the issue that an investor, who comes to invest in this country is free, once he has made profits, to take his or her profit. I would like to inform this House that before I left the health sector, we had a number of companies that invested in other countries within the region - even Ethiopia - and they are now actually moving to bring their investments here; shifting away from other countries to our country. 

In addition to the wonderful weather and people, we, as Government, have been using that strength to attract investors. Madam Chairperson, I would like to suggest that for now, let us, as Government, study this and then maybe in the subsequent year, we look at this. 

Otherwise, I am aware that some of the investors who are in the neighbouring countries, have already been given land and are moving. It is because of this COVID-19 but some would already be here. Thank you, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 2 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Chairperson, I move that the House resumes and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto. 

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Stamp Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2020” and passed it with amendments. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE STAMP DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

4.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Stamp Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2020” be read the third time and do pass. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the Stamp Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2020, be read for the third time and do pass. 

(Question put and agreed to.)
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE STAMP DUTY (AMENDMENT) ACT, 
2020.”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passed. Next item. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE TOBACCO CONTROL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

4.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Tobacco Control (Amendment) Bill, 2020” be read the second time. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Okay, it is seconded. What is the justification? 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, this particular Bill is to amend the Tobacco Control Act, 2015 to impose an export levy on processed and unprocessed leaf tobacco so that we encourage many companies to process from here rather than exporting unprocessed leaf tobacco to other countries. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chair of the committee.

4.57
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry MUSASIZI): Madam Speaker, the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, considered the Bill entitled, “The Tobacco Control (Amendment) Bill, 2020” and made the following observations:

(i) 	The Bill seeks to amend the Tobacco Control Act, 2015 by   imposing an export levy on processed and unprocessed tobacco leaf of $0.8 per kilogramme, which is consigned out of Uganda. The levy shall be paid by the consigner to the Uganda Revenue Authority.

(ii) 	The export levy on unprocessed leaf tobacco was introduced by Parliament under the Finance Act, 2014. Clause 3 of the Bill, therefore, seeks to harmonise that requirement by repealing section 7 of the Finance Act of 20l4 and introducing section 23(a) under clause 2 of the Bi11.

(iii) 	In order to promote processing of tobacco in Uganda, an export levy should not be imposed on processed tobacco. This will encourage value addition in the sector and encourage more investment in the sector. Processed tobacco provides employment for citizens, pays for utilities, uses services in Uganda and contributes to other taxes in the country.

(iv) 	Uganda tobacco crop has been harvested by foreign companies, who export the tobacco in raw form, only to be processed in the neighbouring countries and then re-exported into Uganda, which has turned the country into a supermarket for cigarettes. The Bill, in its current form, encourages manufacturers to relocate their industries within the East African Community region where tax rates are lower, which leads to a reduction in the total revenue to the Government from the local manufacturers and increase in contraband and smuggling of cigarettes into Uganda, loss of jobs and employment to Ugandans and non-promotion of agri-industrialisation of the Ugandan economy.

(v) 	The proposed amendment will undermine businesses, which have invested in Uganda while promoting those businesses, which exited Uganda for production advantages in the region.

Madam Speaker, the committee recommends the following:
    (i) Clause 2 of the Bill should be amended so that the export levy is only charged on exports of unprocessed leaf tobacco; 

    (ii) The Tobacco Control (Amendment) Bill, 2020 should be passed into law subject to the proposed amendment.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I again thank the chairperson of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development together with all the committee members, for the work done, especially spending the Easter weekend here at Parliament doing our work. Thank you very much. It has been signed by very many Members, way beyond the one-third minimum. Is there any comment? 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a copy of the original committee report together with the minutes and other documents we used in processing the Bill. I beg to lay.

5.01
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Madam Speaker, I move a motion that consideration of this Bill on second reading be passed without debate so that we go for the committee stage, since the chairperson’s report is clear, elaborate and speaks for itself. I beg to move.

5.01
MS SYDA BBUMBA (NRM, Nakaseke North County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a good report and for this amendment. Tobacco growing is one of those agricultural products, which are exploitative to our farmers. They earn very little out of it.

As a country, we can earn most through value addition. I was told several years ago that an acre of tobacco was yielding about Shs 250,000 yet this is an annual crop. It employs our people but the value coming out of it is very low. 

I, therefore, support the amendment to increase the levy on processing. I would like to propose that we move it from 0.2 per cent to 1 per cent. Considering even its hazardous effects, I think we should try to get as much as possible out of it. 

In addition, I wish to propose that we increase the levy on imported cigarettes. If we increase the levy on imported cigarettes, these people will be forced to process the tobacco here. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Tobacco Control (Amendment) Bill, 2020 be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE TOBACCO CONTROL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR HENRY MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 2 as follows: Delete the word “processed” wherever it appears in the entire clause.

The justification is that imposing an export levy on processed leaf tobacco at the same rate with unprocessed leaf undermines the efforts of “Build Uganda, Buy Uganda” and hinders the industrialisation of the economy. The proposal will undermine businesses that have invested in Uganda, while promoting those businesses that exited Uganda for production advantages in the neighbouring countries. I beg to move.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, we are seriously encouraging import substitution and export promotion. We want everything to be produced and processed here and exported. So, what some of the companies dealing in tobacco do is that they get leaf and process it but the final touches, which actually employ many people, are done outside the country. That is why we include the words, processed and unprocessed. So, if you are a country producing tobacco, process it, make cigarettes, promote cigarettes and export them –(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: We seem to be reading from different pages. What do you mean by processed tobacco vis-a-vis unprocessed tobacco? Explain to us.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I think the minister is missing a point. When we enacted the Tobacco Control Act, most of the companies – I represent Jinja East where there is a tobacco company; they manufacture and process for export. They no longer process cigarettes. It is no longer a lucrative business for them to do the processing here because the Tobacco Control Act does not make Ugandans one of their immediate customers because of our stringent laws.

I thought the minister should be aware of this. 

MR MUKITALE: Madam Chairperson, in Bunyoro, West Nile and the Rift Valley Albertine up to Kigezi where this tobacco is grown, we know it for non-payment. Government has been licensing companies that con our people. We have case after case. I also participated in the private sector when BAT was relocating and taking the leaf to Kenya in Thika.

Madam Chairperson, if Government is serious about BUBU, we should not just intervene through one Bill because, as I already said earlier, the issue of local content law definition, the tax policy and the industrial policy; because without it, we are just beating about the bush, honourable Prime Minister and Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is your request?

MR MUKITALE: I requesting that – actually one of the most lucrative businesses right now is smuggling of processed tobacco in Uganda. If you go to the Uganda Revenue Authority Anti-Smuggling Unit, and even to police, it is the most lucratuve business because most of the tobacco here is being smuggled into the country. 

We really need to look to have a more comprehensive look at this tobacco. I can no longer promote in my own region because whoever has been involved has a problem.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So what are you proposing in respect to this Bill? What is your proposal?

MR MUKITALE: My prayer is that let us be serious if we want BUBU, if we want industrial policy, if we want to raise money. I agree with hon. Syda Bbumba when she says that it should not be just 0.2 per cent but rather 1 per cent for a corrective measure. We should be seen to prohibit.

MR SILWANY: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We are talking about “Build Uganda”, we are talking about employment for our young people in Uganda. 

I come from an area, Busoga, where we have tobacco industries. There are companies in Uganda that go and buy green leaf from farmers and they export to countries like Kenya and then they promote and give employment to people in Kenya. 

I, therefore, want to disagree with the honourable minister that we levy tax on both processed and unprocessed tobacco. I propose that like the chairperson of the committee has suggested, we should talk about only unprocessed green leaf tobacco because once you process and add value – what I have seen in these factories that process and add value is that they are employing over 3,000 people. 

The implication is that once you put a tax on such companies that already have factories within the country and they are employing Ugandans, it means that they are going to go out of business unfairly yet these other people can buy and just take and provide employment in Kenya. 

Therefore, I suggest that we adopt the suggestion of the committee that we only talk about unprocessed tobacco leaves. If you are going to buy a leaf and take it outside the country without processing, then we levy the heavy tax on you. 

In fact, it should go up to $1 dollar, not just 0.8. It should be raised further up so that people are discouraged from going to buy raw materials and taking them out of the country.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is the minister still strongly objecting to the chairperson?

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, what now happens with the tobacco companies and what they call processed in their opinion is that they dry tobacco and pack it and export it to other countries to process it into cigarettes. 

If you are not processing tobacco into cigarettes, what is the processing you are talking about? What we have been trying to clear the confusion from is this; do not confuse us that dried and packed tobacco is processed tobacco. It is almost the same. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But minister, your argument is supporting the Chairperson.

MR BAHATI: What the tobacco companies call processed is dried and packed tobacco. We want to get this out of practice.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Isn’t it your duty to correct them on what is processed? Should they be the ones to decide what is processed? What is your policy?

MR BAHATI: Our policy would be non-processed – maybe we shall have to define it in the regulation sense.

MR. SILWANY: Madam Chairperson, I want to thank the minister for the information - (Interjections) - Let me first respond. I received information from the honourable minister. 

When we suffocate the industry, because hon. Bahati is talking about drying the tobbaco but some of these factories have industries in Uganda; big factories that are employing a majority of Ugandans – over 10,000. These factories are in existence. So, you should not stand and say that they are not processing when they are already processing, drying and then exporting. 

There are two levels in tobacco. There is a level of drying – removing the water and the tobacco dries. Then the second level is making the cigarettes. There is almost no making cigarettes in Uganda. I think only one factory makes cigarettes in Uganda. 

Therefore, what hon. Bahati is talking about is totally misleading this House and he is out of context. I think we should put tax on only the unprocessed tobacco so that we discourage people from buying from farmers to take to Kenya or Tanzania to process from there and provide employment there.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But it is the responsibility of the minister to define unprocessed. It is his responsibility.

MR. KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, you remember when we passed the excise duty in 2018, BAT took us to court in Tanzania and they ruled against a law that we passed here.

What BAT wants – this is a multinational company – it wants to wipe out all the companies coming up in Uganda so that they make that multinational company the sole tobbacco exporter – in order to monopolise the market. A monopoly cannot be accepted. 

The factory in West Nile had a line of US$ 20 million invested for processing cutlag. Cutlag is already a cigarette which can be exported. In Jinja, the company, which is there – for the people who come from Jinja –  is employing almost 200 people on that line. They have invested US$ 7 million. When you say “unprocessed”, it means you are making a local person to be on the same footing with the one in Kenya.

Honourable minister, this is the reality. Go and visit these companies and find out what they have invested there. You will know what it means to process, add value and employment. These are two different lines of processing. When you take leaf tobacco to Kenya, to where BAT left from here – that is why in 2014 we said, no, if you are taking leaf for free, we will put 0.2 per cent. Today, you are saying, no, you have been taking raw materials without us taxing you. 

There are about three local companies here, which are now processing leaf tobacco. Therefore, how can you now say that you don’t want to promote your own industries and you want to promote those, which have left Uganda?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 2 be amended as proposed by the committee chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.)

(Clause 3, agreed to.)

(The Title, agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resused , the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Tobacco Control (Amendment) Bill, 2020” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE TOBACCO CONTROL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

5.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Tobacco Control (Amendment) Bill, 2020” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the Tobacco Control (Amendment) Bill, 2020 be read for the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE TOBACCO CONTROL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020”

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, Title settled and the Bill passes.

Honourable members, we would have wanted to continue but we are heading towards curfew time. Ideally, we should have stopped at 5.00 p.m. Therefore, I propose that we adjourn to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow to finish the rest of the business. House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.20 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 15 April 2020 at 2.00p.m.) 
