PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTSECOND SESSION - THIRD MEETINGTHURSDAY , 27 APRIL 2023PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA8386Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.1 FOR FY 2022/2023Thursday, 27 April 2023these people are considered strong like robots; so, you need to come as if you are strangling – you shame and humiliate them. My question is: Who are these people working for? (Applause)I think the Government needs to go back and reflect on who is behind these people. I do not think these are people who are working to protect the Government or to promote the image of the Government. These people must be working for an invisible hand that is aimed at bringing down the Government; I do not see any single justification. Nonetheless, colleagues, there is a very critical item, which I want us to first handle before I allow anything else. I will then allow reactions to my communication. I know it is a boiling issue and I see the Minister of Internal Affairs here; he will also be given an opportunity to speak, but I will give guidance on how best we can react to this matter.Secondly, I received a petition from the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions. They were requesting that we amend the Income Tax Act to cater for the exemption because they are like judicial officers. The committee cannot handle this issue because it cannot generate it on its own. Chairperson, I refer this matter to you under Rule 199(1) of our Rules of Procedure so that you expeditiously consider it. This is a very urgent issue. The President pronounced himself and it is very clear that we need to take action on it. Chairperson, I refer it to you; preferably, IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentSECOND SESSION - 32ND SITTING - THIRD MEETINGParliament met at 2.23 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, I welcome you to today’s sitting. I am sorry that I am late by close to 30 minutes because of the developments that we had today; I was getting a briefing, whereby 11 of our colleagues – the ladies – were brutally arrested in an extremely demeaning way. Some are bleeding and there are those whose clothes were torn; it was as if they were arresting terrorists. I do not know what someone was up to. Of course, I had my issue with the honourable colleagues because they had already petitioned us and we had promised them that we were going to have – I had already called the minister and the Prime Minister. I had thought they would wait for that time, but that cannot justify the manner – my concern is with the manner of arrest; they shamelessly did it at the gates of Parliament. I do not know whether we are safe if people can be arrested at the gate of Parliament – picked up and beaten. I do not know whether 8387THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 27 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.you should finish it by tomorrow so that it is considered when you are handling the Income Tax Bill. With that, as I told you, I have a very urgent issue which we have been postponing over time, and this is the issue of the supplementary budget, and I want us to pronounce ourselves on it. I cannot keep this issue on the Order Paper moving forward, and yet, as a House, we have powers to decide on it. I want us to first handle that issue. Once we handle it, then I will allow reactions to my communication and matters of national importance. I just beseech you to hold your fire in regard to these other issues. I will give you enough space; it is too hot. Ensure it does not burn you.In the meantime, as Hon. Tinkasiimire takes the Floor, in the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation of district council speakers from Masindi District represented by Hon. Businge Joab, Hon. Akugizibwe Ronald, Hon. Kiiza Kenneth Nyendwoha and Hon. Asiimwe Florence. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)I was supposed to meet you with your honourable members, but time has not allowed. I will ensure that we meet next time; I really had a lot of commitments, but your Members really pushed me to meet you, only that the time could not allow it. 2.30 MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga West County, Kagadi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am moving under rule 8 where – it is not to disagree with your decision, but I seek your guidance. In the circumstances where the supplementary budget is providing money for those who are now at the gate to unleash mayhem against us – and you are saying that you want to even give them priority over reactions to what you have just communicated about the brutal arrest of our colleagues – it is within your power. I seek your guidance: why don’t we give priority to the matter of arresting our colleagues? (Applause) Thereafter that, we can move to the issue of giving them money to brutally arrest us at the gates of Parliament.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable member, in the end, if you find that the money you are giving is to make you suffer, then you can refuse; the decision is yours. I have not suffocated anyone. What I have just requested is that we handle just one item and then I open up debate. As a leader, I foresee and make my research on certain matters. There is a matter, which we must finish today so that your schools and health centres can get their money or not, or we can keep delaying so that they receive that money late and it goes back to the Consolidated Fund. That is why I am saying that you should allow only one item and I open up debate after. I will give you enough time, honourable colleagues. Leader of the Opposition, can you guide us on that? 2.33THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I lead this team and I am very constrained. I am very sure the rest of the House is with us on this matter.We are here to hear the Speaker guiding us on how he is going to proceed with this matter. I am constrained; I will ask my Members to give the Speaker the benefit of the doubt and I hope this matter does not take more than we can tolerate to listen. Thereafter, we can take a decision. Otherwise, I may not be able to control the mood in this House. I will ask my team to give the Speaker the benefit of the doubt, and listen to what is on the Floor. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. In 30 minutes, we will be done. Honourable colleagues, we had already moved to the 8388Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.1 FOR FY 2022/2023Committee of Supply and there are views; so, I want us to agree on how we handle the supply. Let us move to the Committee on Supply so that I can pick your views on how we handle the supply and then we move forward.COMMITTEE OF SUPPLYTHE SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.1 FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2022/2023THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable colleagues, remember we had divergent views on how to proceed on this matter. Nevertheless, I would like us to move when we have reconciled the positions so we handle this supplementary without causing much fracas. Chairperson of the Budget Committee, have you met with your team and do you think we can have a solution to the issues that were raised?2.36THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMIT -TEE ON BUDGET (Mr Wamakuyu Mu-dimi): Thank you, Mr Chairperson. It is true that in the last two weeks, we had a standoff on the issue of the supplementary, especially only Part A, which falls within the 3 per cent legal limit.We have consulted, and it is true that Members raised pertinent issues and the minister also gave us information that we are still processing. Therefore, we have agreed to first deal with Part B, which requires prior approval by Parliament. The amount is Shs 1,524,961,139,468. That was the agreement as we defer Part A for further consultation.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Chairperson, what I pick is that Part A is for the 3 per cent where the minority report emanated from. The 3 per cent requires the retrospective approval. That was the contentious part because the minority report was hinged on that. Honourable colleagues, the chairperson is saying we stand over that since we do not have time pressure in terms of handling it. Let us handle Part B, which requires prior approval of Parliament. What I remember is that the minority report did not have any issue but Hon. Kivumbi will also guide us on that.Honourable colleagues, we are standing over Part A until we have reconciliation between the chairperson and the mover of the minority report. Otherwise, we have enough time to scrutinise it.MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Chairperson, since we have accountability to give to Members of the House and the general public, I will ask for a minute or two.Firstly, we have two sets of supplementary before this Parliament. There is one under 3 per cent, that is here for approval and it is loaded with most of the questionable items, and most of those items are where Members have huge opinions against.The one that requires prior approval, which is before us and that the chairperson has talked about, has monies that by and large are not controversial because these are small monies for districts, wages, money for the World Bank projects, which we cannot hold for long. Therefore, as we cross-examine to detail the extent of impunity on the 3 per cent, let us not curtail service delivery. (Applause)Also, it will give us an opportunity to check the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to the extent they are applying the 3 per cent. Therefore, I am in total agreement.  MR KIBALYA: Thank you. I am seeking clarification arising from your communication. I would like to be guided whether this crucial money is captured in the 3 per cent. Why can’t we have the useful expenditure captured in the 3 per cent other than handling the other one and then bring the 3 per cent where we capture what is useless? Why don’t we fit it in this one and handle it at once? MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Chairperson, the 3 per cent has already been [The Deputy Speaker]8389THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 27 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.spent by the Government. What is before Parliament – the law requires them to come here within four months, lay it on the Table and we process to see whether it is justifiable or not. If we find it unjustifiable, there is a remedy under the law. The prior approval is money the Government cannot spend without parliamentary approval and the two cannot be mixed. This is why it is our humble opinion that we deal – (Interruption)MS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you. I would like you to clarify something: When you talk about 3 per cent being approved unappropriated, that is correct and we agree, as a principle. However, the Government always uses that opportunity to spend within the 3 per cent. On items that are rejected by the House, they use the 3 per cent to finance those activities and they say we already approved. Mr Chairperson, this is why we are interested in the items funded within the 3 per cent. And we would like to know whether those items fit within the decision this House took when we appropriated.MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Chairperson, I am a scientist. So, I am not from the school of arts; I am from the science bias but I am very slow. I did mathematics and was very deliberate. Hon. Cecelia, we are on the same page. We are saying the extent of impunity has been on the abuse of 3 per cent. This is where they have loaded all controversial items including those Parliament rejected during appropriation. Mr Chairperson, we are staying approval of all those items until we are fully satisfied, as Parliament, that those were monies well spent and there is value for money. If we find them wanting, at an appropriate time, then we will pronounce ourselves. Otherwise, we have not approved them. We are going for areas that are not controversial so that we can provide services like the roads, wages and other things they ignored under the 3 per cent.Mr Chairperson, it is a Catch-22; I am not the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to speak on this. However, my humble view is that Parliament agrees with the position to go ahead and handle the one that requires prior parliamentary approval and then delay and continue to scrutinise all the other controversial items. We are delaying the entire 3 per cent. There will be no single approval of the 3 per cent.MR OKOT OGONG:  Mr Chairperson, some of these items are constitutional. There are certain expenditures that have been offloaded on the 3 per cent, which bear on the constitutionality of our spending. For example, the Government is lending money to an entity. Under Article 159 of our Constitution, the power of the Government to borrow or lend is very clear: The Government cannot raise any borrowing or lend without the prior approval of Parliament. However, the Government is now going behind Parliament to lend without the authority of Parliament. It is really unconstitutional; if somebody goes to court, Parliament will be embarrassed. I can read it here: “Article 159 Power of Government to borrow or lend…(2) Government shall not borrow, guarantee or raise a loan on behalf of itself or any other public institution, authority or person except as authorised by or under an Act of Parliament.(3) An Act of Parliament made under clause 2 of the Article shall provide-(a) that the terms and conditions of the loan…”Therefore, we are giving money where Parliament has not scrutinised the terms. This is unconstitutional because they are now frontloaded. We need to be careful. Otherwise, we are going to be embarrassed. Some of us may even go to court. (Applause)MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Chairman, I am a very principled politician – on record – and I defend the right things if they are right to 8390Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.1 FOR FY 2022/2023be defended –(Interjection)-  in your opinion, and you are wrong. (Laughter) And you do not understand the issues. Give yourself time. First of all, I am on the same page as everyone else is. All controversial issues are in the 3 per cent. We are saying that we are not approving that one as of now. Then, we are saying – unless people do not want to listen – the items under prior approval are not controversial –(Interruption)MR ODUR: Mr Speaker, when business comes to this House, they come under distinct headings. Supplementaries or even the appropriation, at the very least, are Bills. What we refer to as “V otes”, in other laws, we call them “clauses”. Right now, we have, before this House, the supplementary estimate, which is a Bill. We are required, as a House, to look at it clause by clause and deal with it at once. Is the honourable colleague in order to mislead the House as if we have two, three or four different businesses before this House and to the extent that we should separate the Bill and deal with certain clauses, which are V otes, and leave others?THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Hon. Jonathan, the Supplementary Appropriation Bill will come after supply. Article 156(3) of the Constitution reads: “Where, in respect of any financial year, a supplementary estimate or supplementary estimates have been approved by Parliament in accordance with clause 2 of this Article, a supplementary appropriation Bill shall be introduced into Parliament in the financial year next following that financial year to which the estimates relate, providing for the appropriation of the sums so approved for the purposes specified in those estimates.”MR ODUR: Mr Chairman, you are right. That is just documentation – the approval is done, but for the record of this House, it is documented in a Bill. When it comes next year, we do not process it here – THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  No, honourable colleague. There is no Bill that is not processed and approved here.MR ODUR: That is subject to interpretation – but I will not argue with you.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable colleagues, on the supplementary, it is very clear: The Bill comes after supply. For example, some money has already been spent. It will be captured in the Bill if we approve it and the Bill will be approved. It will be brought here.MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Chairman, I would like to inform Hon. Jonathan -THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Jonathan?MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Hon. Jonathan and honourable colleagues, I would like to inform you that an item cannot enter a supplementary appropriation Bill, which will even come next year – for this year – if it is not approved. That is why, for once, for us to decisively deal with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we have to delay this approval. If we delay this approval, then we should go ahead and examine the extent of the abuse. We can even reach the level of saying, “Auditor-General, go and look at those expenditures before our approval.” (Applause) That is why I appeal to the honourable colleagues – I know it is a new concept; it is the first one of its lot – that the logic behind this thinking is that we are curtailing the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development from going ahead, with impunity, to bring for us the 3 per cent. If we approve everything as it is, it is game over; our powers would be done. My understanding is that the 3 per cent – can I be protected? If we delay the 3 per cent – honourable colleagues, there are details that I do not want to give on [Mr Muwanga Kivumbi]8391THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 27 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.this Floor. We are going into July – listen, let me give it to you; in July, we are going to have a new budget -MR OSHABE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I do not know why Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi wants to be lenient today. I am pleading with him that we deal with every aspect of the supplementary and disapprove what we do not want and say, “Parliament is approving this one.” Then, when we say we are not approving this item, we should send it to the necessary process that it requires. However, if we are here to say, “We are not going to touch this section” – let us not fear to disapprove what we have refused to appropriate –THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Is that procedural?MR OSHABE: Yes, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  So, what is the procedural question?MR OSHABE: Mr Speaker, are we proceeding well -(Laughter)- when Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, the Member we always rely on, on matters of financial management in this country, comes here and starts saying, “We leave this section...”? Mr Chairman, let us look at every section so that the Members disapprove or approve them. (Laughter)THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, there is a procedural matter that I have to rule on – and, in the end, the decision will be yours because I will put the question. One, what Hon. Kivumbi is giving is a view and, here, we listen to views whether we agree with them or not. Secondly, what I pick from Hon. Kivumbi – honourable colleagues, let us listen to one another. I do not know what is going on. What I am getting from Hon. Kivumbi is that we have found a problem with money spent under the 3 per cent and we need more time, as a House, to look into it. So, we defer it but we also have money, which requires prior approval of Government before it can be spent. And that money is holding very, very critical items, and he’s saying, “If we are finding a problem with this component of the budget under A, why don’t we first hold on to it and not approve it? Then we clear this one, which we need the most. After clearing it, we come back here and process that one under the 3 per cent, scrutinise it very well and then put it to a vote here; we either accept it or reject it. Now, let us listen to the Leader of the Opposition.MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. There are two ways of dealing with this dilemma: the first is going the way Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi has proposed. The second is for the minister to move an amendment motion to the earlier motion, and that will also give you the same output. There is actually no crisis; you can deal with it the Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi way or with an amended motion by the minister, or by a Member moving a motion to amend the original motion. All the powers lie in this House but I want to look to the Speaker to use the two options available. THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Of course, that is what I want to do. I will give the minister a chance. I wanted to get your views, and then we had a procedural matter from Jonathan. MR ODUR: Mr Chairperson, you had communicated that a meeting took place, in which some positions were harmonised. Would it be procedurally correct to state the names of the members who attended that meeting on the record here so that we can follow up, and where the meeting took place?THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Honourable colleague, these meetings 8392Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.1 FOR FY 2022/2023have been going on and I think if we had come to a conclusion in any meeting, I would have communicated the position we agreed on. What was agreed was that I bring the issue here and the House decides. And that is what I am doing. So, there is nothing that was decided anywhere. I do not want anyone to be accused that they went anywhere and agreed on anything. No. What we are all saying is, no one is saying - from whoever has spoken - that we approve the 3 per cent, which you have a problem with. If they were saying you approve it, and I have an option also of bringing all of them but I wanted us to have a compromise here, so that we agree on how best to approach. Hon. Okupa?MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. First to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, never ever again should you bring such things which confuse; which make a mix-up in the House because here we are now, hitting at one another yet you are the cause of all this mess.Two, Mr Chairman, I can see where the debate is going; it is as if we are now lumping everything on Hon. Kivumbi. No. When you came in, you told us that there is a position; a view. Hon. Kivumbi was only giving support to what proposal you have put here, but I think we should not waste time. I think the proposal moved by the Leader of the Opposition is what we should go by. Let the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development move a motion to amend the motion to separate the two items such that we deal with them separately and then we move on. THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Okay. Hon. Omara.MR OMARA: Mr Chairperson, when this Appropriation Bill was brought to the House, the matter was referred to the Budget Committee, which discussed and processed it and the report was presented to the House. However, there was a minority report as well. As you know, this matter has been rather controversial and there have been a lot of discussions between the other side, this side and the independent consultations. Now, the Chairperson, Committee on Budget has come out clearly to say, even as the majority of the Committee on Budget members approved certain recommendations, which were presented to the House. The minority report disagreed - THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Point of order?MR ODUR: Mr Chairperson, Hon. Paul Omara was part of that meeting that took place to the exclusiveness of Members of Parliament sitting as Parliament. Is he in order to come here not to declare his interest, which he pushed in that meeting, and now he wants to persuade and hoodwink the House to buy in that position? THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Omara is in order because he is not among the people I called in the meeting. Honourable, continue.MR OMARA: So, what has happened since then, Mr Chairperson, is that that position has been harmonised between the majority report and the minority report, where the chairperson of the budget committee has now conceded that even if we have made recommendations for some approvals under the 3 per cent, we should now state –(Interruption) MR OKUPA: Mr Chairman, we take your word as the final word. You have just stated here, after ruling what Hon. Jonathan said that Hon. Omara was in the meeting. Now, Hon. Omara comes here and says, “This thing has been harmonised in the meeting” as if he was in the meeting. (Laughter) Is he in order to report on a meeting where he was not? THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, Hon. Omara was part of the meeting which we had with the [The Deputy Chairperson]8393THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 27 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.Prime Minister, and you did not conclude on it because I asked you whether you concluded or not. Since then, I have not involved you in other meetings. So, it is up to you. If Hon. Omara, you had your meeting, where you have concluded on things, you are out of order. Hon. Omara is out of order. Hon. Kinyamatama.MS KINYAMATAMA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson, for giving me this opportunity. Honourable members, my opinion is that we should move the whole thing entirely because when you look at those that are in the 3 per cent, you will, for example, find education, health; and as a mother and member of the Committee on Education and Sports, we are soon going to see strikes in schools and everything. So, I think we should handle it entirely than breaking it down. Thank you so much, Mr Chairperson.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable minister, what is your view on this? Honourable colleagues, I will give you time. I will give you another chance to speak. Let us listen to the minister. MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I do not sleep because of this motion not passing and I want to tell you why –(Interjection)– Mr Chairperson, can I be protected?THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable colleagues, let us listen to the minister. Honourable minister, you are not in order not to sleep, we want you to sleep. Proceed.MR MUSASIZI:  Mr Chairperson, this motion that is before Parliament has items that touch the entire country. I receive phone calls from the entire country about items that have not been considered by Parliament. You can imagine getting phone calls from all corners of the country and I never switch off my phone. Mr Chairperson, my prayer is one; we moved a motion here under Supplementary Schedule No. 1, amounting to Shs 2.972 trillion, of which we have items under the 3 per cent, amounting to Shs 1.434 trillion and items that require prior approval by Parliament, amounting to Shs 1.538 trillion. Our prayer as the Government and as the Ministry of Finance, Planning, and Economic Development is that Parliament considers our motion as it is. Thank you.MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I appreciate the Minister moving the motion - that is in order, and I think it is also in order that the House should do consultation; this particular supplementary has been going on for the last three weeks, if I recall. However, because of the mood on the Floor and because of the legality of the decision that we may take, that may have some consequences. I beg to amend the motion that we separate the prior from the 3 per cent.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. I put the question to the motion. (Question put and agreed to.)Motion, as amended, agreed to.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honour -able colleagues, we are going to proceed; we shall handle Part B of the Schedule.SUPPLEMENTARY RECURRENT EXPENDITURE FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2022/2023 - CENTRAL GOVERNMENTTHE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable colleagues, from the motion, we are only handling money, which requires prior approval. We are not touching the one of the 3 per cent under Part A. Therefore, all the questions I am putting are for Part B, which requires prior approval.I now propose the question that a total sum of Shs – procedure?MR ODUR: Mr Chairperson, rule 154 requires that you call the V ote heads V ote by V ote. The entire reading of rule 154 allows this House as well, when considering the V ote, to vary it, to reduce or to ask for information to 8394Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.1 FOR FY 2022/2023be supplemented on the particular V ote. I now ask you to proceed that way so that each V ote is called. (Applause)THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Jonathan, I totally agree with you on the rule but we also have a practice here, which I believe has always been within the rules – it has been a practice over time. Now, these are issues with no minority report on them. What I can do is that when I put the question, before I allow a vote on it, if there is any Member who has an issue with an item falling under that, they raise it, and then we can handle it. Hon. Katuntu, do you want to guide on this?MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I think Hon. Odur should concede to that because it caters for the position you are articulating. Once an item has been called and any colleague has an issue with that particular item, he will go on record and he can make his substantive - there is nothing wrong with it. You may consider conceding to the guidance of the Chairperson.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON : I will give you a chance, I will not put the question before Members - I will look around, if there is anyone who has an issue, then I will give them a chance to raise it. I will first propose, then I listen to you and after I put the question. I now propose the question that a total sum of Shs 457,063,735,891 be provided for as Central Government supplementary recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2020/2023.We are doing Central Government; I hope you have your reports. It is within the report of the committee and it has several votes in it.MR NSAMBA: Thank you. Mr Chairperson, help us to know which items you are at –(Interjection)-  We have the reports, Mr Chairperson. At least we would go item per item and know which one you are reading so that we could follow, and respond.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Col-leagues, I request you get your reports; that is why we give you iPads. I am not going to read for you. You will have to read for yourselves, I cannot read for you. MR OKUPA: Mr Chairperson, if this could help, the procedure is that you always read V ote by V ote but since it is Central Government, there are a number of V otes. You can just say, “from V ote number this to this of the Central Government” such that it is captured on record.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honour -able minister, can you help me read? Let him have the V otes.MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, in the interest of moving together, the V otes under Central Government totalling the figure you have read are the following: V ote 004: Ministry of Defence;V ote 006: Ministry of Foreign Affairs;V ote 010: Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries;V ote 012: Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development;V ote 014: Ministry of Health;V ote 016: Ministry of Works and Transport;V ote 018: Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development;V ote 019: Ministry of Water and Environment;V ote 022: Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities;V ote 107: Uganda Aids Commission;V ote 114: Uganda Cancer Institute;V ote 17: Uganda Tourism Board;V ote 120: National Citizenship and Immigration Control;V ote 121: Dairy Development Authority;V ote 124: Equal Opportunities Commission;V ote 135: Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratory; vote 145: Uganda Prisons Service;V ote 16:  Public Service Commission;V ote 152: National Agricultural Advisory Service;V ote 158: Internal Security Organisation;V ote 165: Uganda Business and Technical Examination Board; [Mr Odur]SUPPLEMENTARY RECURRENT EXPENDITURE FOR FY 2022/20238395THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 27 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.V ote 302: Mbarara University of Science and Technology;V ote 303: Makerere University Business School;V ote 306: Muni University;V ote 308: Soroti University;V ote 309: Gulu University;V ote 310: Lira University;V ote 312: Uganda Management Institute; and V ote 313: Mountains of the Moon University.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON : Honourable colleagues, refer to page 26 of the report; it has all the details of the amount of the V otes.MS AMERO: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. The procedural issue I am raising is: Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the minister to read the amounts for each of the V otes? Otherwise, we agreed that should there be any possibility, we may vary. The minister is only reading the V otes without giving us the amounts the Hansard will capture.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable colleagues, the report is already captured on the Hansard. The report from page 26 has the V ote, amount and purpose. Please read the report.(The report is hereby attached.)MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Chairperson, I think the minister has not done a good job. The total, which is Shs 490 billion, on the schedule is for the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs and it is Shs 90 billion for salary enhancements, yet there is salary enhancement for various V otes; both wages and salary enhancements. On the V otes with salary enhancement for local government, and universities for scientists, that is the total and that is what that money is for.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 457,063,735,891 be provided for as Central Government supplementary recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023. (Question put and agreed to.)Referral hospitalsTHE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honour -able colleagues, I propose the question that a total sum of Shs 9,526,547,852 be provided for referral hospitals as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.I put the question that a total sum of Shs 9,526,547,852 be provided for referral hospitals as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.(Question put and agreed to.)Foreign missionsTHE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that a total sum of Shs 2,811,276,297 be provided for under foreign missions as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.I put the question that a total sum of Shs 2,811,276,297 be provided for under foreign missions as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.(Question put and agreed to.) Local governmentsTHE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that a total sum of Shs 370,849,807,950 be provided for under local government as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.MR ODUR: Mr Chairperson, I seek clarification on two V otes under local government, that is V ote 827: Butambala District - Shs 1.5 billion and V ote 893: Mitooma District Local Government - Shs 2.628 billion for 47 kilometres of roads. I request that that is explained.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, honourable member. That is under Part A 8396Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.1 FOR FY 2022/2023of the schedule, not Part B. Otherwise, we are handling Part B.MR WAMAKUYU: Mr Chairperson, the issue the Member has raised is under Part A, which we deferred.MR ODUR: Mr Chairperson, I took my notes very well. I have looked at the figures that were under Part A. I even have the items I wanted to query with their V otes. For example, the one that the committee wrote that requires Parliament to approve first is V ote 003 under the Office of the Prime Minister, which is Shs 1.5 billion for commencement of land preparation for a humanitarian base in Namanve. I have an issue with that.The second one is V ote 008: Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Under Part B, it is Shs 2 billion for EAC meetings on tax policy conventions. Then I have V ote 893: Mitooma District Local Government, the sum of Shs 2.628 billion to rehabilitate 47 kilometres of roads and the roads are even captured.My issue is on Shs 2 billion to do 47 kilometres of roads. This is why I am seeking clarification.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Jonathan, on which page of the report is that captured? I do not see it under Part B, which we are processing. I cannot stand on issues, which are not in the report. We are handling Part B.MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Chairperson, I do not know why the finance minister or chairperson is not coming to explain. Monies for local governments were given wrong codes and so, the local governments could not spend until Parliament revotes and puts them in the right codes. That is the money being captured in districts like Butambala and Mitooma. What is the problem with that?THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that a total sum of Shs 370,849,807,950 be provided for under local government as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.(Question put and agreed to.)Total recurrentTHE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that a total sum of Shs 840,251,367,990 be provided for as total recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 840,251,367,990 be provided for as total recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2022/2023.(Question put and agreed to.)Supplementary Development Expenditure for Financial Year 2022/2023Central GovernmentTHE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that a total sum of Shs 285,828,361,577 be provided for as Central Government development supplementary expenditure for Financial Year 2022/2023. I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 285,828,361,577 be provided for as Central Government development supplementary expenditure for Financial Year 2022/2023. (Question put and agreed to.)Foreign MissionsTHE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that a total sum of Shs 1,027,305,400 be provided for as total Foreign Missions development supplementary expenditure for Financial Year 2022/2023. I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 1,027,305,400 be provided for as total Foreign Missions development supplementary expenditure for Financial Year 2022/2023.[The Deputy Chaiperson]SUPPLEMENTARY RECURRENT EXPENDITURE FOR FY 2022/20238397THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 27 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.(Question put and agreed to.)Local governmentsTHE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that a total sum of Shs 397,854,104,501 be provided for as total local governments development supplementary expenditure for Financial Year 2022/2023. I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 397,854,104,501 be provided for as total local governments development supplementary expenditure for Financial Year 2022/2023.(Question put and agreed to.)Total developmentTHE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that a total sum of Shs 684,709,771,478 be provided for as total development supplementary expenditure for Financial Year 2022/2023 – clarification? MR OSHABE: “Total development” is a new term that, probably, the minister would want to explain to us. What is total development? We have heard about capital development and all that. So, I need clarification before we can approve it, Mr Chairperson. THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honour -able member, this is the total of the amounts we have passed for the development compo-nent under central government, local govern-ments, regional referral hospitals and missions abroad. MR OSHABE: So, it is the total of Government expenditure.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes. (Laughter) Honourable colleagues, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 684,709,771,478 be provided for as total development supplementary expenditure for Financial Year 2022/2023.(Question put and agreed to.)Total supplementary expenditure for Financial Year 2022/2023THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I now propose the question that a total sum of Shs 1,524,961,139,468 be provided for as total supplementary expenditure for Financial Year 2022/2023. I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 1,524,961,139,468 be provided for as total supplementary expenditure for Financial Year 2022/2023.(Question put and agreed to.)MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUMETHE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable minister?3.28THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto. (Question put and agreed to.)(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding _)REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY3.29THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No. 1 and passed it with amendments –(Members rose_)8398Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.1 FOR FY 2022/2023THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think we needed to clearly put what we have covered and capture what has been deferred. (Laughter) We have considered Part B only. Honourable colleagues, please, let us listen to the minister.MR MUSASIZI:  Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No. 1 and passed Shs 1,524,961,139,468 and deferred all expenditures under the 3 per cent. (Interjection)  Yes.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, for emphasis, let me read the figure, again. It is Shs 1,524,961,139,468. That is what we have passed, which is captured under Part B. Now, whatever I am saying is also being captured on the Hansard. So, in case of any doubt, one will refer to the Hansard. That is why we extract and attach it to the resolutions.MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, just a correction on the motion that we asked him to… He stated, “… and stood over those under 3 per cent.” It is not “… under 3 per cent”. It should be “… and stood over the 3 per cent.” THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Also, when they are extracting the resolution – it is for emphasis and I am repeating it. We extract the resolution and it goes with the Hansard. I want to emphasise – and the Clerk should capture it in the resolution - that we only processed Part B of the Schedule. It is well captured. The other one was deferred.3.33MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Mr Speaker, again, I will try to persuade you, when you say we have handled only Part B of the Schedule. What is the schedule for?  It is a schedule to a law we are processing, just like others. The schedule is to something else. We cannot go to the schedule without addressing that law. That is the point I have been trying to make; that you cannot pick the schedule, which is dependent on something else and process it without addressing the substantive Bill, which is before us. You can see the confusion now when he says, “We have stood over.” By practice, when we stand over something here, it means the process is not complete. You are expected to come back – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why I told him that we have deferred the matter. The Bill will come. When we handle the other part, we shall consolidate and get a Bill and move forward. MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY3.35THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (MR HENRY MUSASIZI):  Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of Supply be adopted by this House. (Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister and honourable colleagues, congratulations.  I know that we might have taken – honourable colleagues, let us listen to one another. I know we might have had divergent views, but for all of you who had divergent views, I know that what was very critical was that we need to put more scrutiny to the money spent under the 3 per cent.How do we reach that? That is where we are having a difference. Some are saying that we should do it now and others are saying we should do it later. That was a major purpose for all of us. Chairman of the Budget Committee, you will have to go back as a team, sit, look SUPPLEMENTARY RECURRENT EXPENDITURE FOR FY 2022/20238399THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 27 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.into these issues, scrutinise further and you ensure that indeed the House is satisfied. You will bring a report, which will satisfy the House on how money spent under 3 per cent was considered.3.36THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Mudimi Wamakuyu):  Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members.  While we were processing the supplementary schedule, we moved under rule 153 of our Rules of Procedure; consideration of a supplementary schedule. We specifically looked at the rule (2); the supplementary estimates presented in subrule (1) and (3) which reads: “The Speaker shall commit the proposed supplementary estimate to the Budget Committee and to each sectoral committee the part of the supplementary that falls within the jurisdiction of their respective sectoral committees.”All this was committed to sectoral committees and I guess we, Members of Parliament, belong to sectoral committees. What we process here are reports from the sectoral committees. They reported to Parliament.Again, we have to go back again and refer - I need the guidance, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, you have time. Go and consult. If you hit a snag anywhere, we are available. We shall guide you. 3.38MR ABDU KATUNTU (Independent, Bugweri County, Bugweri): I am extremely happy with this conversation that has been going on. At last, the House is paying attention to this critical issue. I thought that the chairperson of the Committee on Budget should have picked lessons. I thought the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should have picked lessons; that there is something which is not correct with the way we have been considering the 3 per cent. Let this be the last time we have such a conversation. We should clean up our acts. The only power to talk of about this institution is appropriation. Once we gamble with it, we are no House to talk of. Yes, “The ayes have it.” Sometimes, it is like we have supplied, but how much have we supplied for what reason, and we have not yet even critically addressed our minds to it.To the finance minister and the Committee on Budget, this should be the last time we have this sort of thing. We are not looking very good to the public. There is a very big issue. We reject an item here, as Parliament, and then somehow, the Executive comes and says, “by the way, we nonetheless spent it under the 3 per cent.” Can you do this, when the House or even committees have sat and carefully considered an issue? However, the Executive goes ahead and spends money on the very terms we have rejected; then they say, “Yes, you rejected but we have spent it as 3 per cent.” This should be the last time, especially to the ministers; those who are saying that we are quarrelling. This is actually a quarrel. When we talk about taxpayer’s money, they have entrusted that responsibility to us to make sure that their money is appropriated correctly and intelligently.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. There is a procedural matter.MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Against all odds, we allowed the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to partially deal with his supplementary schedule.I am alive to the fact that the House is full today, artificially in some way. I am impatient that we are here and there is a post supply debate, when we still have Members in prison. (Applause) I am running out of patience. You committed that you will handle this matter and we address that matter. Wouldn’t it be proper that we vacate that post supply debate and address a critical matter of the rights of our Members? (Applause)8400Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.1 FOR FY 2022/2023THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, I still stand by my commitment. Honourable Minister for Internal Affairs, we have dealt with this and we are done. Honourable Minister of Internal Affairs, before I allow anyone to speak, first, tell us what has happened and then we shall hear from the Leader of the Opposition.1.42THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. David Muhoozi): Mr Speaker, you gave your guidance in the Communication from the Chair. The Leader of the Opposition raised his sentiments. I want to say, from the onset, that I share the same sentiments and concerns.I watched, with consternation, that clip; that brutality was absolutely not warranted. Even so, especially coming on the hills of Buvuma - this makes it even more objectionable.What we have done thus far - and I am surprised the LOP says those honourable members are not yet released - we passed the instruction to release them unconditionally and I am going to follow through on that one. (Applause.) Secondly, I heard Members say that the actions of -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, let us listen to the minister and then we shall have a chance to react. Otherwise, I do not know what we shall react to if we do not listen to the Minister. GEN. MUHOOZI: I heard sentiments, including that it is surprising that it was done at the gates of Parliament. My view is that it should not be done anywhere, whether near Parliament or wherever and against anyone - not just Members of Parliament. So, to that extent, action will be taken. I want to promise this House that action will be taken and we shall inform the House. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Leader of the Opposition?3.44THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Mr Speaker, I acknowledge the report of the honourable minister. However, I would like to say that his orders are appreciated but he should understand that orders on actions illegally done really do not matter; an illegality with or without an order is an illegality. We wait for action on the officers that manhandled these honourable Members of Parliament.Mr Speaker, for the record, the Members are 11 and I want this to be on record so that when we are looking for culprits, they know the victims are known: i. Hon. Joan Namutaawe, Woman MP of Masaka District;ii.  Hon. Betty Ethel Naluyima, Woman MP of Wakiso District;iii.  Hon. Juliet Kakande Nakabuye, Woman MP of Masaka City;iv.  Hon. Manjeri Kyebakutika Woman MP of Jinja City and Deputy Opposition Chief Whip;v.  Hon. Nyakato Asinansi, Woman MP of Hoima City;vi.  Hon. Joyce Bagala Ntwatwa, Woman MP of Mityana District;vii.  Hon. Florence Kabugho, Woman MP of Kasese;viii.  Hon. Stella Isodo Apolot, Woman MP Ngora District;ix.  Hon. Helen Nakimuli, Woman MP of Kalangala District;x.  Hon. Hanifa Nabukeera Woman MP of Mukono District; andxi.  Hon. Joan Acom Alobo, Woman MP Soroti City. Mr Speaker, this comes against the backdrop of what you explained in your opening statements that honourable members had lodged a petition to the Speaker over this mistreatment.Mr Speaker, they logged the complaint in their own right. That complaint is not a legal battle, but a public demonstration of their dissatisfaction.SUPPLEMENTARY RECURRENT EXPENDITURE FOR FY 2022/20238401THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 27 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.We would like to uphold - and this is where I want to challenge the honourable Minister of Internal Affairs to come here and tell the public whether demonstrations of a peaceful nature are illegal and unconstitutional in this country, so that we can know that they have a new constitution we are not privy to. That actually we are operating under two legal regimes: one that applies to some individuals - I have seen a one Gen. Muhoozi Keinerugaba all over the country. A serving military officer breaking the law and nobody has touched him, even being escorted by ministers of Government.I have seen NRM supporters demonstrating on several matters. I have not seen anybody touch them. Do you have the law for the NRM supporters and the law for the rest of the country, Mr Speaker? Mr Speaker, I would like to invite you, whereas the Minister says he made an order, I would like to ask you to walk with us to the Central Police Station (CPS) and see your Members (Applause). And probably to walk with the honourable minister to confirm that the culprits have been apprehended; you cannot do that. Can I say, Mr Speaker, that the continuation of these activities is going to set this country on fire. I will tell you, do not enter my house if yours is on fire. I can tell you, all of us are going to be in trouble. Whether you are a supporter of whatever project, whether you are a supporter of what nonsense, you are going to be all in trouble, all of us.And unless a difference of what is right and wrong is stated –(Interruption) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of order. Hon. Ogwang. Let us listen. You see, colleagues, when you listen, you know how to rebuttal. However, when you do not listen - Hon. Ogwang. MR OGWANG: Mr Speaker, first of all, with due respect to my very good friend, the honourable Leader of the Opposition, we are aware that this House operates on decorum under the Rules of Procedure. Mr Speaker, is it in order for the honourable Leader of the Opposition to use unparliamentary language of “nonsense.” Mr Speaker, is he in order?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, I usually make interpretations depending on the emotions I see running around. This is so painful to some people. If they call someone nonsense, then I would have a problem. But if the situation that was happening is nonsense, but not a Member being nonsense, not what is in the House being nonsense, then I do not have a problem. LOP, conclude. MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Actually, Mr Speaker, the biggest nonsense is beating up citizens. It is even nonsensical for anybody to defend it anywhere in any space, whether on the streets, in Parliament, or anywhere.I would like to ask, Mr Speaker, that you order this House to act on this impunity and we stop it. I would like to ask, Mr Speaker, if this is done again, anywhere on any citizen, I will lead any activity allowed under the law to make sure this House attends only to the business of ensuring the rights of the citizens.Mr Speaker, I submit.  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Now, honourable colleagues, with the situation we are in, honourable Government Chief Whip, the Rt Hon. Deputy Prime Minister, the Deputy Attorney-General, the Minister for Internal Affairs, the Leader of the Opposition, and the Whips from the side of the Opposition, we are going to meet in my waiting area. House is suspended for 10 minutes. (The House was suspended at 3.51 p.m.)(On resumption at 4.23 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, let us resume our seats. We need order in the House. I would like to thank you, colleagues, for the patience as we COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR8402Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.1 FOR FY 2022/2023consulted as leaders both in Government and the House over the unfortunate incident of this morning. Therefore, I would like to report as follows:One, as requested by the Leader of the Opposition, our colleagues have been unconditionally released. (Applause)I would like to thank the Speaker of Parliament who drove to the Central Police Station to follow up the matter to ensure our colleagues are released. She even drove with them up to the precincts of Parliament. I thank her for that. Honourable minister, I would like to thank you for the directive you gave. When you watch the videos, they look ugly. There should not be any sugar-coating. These people are not working for the Government. Honourable minister, you need to investigate this. I believe these are people who are not working for the Government. They are the people making this Government and our country be hated; they are saboteurs. You must investigate them. (Applause)Two, honourable colleagues, as we had agreed earlier, the Prime Minister on Tuesday - I understand there is a Cabinet sitting but we shall work on it. We had earlier said that on Tuesday, the Prime Minister shall bring a statement with regard to this issue of stopping Women’s Day celebrations, yet the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development guided all district women representatives to organise Women’s Day celebrations in their areas. In fact, tomorrow, I will be presiding over the same. It is embarrassing that some are stopped yet I have presided over others successfully. It is a double standard and we might look as if we are part of it. I also know the Prime Minister has presided over some. We need that statement, which should include today’s incidents; it should be well captured and the action taken against the errant officers that are destroying the image of our country and the Government.Three, as the leadership of the House, we are constrained by what has happened and we find it difficult to move on. I adjourn the House to Tuesday at 10.00 a.m.(The House rose at 4.27 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 2 May 2023 at 10.00 a.m.) [The Deputy Speaker]SUPPLEMENTARY RECURRENT EXPENDITURE FOR FY 2022/2023tItItItIItIttIIi: . ( llJiJPARLII.UIT{T OT UOI{AI'ARTPORT OF THE BUDGEf, COMIIITTEE OT{SI'PPLEMEITTARY EXPEITDITI'RT SCHEDT'LE I{O. 1 ANI)N)DEI{DA 1, 2, 3 & 4 FCIR THE FY 2022123.1vpvuw,qtd"'q{Fk&lrAPRIL 2(1231NAW"?ql.O lltroductlonRt Hon Speaker arrd Honorable Membcrs, on 23.d Dec.mber 2022, thcMhlstcr of Fma-acc, Planmng a-ad F,conomlc Development (MoFPED) lardbeforc Pa-rllamcnt a Supptementary cr.pcndrture Schedule I fot f! 2022123amountr-ng to UCX 2 387 ti Lon Flrdhermore, on 2nd March 2023, theI\ilrruster la.rd Addcndum 1 & 2 to thc Supplementary Schedute 1 aEountrngto UGX 33 851 b llon and UGX 13 479 brlhon respechvely In addrhon th.Mhrstcr la.rd Addendum 3 to Supplementary Schedulc No I Ft 2022123a-mountrrrg to 38.85 b lron on 22"d Ma-rch 2023 a d, addendum 4 toamountrng to UCX 499 bdlon on 306 March 2023 The SuppleBentaly.xpcndrhrre estrmates (rn UGX tr Loa) have beea categonzed as followsTrtL l: Br.d..lora of ttc SnDDLEcntrry BrFctrdlturctAupp Erp-rlthrn tto 3f.3rl ltattSupp Ef,D- lor HorApprovel byPrdhlncatAotrlSchedul. 1 1.316 I o7l 23e7Addendurn 1 o.034 o O.O3.lAddcndum 2 o oo5 o 008 o.ot3Addendu-o 3 o o 039 o.o39Addendurn 4 o o?9 o 420 o.499Totd 1.434 1.534 2.9?2Solrrccr MotrPEDRt Hon Speaker and Honorable Members, the supplementary scheduleNo 1, addcndum f,2, 3 & 4 were referred to the Comorttee on Budget forscruhny Ttre BudSet Commrttce commrtted to each S€ctoral Commrttec, thepart of thc supplementary that fals wrthrn the lurrsdrchon and thcCoEmrttees reported back to the Budgct Commrttee as requr.red by Sectron153(4) of the Rules of Procedure of the Pa.rhament of Uganda The BudgetCommrttee now reports theretor Expcndrturcs that lrrere not provrded for dunng appropnahon of theB\d$ct tor F'! 2022123,u Wage enhanccmcnt for UPDF stafr and screntrsts,ur. Unspcnt funds - Ths rs mostly External Frnancrng from Dcvelopmcntpa-rtners that could not be mcorporatcd at the trme of finalzrng thcBl'ld$ct for FY 2022123,rv Erpcndrture on S.cunty, andv Govern rent comrdtments such as ongorng contractual obhgahonsRcport of the Commrttee rs preBentedM2ltKq.twoparts as followsa) Part A Supplementary Requests wrtlun thc 3o/o l*gel|-,,rmft,b) Part B Supplementary Requests that rcqu[c pnor Pa-rham.nta-ryapprova.l,..1 licthodologyThc methodoloBt adopted by the Comrnrttee rnvolved exa.mrnatron of releva.ntdocumants ,nd rntaractrons wrth stekaholderdSt t holdcr. Con ultcd hcludc:a) MmBtcr of Fmancc PLannrng and Economrc Development,b) LEadershlrp of Scctoral Commrttces of Pa-rhamcntTha rclcarnt docu.acatr cnalaad laclqdcd:al Supplcmentary Expendrture Sch.dule No I alld Addenda 1-4,b) Submlssions by Mmrster of Frnance Ptallmng and EconomrcDevelopment,cl Sectoral Commrttccs Repods as per Rule 153 of the Rules of Procedure ofthc Parhamcnt of Uganda,d) The Conshtutron of thc Rcpubhc of Ugandac) Ttre Pubhc Flnancc MalageEent Act, 2015 & Rcgulatrons,0 The Rulcs of Procedurc of thc ParLamcnt of Uganda.gl Other documcnts inctudc,, thc Budget Act 2001, Mmrstenal PoLcystatements and approvcd Budgct Eshmates FI 2022/23 a-nong others1.2 Lcgd trnEcsorkAftde 156 (2) of thc Cons'ralhon ol the Repubhc ol Uganda states tlat "If vtresped of anA lnanool lear t 6 found ttat thc anount appropnated for anApurpose under thz Appropnohon Acr. rs u-sufficent or that a need h,,s ar6enlor eqendtdare for a putpose lor whtdt rlo amoun . has been appropndtcd. bAtlat Act, or th^t an! monr€s haue been e4)ended. lor a A putpose m ercess o/thc dma)nt oppropnated Jor that purpose or lor d p-upose lor u.tfud1 noamount has heen appropratcd. bA that Act, a supplemen ary esamateshou,Jng the sums requved or spent shall be latd dou.tn beforc Parb.ament,wtlun four months afret thc fionzq $ sle^t"The above aitrclc rs operatronaltzed under Sectron 25 of the Pubhc FmanceManagement Act, 2015 (as aeendedl whch provrdcs as follows, Secton 25of the Pubhc Frna-nce Management (Amendmentl Act (2Ol5lstates thatVD-3\VP(1) I:hE total s)pplement4ry aqendfi.te that rqu(es addi@nol resouresouer and aboue uhat $ approued. by Parkanent shu.ll not exceed. 3% of thetotal approued budget fot tl'at finarldal gear, uJtthout apprcuof ol Padtarnent(2) Where fu^d.s ore expend.ed. under subsedldn (1), suppleirEntary eshn?','tesshAutng thc sl,tnts spen. sholl be lofi- before Parhdnen latthatu four mon hsafter the naneg 6 spentF)lrth.rmorc, Regulatron 18(5), (6) and (7) of the Publrc FmaiceManagemcnt Regulahons 2016 provrde as follows(5) Padtanenf m/r! approue a Supplenen ary appropnadon or thE Mt ustermag apprctE a supplementoru budget, as the case nag be uhere theslpplemzn ary etpendtharc $ unauotdable or unforeseeable(6) For thc purposes ol tlus Regula,.oq(a) Utawdable mzans an expendture that cannat be postporBd. to the ncnfinanaal Aeo, thra,tgh ureman ,(b) Unforeseeable does not o.cfude an eqendrdarc thu, tuos loreseeablebg the wte at the frrnc of prepatado\ oJ the budget of the wte or aneqenltb)re tt'ul should haue been m.cfuded & thc budget of thE uote(7) An! expendrture, uh).h 6 tn et/€ss olJ thc opptopt@led. bud.qet ofwte and. Lohtdt ts ,tot & a@rdance utth thrs secfton shall be treatcd aslrss ol pubhc funas ds ptoaded Jot undet sectton 79 (1) ol thE Ad2.O EOTJRCE OT TSNDT.IIGRt Hoa Spea.k r and Honorable Members, accordrng to Rule 153(21 of theRules of Procedu-re of Pa-rhamcnt, thc supplcmentary estraatcs prcscnted toParhament shall clcarly spell out the source of fundrng for thesupplemcntary expendrtu-re requcst for each voteThe CoDmrttee was hformcd that tlle SuppleEentary Expendrture SchcduleNo 1 an the addenda there to wrll be fundcd from a combrnatron ofsupprcssron of releascs wrtlun the GoU Budget, rcallocatrons, domeatrcrevenuc (URA), ad&tonal local revenue coUcctrons (l,ocal GovemEents),addrhonal borrowrng as well as external financm8 whrch has already beenconfirmed as summanze d below\ra/r60urcc UGX bll oaISuppressron of wrthrn GoU Budget se7 ?2Rcallocatuon (lrcal Governmentl 3033Domeshc Revcnuc (URA) 587.04Domestrc Borrowrng 1,OO0.O5Non Tax Rcvenue ([.cal Covemmcntl 566Non Tax Revenue (Central Govemmentl 627?Extcmal Fmancmg(World Bank, ADB, EUI 694 4Totd 2,9?1.7a lu) Loca.l revenue a-mou-nhn8 to UOX 5.6 tllllon was co[ected by tacalI Govcrn@ents over and above the proJcctsons rn thcrr ongrnal budget for/ tlUS Frnanctal Yearf,HO rq supplementary expcndrtures to bc tunded through reallocahon - ucxI 3O.2 bllllotr Thrs rs to enable lacal Govern6ents wh,rch erroneouslyTrb[. 2: Br.rldoea of thc Source of trurdLagThc dctarls of thc fundrng arc provldcd hcrc bclow{ Extcrna.Uy Fmanced Supplementa-ry Erpendrtu.res - IrOX 698.4 bfio!,of wh,rch UCX 227 O b Iron rs for Uganda lntcr-Govcmmental FrscalTransfers (UGIFT) , UGX 150 6 18 for Uganda Murucrpal InfrastmcturalDeveloprnent (USMIDI and UGX 32O 8 b Lon rs from other sou.rcesrncludhg World Bank, Europea-n Umon (EU) , Alr'rc2-n DcvelopmcntBank among othcrs Thcsc funds tDere not spent by rcspcctrrc MDAS bythe close of Ft 2O2L 122 duc to th. Budget proccss cyclc, whcre thcbudget rs appropnated m May The funds wcre not rncluded rn thcBudgct for Fy 2022 123, for thc MDAS to spcnd thc funds It rcqur.rcs rc-vohng thls FErancEI Year 2022123Fundrng for proJect financmg &om the World Bank (U(X 661.3bllllolrl, Afncan DevelopEent Bark (IrOx f3.2 btltonl, Europcangdoa (UGX 21.8 bltltonl arld USAID (UOX O.8 blllloll. Faiure toreleasc these funds means that Govcro.Ecnt ts not ablc to rmplemcrlt theagrccd projccts and therefore won't meet the drsbu.rsemeat lurj(edrndlcators undcr Budget Supportu) Supplcmcntary expcn&tu.re that aie financed through Non-Tax Revenuecollechons amountrng I,GX, 62,? bllllor, Tlus rncludes UGX ,l{i.8bllllon to Natronal Crbzenstup and lrlmrgratson Control (NCICI fromprolectcd purchasc of morc passports by Ugandans, UCX 5.2 bultoncollected by Uganda W dlrfe Educatson Ccnt c (t WEC) and UgandaHotcl and Tounsm Trarmng Instrtute and UGX 10 8 b Lon collected byUtuversltes on account of rncrcashg number of studentsbudgeted under the wrong rtcms, to corcct therr Budgets The Chart of@-tt\i,,1Y,&s-ffi'4,4ff+I(Ac@unts waa changed rn thrs Fmancral Yeai, and some tacalGovernments erroneously pLaccd funds on preuous rtem codesv) Suppressron of classfied proJect rcleases undcr Votc oO4. Mmrstry ofDefensc - UGX 339.aog bllllo! to cover shortfalls on the UPDF wageblvrl Domestrc revenue the supplcmcntary cxpcndrturc to be fundcd throughaddrhonal revenue collectron by URA alnounts lrGX S8?.O tllllonvu)Borrowrng the supplcmcntary expendrtu-rc to be funded throughaddrtronal revenue collechon by URA amounts t OX 1,O(X!.O bfioaThe Commrttee observed that out of the funds provrded under suppres$ontotalhg UGX 5a7.7'ba, only gOX 339.8 bllllon was lustr-tcd Howerr.r, thcCommrttce q/as not provrdcd wlth detarls of supprcsscd Votes and therrcorrespondrn8 ahounts totalng to UOX 2 7.892 bllllonPIRT A3.O ASPPLffiEI{TARY REQTTESTA WrTHrll THE 3% LFr}Ar. LllilT3.1 votc (X)il: Strtc Eour. - lr(X 23o.545ba qras rcquested assupplementary expcndrture of srhrch UGX 21O 545 b hon as class iedexpcndlttue to enable State Housc handle opcrahonal shordalls mcludrngwelfare and sccunty and UGX 20bn ls subvenhon to Kura MotorsCorporatronKMC plan8 to produce crght (81 layoola EVS 1O 5m, 7l-Passeager EtectncCrty Buses at UGX 8 4 b lrcn, seven (7) Kayoola EvS 8 om, 56 Pass.ngersElcctnc Crty Buses at UGX 4 9 b lon, fi.ve (51 Kalroolia Coach 10 5m,44PassenScr Electnc Crty Bus.s at UGX 5 7 Bn a,ad fivc (51 360 Kw Fast DCCha-rgers at UGX 1055 Bn tlrou8h a Prcsrdentral drrectrve rn h,rs addressesto thc nahon on 2oln a d 27tb July 2022The Commrttee furthcr obscrvcd that Kura Motors Corporahon has bccaCaprtalEed by Oovemment of Uganda cumulahvely to UGX 312 45 btftonfrom Fy 2018/19 to thc FY 2022123 to estabhsh and operatronalze theItrra vetucle PLant; Technologr Transfcr for the Kayoola Bus.s, scttrng upthe Automotrve Industnal and Technologr ParkIn the FY 2022123, the Commrttee on Presrdenha.l Affarrs recervedmformatron that, k:ura Motors Corporahon (KMC) was at the bnnk ofcotrlmer! and that, KMC requested for frontloadmg'of funds to\.(enable thcm c4)cdrte rmplcmentatron of ackvrtres of Phage tr and thereaftertransrt to coD-mercralrzatuon. KMC madc a commrtment that thc rcqucst tofrontload caprtalEatson rs honorcd, they would only requrrc UGx 12 sbn asoperatronal cxpcnses for tllrce consecuhve Frnancral Yea-rsHowever, rt was estabhshed that UGX 77 O9 brllrcn was appropnat d toK,rra Motors Corporauon aid was ,ret to be absorbedthc CoEElttcc rccol! !cnd.| ar folloer:l. Dcclhc. rpprcral of UOt 2O.O bfio! lor trlln uotor.Corporrtloa dncc PrslhEart hrd rpproprhtcd fo!& sltht! thcUG,X, ?7.O9 blllloq lor thc procrrtcEcnt of prst rrd llrtcrhlr lorttc productlor ol clcctilc hu..a..tt. A edrc lor laoacy rudlt bG Endcrtrtcn by thc Omca of thcAtrdltor Ocrcnl of thc fo.ndt rdernced to l(lln fotor. lor thc litrtthrcc f,r.rtrchl ,arsr.ttt. Appro?rl of UOX 2lo.stts bfllloa to Votc OO2: 6trt Eou.c rrfollot . lor clr..lned arpcadltu.rGl3.2 Votc OO3: Omcc of ttc H.irc Mtd.tcr - UGX 1.3 tfioa to cnableoficc of the Pnmc Muuster to commence on land preparatron for thehumamtanan base at Namanve, Mukono Dlst'rct wh-rch was gr!rcn byU8a-nda Investment AuthontyThe Coa.nlttcc rccoE oco& rpprolrl of UOX 1.5 bllllo! to Votc OO2 -Olncc ol thc HaG Ulniltor to coEloctrcc oa l.ad lrcDuatlol lor tfi.huannlt iirn ba!. rt ltraanlrG, Un&olo Dbtrlct.3.3 Votc OO4 - [tdrtry ol Dofoacc rEd Vctcn! Afirlr.: UOX 90.139bllllor ls salary enhanccment of thc UPDF Sctuor Omcersthc Cololllttcc iccol!.ncadr rDDEt rl ol UGX 90.139 bllllo! to VotcOO4 for rrhry crhrlccEcnt of t'lle lrP!)F SGnlor Oftccr..3..1 Votc 006 - Utli.try of Forclgn AIhlrr: UOX 13.529 blllioa to cater. . , {or paymcnt of outstandrng arears for 2022 and contrrbutron for 2023 forlI[O.-.fiE AArcan Uruon (AUl Thrs was provrded to enable .etarn rts nghts topa.rAclpate, and votc dunng thc Alrrcan Umon meetrngs and summrts,{v }(---? rHThc coD.Elttcc !ccor!![cn& approt d ol Uox 13.529 blllloa to Votc006: utd.try of Forclg! AlhLrt for prrrmcnt of outstlttdh! arrclrt for2022 erd contrlbqdon for 2()23 for the Aftlcra Uuloa (Agl3.5 Vota OO8: Mitri.try ol Fltrrtrccr Phnnlng .nd EcoloElcDc?clopEclt - UGX 16.357 blllloa to cover shortfalls on cnacal actrvrtresmcludrng the PPDA appeals tnbunal, acquBrtron of land for the one-stopcentrc at Uganda Buarnes8 Fac rtahon CenEe (UBFC) l(I Koloto, shordallsunder the PPP Urut and fundrag for EAC mcchnSs a.rrd resourcemobitzatrons tra!rclsThc Comm-rttee obscrved the supplemcntary provrsron to vote 0O8 r8 brokcndown as follows PPDA Appea.t Tnbunal- UGx 2 o99 b [on, UgandaBusmess Faohtatron Centre (UBFC)-IO 258 b Lron, Fuaance arldAdmmrstrahon-Ucx 2 b hon, alad Pubhc krvatc Partnershrps Urut - UGX2b Lron.ll PPDA Appcd trlbulrl - UGX 2.099 blltonTtrc Commrttce obserrrcd that thc hrbhc Procuremcnt and D8posal of PubLrcAss.ts (Amcndment) Act, 2021 creatcd addrtronal responslb rhes thatrequrred much rcgular srttng of thc Tnbunal The Amendoent creatcd aprovrsron where pubhc procurements are haltcd untrl a pctrtron foradmlnlstratrve revrew rs drsposed by the Accounhng oficer of the Authontyor thc thbunal f applcants arc not satrsfied wlth procurement processAccordrngly, the functrorung of the Tnbunal has bccome fiJltrme rcqurnngad&tronal resourcea to fac rtatc thc srttrngs for erpedrhous drsposal of therncreasmg numbcr of mattars before rtThc Coloalttcc rccotnEca& rppaot rl of Uox 2.099 to votc OO8:Mln .try of Flnancc, PlrtrdnA rad Econoalc dcaclopllcat to crtcr foraddittolrl .trtntor? rc.Doadbllitlc. b, thc hbuc Procutcrlclt rldDtapoxl ol Publc Lrctr ADDcrL. t.rlbtrtrrl.Ul Ulrnd. Bu!lac!! Frcllltrtlotr C.atrc gBfrcl -10.254 bllllonThe U8anda Busmess Fac rtahon Ccntie rs a new fac .rty based m Kototo,Kampala, housrng drfrerent busrness agcncres mcludmg Uganda InvestmcntAuthonty, Uganda Rcgrstrahon Scruccs Bu-reau and Caprtal Ma-rketsAuthonty Ttre Centrc rs rntended to support the economy by reducrng thetr-Bc rt takes to rcSrster, hcense a-nd opcrate a buarness rn Ugaida.$r4/ffi8\{vThe Conrmrttce was rnformed that the Centrc lacked ample packhg for theBrowrng numbcr ofusers $rho vrsrt the agenccs for servrces Thc Commrttc.sras further riformed that 3 ncEhbonng plots compnscd of Plots, 48 and 4AMalcom X Avcnue and 3A Baskerv lc Avenue at Kololo beca-rnc ava ablc forsale on thc open rcrl estate ma-rketThe Commrttee ob8€rved from the Survey report comp cd by Waia SurveySolutrons that the mdrvldual plot acrcage arrd pncc rs as urdtcated rn thetablc belowTrblc 3: DctatL of.Etjcct proDortlcr rcqulrcd tr lhloloOn revrenr of thc valuatron report of the Land Valuer from l\&mstry of LaId8,Ttre Com-mlttee notcd tlEt Plot 3A Baskervrlle Avenue has cncumbrances(mortgag.d to Stanbrc Bank Lulltedlthc CoraDlttca rccoE6Gn&:tl approtnl ol gGX 6.788 bllllon for litrPED for Durpo.o! of thcprocu!.lDctrt ol Ir.ad (Plot .tA Udcot! X AeGtrEG rtrd Ptot 48 ihlcolt!X Avcnlrcl to crpa.trd thc parHrg rf,G8 for the t lradr BudnclsFrcllltrtloa Ccatrc (IrBfrCllll Delcr ol rDprovrl of UOjf 3,92?an lor Irrocurcrrort of Plot 3ABr3tcn,lll3 A?cntrc pcldhg clerrancc ol thc ctrcqmbtalccr o! thcpropcrtlr/tttlc.filfh.ncc rnd AdDhbtntlor - UOX 2 bl[ioaThc Comrnlttee was rnformed that thc Mmrstry of Fmance, Planrlrlag a.rrdEconomrc Derrclopmcnt Iaccd a shordall on the provrsrcn for trarrcl for EACas wcll as resource mob rsahon reliated tra\rcls abroad TheMrnlstiy recert ed a supptementaiy allocatroa of UGX 2 b honThe Comrlrttee observed that thrs rs a recurrcnt rtem m the l!ftrustry budgetthat ought to have becn budgeted for at appropnatron Thc supptementaryrtcm doesnt pass the t st of funforeseen' srnce ths rs a r.current rtem thath(9hrl\Propcfii Rclcrcrcc AcrcrSc llrrLt V.lu. UOX1Plot 3A Baskerv le Avenue o32 3,927,100,0002Plot 4A Malcolm X Arrcnu. o28 3,265,O00,0003Ptot 4E} Malcota X Avenue o30 3,s13,600,000totrl o.90 1o,705,700,ooov \fri.\r.-_ --A>rFt{the Mmlstry undertakes crrcry yea-r Duc to the urgcncy to attcnd EACmeehngs for Tax Pohcy purposes, the rtem passcs the "unavoldable" testThc Coarntttca rccotrDGnd. rlrprovrl ol UGx 2 bllllotr fot MFPED r. rDrovLlon to auDDort rcaou.rcc aoblllado! rnd tn?al rchtcd c4Enaca.tvl Pnbuc Priertc Prrtacr.hlp. Udt - UGX 2 bullolThe comruttee waa uformed that upon cxpry of a World Bank Gralt tosupport the Pubhc Pnvate Partncrshrp Umt, funds were no longer avalablcto pay techmcai 8taff to provrde techmcal support rn rnfraatructure(engmeenng), l€gal (Corporate 6nance, mcrgcrs and acqursrhon) as q/cll asprolect financeThe Cooranttcc obscrvcd tiat PPP experts provrde structunng arrd frrarlcralmodclng advrce to th. UruL Tlus enabtes Covcmmcnt to preparebackground rnformahon rcqufed by negotratrnS t a.ms wlt]r potentra-l pnvatescctor pa.rtnera. The commrttec notcs that thc Urut rntends to achrcve a lerrclof 17 professronal/techmcal stalf arrd regula.nze non-tech$cal support sta-frThG CoErllttac lecoEacad. rlrpto?d of UGX 2 tlllloa lor vote OO8:FPED for !tr.po.c. ol .upportfurt thc actlelttc. ol thc PPP Urtt tn thcrflnl.try.3.6 Votc OOa: fbt try ol Flaracc, Irha.al.S ud EcottotDicDclr?lopEcrt - UGX 2.,173 bfiotr to cater for Uganda TelccommurucahoasCorporatron Lmrtcd (UTCL) Boa-rd expenscs constrtutcd to supe.mtcnd o\rcrthe affarrs of t TL Ths lrras provrded followurg thc srgmng of thc Asset Salealld Purchasc Agrcem.nt betwcen UTL and UTCL wluch neceasrtatcdconshtuhng of a bo€-rd to supenntend over the a-frarrs of UTCLThc coa.lrlttcc r,GcoEr!c!& rDDrotnl ol Uox 2.473 blltoa to votc oO8for Ugrlr& TelccoEmqdcrtloaa Corpontioa LtEttcd (lricLl BordcrDCraea3.? Votc Ol3: Mhr.try ol Edrcrtlo! rlld sports - UGX 2O.f b llo! r!follost:4 Uax 3.8 blllio! for OOU contnbuton for upgrade and reconstiuchon ofNdclc Umverslty sports iacrhtres m prepa-rahon for the Eastern A-&rcaUruversrty games 2022The Commrttcc obscrved that NdeJe Umvcrsrty won the brd on behalf of Ugandato host the 12th e&uon of the Federatron of Eastem Alnca U v.rsrty (FEAUSIgames drat took pl,ace rn Deccmber 2022 The Uruversrty was rcqurrcd to upgradclts 6ports facfutre a standard bcfithng of the host natron\$T\${l- ,.A.IIET_Tho Cotnalttcc nccollmcn& .pprot.l of UGX 3.8 bfioL to votG Ol3:Mtlt try ol Educrtlon rnd Sports for GOU coatrlbqtlon for upgrrac radnacoEtrEctiotr of dclrc Uahcr.tBr rDort. frcllltlc. ln prcp.ntio! forttc Er.tcn Alrlcr Unlvcrstty graca 2022[] UGX 3.O hillion rs requ[ed for cnacal actrvrhes under the Educahon PolcyReuew Commrssron,The Commrttee obscrved that Commrssron was constrtuted by the Mrmster underLegal Notsce No 5 of202l arld had not been allocated a budget smce mccphonHorpet .r, the Comrtuttce obscrved that out of the UGX 3 Obn allocatcd under thesuppl.mentary, UCX O 6OObn rs to be used to hll.e 3 untta of vehrcles to facfitatethe Commrssronh achvrtres for the remarmng months of FY2O22123 tn holdpubhc heanngs m at lcast 2 sub-rcgrons The cost of vehtclc hrrc secmsoverstated arrd rt would be more cost-efrechve to purchas. thc vehrclesfhc CoEDlttcG rccolnroc!&itl rDpro?rl of lrC"X 3.O blllio! to rrotc Ol3 - Mbf.tr, of Edqcrtloa sldSDortr for crtdcd rctMtlcr undcr thc Educ.tlon Poltc, RcvlceCoaaLarlotrlll UOX O.6OOb^ ehaaed for hlrc 3 urlt of ?chlcie. to frcllltrtc tteCor!t!|.don'. rctleitlca bc rllocrtcd to thc Edqcrtlotr PollcyRcelcs Coa.nt!.toar .hodd l,'rtced bc utllltcd tosrr& tNrcLr.cof 3 doublc c.btrr plcl tl! crra to ctr{rtc Gort clfcctlsEact .ltt) UOX 3.3 btltotr rs rcqured for thc rollout of the Educaron ManagementInformatron System (EI\,fl Sl,TIie Commrttee observed that m the bud$d ot ff2o22l23 UGX 2.86Obn hadbeen a-uocated, howcver, thcre rs aeed for addltronal funds to cat r forrncreasrng number of lea-rncrsThc Cotnalttcc thcrclorc recoaaca& rpprovd of UOX 3.3 blllioL tototc Ol3: Mlatrtry ol Educrtlon rnd Sportr for ttc rollout ol thcEducetlor Ualrrgcrncnt laformtloa Ay.taE (EMlAlW-wt\Fttv) UOX lO.O blllioa ls requrred to clca-r outstandrng commrtments for thesupply of mshtutronal matcrrals for pnma-ry aid seconda-ry schoolsThe Comlauttec observcd that the budget fot FY2O22123 for hstmcaonalmatenals eras suppresscd from UGX 33 992bn to UGX 10.157bn and thatby.nd of qua-rter one The funds wcre used for 2oyo advance to supphcrs ofS 2 and S 3 textbooks and part of outsta-ndrng obhgatrons fol the prcvrousyea-r Therefore the Mmrstry has arr outstdtdmg ba.lanc. of UCX43,415,361,448 for rnstruchonal matenals. UGX lOObn provrded m thesupplementa-ry was mcant to reduce tlus outstandrng balance to enableaupphers dellrcrThc CoE.ldttcc rccoaEaad. rDllrov.l of UOX LO.O bllltotr to votc Ol3 -fidrtry of Educrtloa and Sport to ctrGrr outstrndhg coaoltaetttt forthc sqpply of t!.tructlotrd Ertcri.L for Ddanrt ltrd rccordrryrchooL.3.8 Votc OlSr Mtntrtry of T'rrde, Indu.try rnd Coopcntlvc. - UGX85.4 bfioa for Govemraent of Uga:eda (GOU) contnbutron to MunyonyoCommonwcalth Resort for construchon of a Conventrcn Centie, lnprepa-rahon for hoshng of thc Non-Algnmcnt Movement (NAM) Confcrencern Ugalda tlus ycarHonorable Members, Uganda rs scheduled to host th. NAM Summrt tlusye2.r l2023l Howevcr, there ra no confercncc fac rty that can accomrnodatethe over 3,OOO delegates expected from the 120 Membcr States and the 17Obs.rvcr countr-res AccordrnSly, Covemment of Ugarda cntered rnto JorntVcnturc Agreement wrth Mecra In\ estoenta Lrmrted as thc fcasrble optronfor construchng and op.ratrng the Co renuon Ccntrc for hostng dre Non-Algned Mot ement, O77 arld Chma SuomrtsMoFPED takes note of Parhament's concem on the nced to ca-.ry outvaluatron to determrne Government equ-rq contnbuaon m MunyonyoCommonwealth Resort, accordrn8ly, we w l task UDC, whrch rsGovemment's rnveatment a-rm, to take stock of all Governmcnt's equrty rnMunyonyo CoGmon$realth Resort and all other Governraent ventures andprovrde a report to both Cabmet and ParlE&ent However, rn order not toderarl preparatons for hostrng of the NAM conlcrence and the resulhng&plomatrc and economrc benefits, tlus Supplemcnta-ry has been authonzedfor expendrture12tlG$-*-IThe Colnmrttee observed ttrat the total cost for the constmchon works lseshmatcd at USD.4oM Lon (excl 18% VAT) Meera ln\rcstmcnts Lrmrt dwould contnbutc cqualy to the Jomt Venture As part of rts contnbuhon,Meera Inrrcstments Lrmrted wrll contnbute land measunng O 926 hccta-rese 28gadesl lued at UGX16 4bn leascd for 49 yea.rs to the Jornt VentureThe Land has alrcady bcen tr:ansferred to the Jornt venture names.Thc rnvestmcnt rs algned to Tounsm Dc\rclopmcnt Prograjrl undcr the NDPm whlch calls for rntervenhons rn consEucAon of a Nahonal ConvcntronCenter to scalc up Meetngs, Incenhves, Confercnces a.rrd Events (l\nCE)ltre CoEmrftce was furthcr mformed that, the dates for hoshng theconvenEon aie predctermrned (Novcmbcr 2023) and the conskuctron of thcconfcrcncc facfity ls expccted to takc l4Months Below rs thc progress todater. A lornt Ventu-re Agrcement a-tld Sharehotder Agreement wcrc srgnedbetween the Covcmment of Uganda rcpres€nted by UDC €nd MIL on196 August 2022 ar\d, 2"d September 2022 rcspcchtiely. A sharcccrtrficatc waa rssued.u A Boa-rd of D[ectors was conahtutcd compnsrng of scrrcn (7) mcmbersand cach party has equal represcntatron of threc (3) membcrs on theboa-rdur A Jornt Vcnture Company (JVCI - Spckc Resort Convcntron CcntreUganda Lrmlt d was rncorporated on 2nd Scptember 2022 to lmplemcntthe proJectrv UDC recerved a supplementa-rj. budgct of UGX86.4Bn of wlxch UGX38Bn was for acqu.rsrtron of 500/6 sha-rcholdmg m SRCC The b€lance rs tobe grven as a sharcholdcr toan to thc companyv Construchon of the conventron ccntcr rs under wayThe Commlttce furthcr obscrved that Spck Resort Convenhon Centre(SRCC) Joht Venture ra a sepa.rate busrncss enhty from thc cxrstngCommonwealth Resort MunyonyoDunng the Budget proccss ot f{ 2022/23 Pa-.ha-ment rcalocated UGX86 4Bn requested for the Jornt Vcnture to other pnontrcsThe Commrttee observed that sclcctron to host Non Algncd Movement (NAM)convenuon rnvolved negotratrons, lobblng and was not a gua-rantec thatUganda would be Belected to host h.nce the convenhon !,/aa unforcsecablca-nd rs unavordable because gove.nment has alrcady comertted ttself to hosta-nd rts dat s aic prcdetermmcd. Addrhonaly, Uganda as a Mcetrngs,lncentrves, Conlerences Exlubrhons (M[CE) deshnatron w l promotebtounsm and create J1,/(ffiNb-v.}t-13NFtThe Commrttee noted that Artclc 159 of the Constrtuhon on the Power ofGovernment to borrow or lcnd requrres ul ctause 5, 6, and 7 as follows(q PontanEnf naA, bA rcsoluho\ otlthonse the Couemmcnt to en er &to 4Lagreenlent lor thE grung ol a laan or a gra t out ol ang pubhc lund or pubhcaeount(6) An agreernent entercd tn o under clause (5) ol tfus attde shail be lotdbeforc Parb.dmznt and shall not @mz tn o operor@n unfess t hzs beelappmBd bA Parhament bg resofuhon(7) Fot thc putposes of thts ottrcle, thc e4resston'loan' ficfudes anA mone!lent or guEn to or bg tle Gouetlncnt on @n/,ttron oI rciln or repaAoenl andang othet form ol botmuang or lenlng tn respect ol uhtch -(a) motues frum thc Consoldated Fund. or ang othcr pubhc f)nd mia beused.lor pagncnt or repogmcnt, or(b) !,,orues lrom ang fund. bg uhatzuer name u.lled, esttbhshcd. lor thepttrposes ol payment ot repagnznt uhethcr tn uhole ot tn paft and- utAthcrdvectl! or odvectl!, maA be used lot paAment or repayftentThe comerttee observed tllat the tcrms a-nd condrhoas for the loan to JomtVenturc a-mounbrr8 to UGX 48 4 bdlon have not yet bccn concluded.Thc CoEolt'tcc:ll R.coa.Ectrd. rpproed of U(i,( 38 blllloa to votc Ols for(iovcrucnt of Ulradr ((XIrl coatrlhuttoa a. cqulty .h.r.. toSpcLG Rcrort Coavcntloa Centrc (ARCCI Jolnt Vcaturc lorcotrltructlon ol r Con?clrtloa.l{ Dcclilc. rpprovel of UGX,l8.,l tflltoa hcilg lo.!.Eonnt to SpckcRcsort Cotrt,catloa ccatrc (aRccl Joittt Vclturc pclrdlnf rpprovrlol ttc tcrE rad cordltio! lora froE (iorrcrmctrt ol U3udr asper Articlc 159(51, (61 t (?l of thc Cotr tttntloa ol thc R.pEbllc ofIrgrtrdr.3.9 Votc O15: Xlnbtry ol Tndc, Itrdu.try rtrd Coopcntlvas - Uox3O2.2SS bllllo! e. follos.:4 UGX 2?.1.11 blltoa to USarda Development Corporatron (UDCI forpurchase ofGOU shares rn Atlak Sugar FactoryThrs rntervenhon rs rn hne wrth Govemmcnt's mdustna.Lzatron pohcy andcom&rtment to bala.accd rcgronal dcrrclopment and equrty Hon. Mcmbers,there arc augar factoncs m thc Central, Eastem aid wcstcrn regrons,hon ever, Ahak Suga-r Factory rs tlle only sugar lactory m Northem Uganda,the factory w l support thc sugar cane out growcrs, as well as to tap mtothe DRC and South Sudan markets,s,trfr^\(*t,llrtThc Comrdrttee obscrvcd that Oovernment through Uganda DevelopmentCorporahon (UDCI nvested m HoryaI Invcstmcnts Holdmg Compary (I{IHC)Lmrted UDC's rruhal rnvestment m the company was tlrough cqutyac4ursrhon ol 4oo/a for UGX 80 lBn and a sha.reholder's loan worth UOX2O.5Bn In W 2021122, addruonal tundmg of UGX lO8 Bn undcrsupplcmcntary budget was approved by Padrament for mcchan zahor1equrpment ls.c tabb n bbut Currcntly, the Equrty share caprtalcontrrbUtron by vanous rnvestors hcludmg govemGent stands atucroo14l4Bntrblc II: Oo?clllacat kpctrdltErc o! Horrrl Holdln!. hvestlcltr Ltda/rIlttlhrtloI Atnou.trt la BaPurpoaro1T'DC 80 1 40Yo Equrty hvestment02TJDC 205 Sharcholder loans /Stll wrthngrace pcnodo3UDC 108 Mcchanrzahono4UDC 274 trPreference SharesTotrl 4e2.tltotd Dlr.ct &IEtrdttu.r6o5UDC 16 Tra!8port subsrdy06NAADS 65 ISugarcane Out growcrsAotd 3t.rt Totd lldLcct &IEadlturoGflndAotrls63.22 Totd Oo?t ErpcrdtturcSourr..' Rcport of thc ,aa LlablntTct btf/.,/r.d bg Horyal a d ttElmrtllcaclo to Oottcrmrld, t Aprll, 2022Thc Commrttcc was uformed that whrlc ttrc factory startcd operatrons rnOctobcr 2O2O, rt drd not see a seooth takc off from thc onset as expectedThe Company was faccd wrth a host of cha-llengcs cmcrglng marnly from adrsmtcgratcd and plecemeal approach to thc planmng and rmplementatronof the rnrrcstmcnt ardong othera ltte re-pl,annrng proccss was undcr taLenand ncluded analysls of all the hottahons and recommended solutrons asbcnchma-rked from srm ar sugar m ls wrtlun the regron and thc countr].These challenges rndude the fotlowmg4 lnsumcrent from a farlure by the factory to atta$ theunder the NAADS program planhng.kAv,ffilsW *(+>-}tq-t++fr4 Frcquent fi-res that occasrona-lly dcstroyed the cane plarrted, dre fireshavrng been causcd or aggravated by rnadcquate fi.re ba-rners around thccane gardensu4 Inadequate rnfrastructurc dc!rclopment arrd marntenance (houshg,roads and bndgcs, ctc ) causrng l"abour shortagcslv) challcnges rn thc suga-rcanc subsrstcnce planhng methods that led12,900 acres bcm8 plantcd ovcr thc 4 yca.rs as opposed to 60,000 acrcsthat should have been pLanted wrthm 3 years duc to low capaoty Ia-rmequrpment on the open market, delaj,cd rclcasc of funds as opposcd tothe ptantrng needs/scasons of thc company - lcadrng to underutsLzatsonof the factory cqurpEentvl low Feld r c a-a avcragc of 21 tonnes per-acre pcr annum as opposcd to36 tones by rndustry standa.rds and prolongcd durahon of the sugarcane matunty due to lack of rngatron r c 18 moaths as opposcd to 12monthsvrl Hrgh coat of borrowrng wlth rts assocratcd negatsrc mpactsTo mrtrgate the abot e challengca, management of thc company worlsng wlthUDC and other government rnstrtutrons undcrtook a re-plarmmg andconccptualzahon of thc prolect to dcterEme lts development and fnancrngnccds as follows, Factory Estat Dcvelopment, Factory mrll expalsron, Farmcatate development, Fa-rm mechrn "atron, Irngatron of 6O,O00 acres ofsuga-rcane ficlds, Stonc crush[rg machrne, Debt refnancmg, 52km rarlwayAs a rcsult of the challcnges befalmg the Company rn the yea.rs ofopcrahon, the factory eventually cl,osed ur Apr[ 2022 wrth a-n cxpcctaaon toreopcn rn October, 2024. The trme tiaS rs to allow for thc proposedrmplementatroa mcchamsms to take cffectOn 14d March 2022, |.}rc coapany requeated govcmEent to support fourmalor developmcnt necds out of those mcntroned above as a means toensure thc proJcct begns productroa by Octobcr 2024. It was a meant to de-nsk the CompanyThc PS/ST advrs.d ofrce of thc Int rnal Audrtor General to carry out anAudrt on Horyal loan r€stmcturmg whrch, recommended a rcfinancrng of theentr.re dcbt pordoho Thc Govcmmcnt €Itcr consrderatson of the requcst,con-6rmed the rnvcstment through UDC by way of purchasc of prefcrentalshaie3.The Co@mrttee wae rnlormcd that 60p/6 shareholdrng m HIHC r8 hctd assccunty by Equlty Bank and farlurc by the company to secure the cqurtystake could potentally lcad to sale of s.cuflty held by thc bank Ttus woutdresult rnto a loss to Govcrnment conardenng the amount of rnvcatmentmade rnto the com through UDC arld NAADS. In addltron, thc prolect-/s16A6m wrequrres urgent constructron of accomoodahon facilities to house at least1,3OO LaborersProgr.ra Erd. out of SupplcECttrry c4r.adltqrc4 UDC and mHC $gncd a sha-re subscnptron agreeEent for the purposeof purchasrng redeemable prefcrence shares rnto the compa-ny on 2NoDeccmber 2022 P^ytuerlt has bccn made to HIHC Company m EcoBar& as gurdcd by the Attorney Generalu) A total of UGX20OBn has been received by UDC towards ttusrn'reatmcntur) Parhal payment has becn s.tded wlth Equrty Bank and the 6O%shareholdrng hctd as sccunty rs yet to bc rcleascd to UDC.The Commlttce observed that Covernment drect cxpcn&tu-rc rl1 Horya-l rsUCX 482 1lBn rnclusrrc of, UGX8O.1Bn Equrty contnbuton, UOX2O SBnShareholder Loan, and UGXIO8Bn for Mechamatron Equrpcent andUGrO74 llBn for acqursrhon of Preferentral Sha-res Total Equrty ShareCaprtal for Horyal lnvestmcnts Holdhg t&rrted rs UCX2O 1 4l4Bn and otherpaity's contnbutron ls UGX121 314Elr1 Tlus mphes that Corrcrnmentexpendrturc on Horyal Holdrng li[rcstment Coepany ls more than twrce theEqurty sha-re Caprtal of the compa-ny yct rts shareholdrng has stagnated at4Oo/oThe Com.orttce furtllcr observed that out ot UGX274 11 b honsupplcmentary budget to Ahak, UGX133 63 brlLon wrll bc Bpent to redeem60% shares held by Equrty Bank mlorm of secuntres belonSrng to LaburnamCourts Ltd and lcngstonc Ltd as dcbt refnancrng UDC sought and recervedgurdancc from the Attorney Ccncral on whether Debt refna.ncurg fundsshoutd be dlrectly &sburscd to thc Credrtor Bank, the Attomey Generalgurdcd that palmtents 8hould be madc to HHIL as oppos.d to thl.rd partycred.rt lnstrtuhonsTtrc Com.ruftee notcs that to date, UGX 20OBn has been recerved, preferenceshare certrfcatcs qrorth UGX100Bn havc been rccerved from Horyal but, nosccuntres have becn dcposrted wrth UDCAhc CoEdttce dccllnct rpprornl ol IiOX. 2?4,11 bllllon to t gradrDc?Clopncnt Co4lonttotr (Ulrcl lor Durchrtc of ()OU prcfcrancc shrrcrl.a AthL 8u!ar Factot .d UGX 26.LS bllliotr to Ugaida Development Corporatron (UDCI for purchascof GOU shares m Abubaker Techrucal Scrvrces and General Suppheshrlted; tlus rs also rn L-ne wlth t's rndu stnalatron pohcy, andrn pa-rtucula.r, support to have a proven recordu&^rhftICommrttee observed that goveftrment support for local compamcs has agood track record and rs commendable Support to Abuba.ker TechtucalServrc.s rs to strengthen the comperry's linancral cs.paclty rn road a-ndbnd8e constmctronThc ColoDlttcc rpDndrcs ttc rcqnctt for 25.lshtr lot AbubalctTcchtticel Scnricc! & Gcncnl Suppllc. Ltd (ATaoLl .ad th.b tuutletesto 14% rhrcholdt4 ta thc Coopuy btrcd oa lt lnluc of UGX188,385,,r2?,s()6.ul UGX 2.O billton rs requrred to meet operatronal shortfalls under thc VotcO15: MErstry of Trade, lndustry and CooperatrvesThc CooElttGG rccoa.aan& rptrolnl of UGx 2.o ttlltoa to fhtttry ofT'rrdc, Iadudtfr a.trd Coopcntlvc.3.LO VotG 016: iitrt trt ol lfort rad Tnn pott - uox 3.t188 bllllo! forthe completron of cntrcrl works at Uganda Ma-rtyrs Cathohc Shnne,NamugonSo Ttus was provrded to fac tatc complchon of the Presbytcry that$ras at nsk of collaps€ because of ramwEtcr that has contrnued to pcnetratert srnce 2015 as rrcll as completc tllc burldrng to accommodatc thc Shnneomces a.trd pnests' rcsrdence grven that they cu.rrently lcarde rn a rentedhouse a lolometer away from th. ShnneThe Coaotttcc rccoBmcad. rDDrornl ol UOX 3..188 ttltotr to rrr.bttyol Worlr rad Tn!.port3.ll Votc Ol7: Uid.try ol Eltcrlnr ead lncrd DcvcloPlnctrt ( tMDl -Uox 103.3 btltoa as followsrl U(xx 5?.6 bllllotr to catcr for the out of court settlement to Albat os;Rt Hon Speaker and Honorable members, The Commrttec lras rnformcdthat Govemment's energ/ pohcy rs to rescrve 10o/o of the Country's PowcrOenerauon Capacrty ln thc form of thcrGal PoerEr Plants to deal wlthemergency srtuatrons rn the cvcnt of rnterrupaons on the nahonal Gnd Inlrne wrtlr thrs pohcy, m FY 20l4l15, Govemment of Uga-nda entered rnto a-nImplementatron Agreement enth Albatros to cstabhsh a 50Mw ThermalPl,ant rn Horma Drstirct, that would ut l2. Heavy Fuel Otl (HFOIproduced locally from the countrl/s proposed od refrrery m FY 2018/ 19Howelrer, duc to the dclaycd produchon of first o a.rrd development of thc ollrefnery, the prolcct was unable to cornoence as cnstG+8L-s\t /\ry( AGovernmentfound rt costly arld unsustamable to provrde an anDual subsrdy (USD 74 5mrlLonl for the rnvestor to use mpoited oSubsequcntly, GoU all.d Albatros mutually agreed to dlscontrnue the proJectand rermbu-rsc thc dcvelopcr for expcnsca rncurrcd rn the dcvctopmeat of theproJcct process, retarn the land and othcr asscta of thc prolcct Albatrosprescnt d clarms amountrng to USD 16 m [on(UGX 60 b ronl mcured onthe assct acqursrhon a-nd othcr opcratronal cxpcnscs, of whrch USD 4 768mrllon was agrced upon as a parhal settlcment by both parhcs Accordrngly,USD 4 768 mrlhon (approromately UGX 16 832 b lonl has srnce bccn pald.Therefore, thc requrred amount rs UGX 43 167 b,llon Hence thcsupptcmcntary request of UGX 57.6 b llon rs rn excesa of UGX 14 433b lrcnThe comranttce obs.rved tlut tlus supplcmcntary cxpcndrture was forescenarld prescnted as a cntrcal unfundcd pnonty dunng thc budgctmg cycte forfI 2022123 Howevcr, rcsou-rces srcrc not provrded. Thc coEErtte. furthernotes that the supplemcnta-ry request rs unavordable srncc rt rs bour d by acontractual obhgatron betlr/cen GoU and AlbatrosTlc CoEDtttao rccoaacn&:t. Aplrtoed ol UOX .1i1.167 tlllloa for XEND to crtcr for thc oqt ofcourt .ettlcracat to Altrt ot.1t-UOX 14.433 bllllon tc rccoecr.d, dcpodtcd o! thG ColrolldrtcdFu.nd rad l[oof ol thb dcpodt proddcd to PrrlhEcntbl UGX .1S.7 blllioa for thc buyout of thc ESKOM concessron at theKra/Nalubaale powcr stahon Honorable Mcmbcrs, Govcmmcnt rscomrutted to reduce powcr tan-frs ton a-rds the Go!rcrnmcnt target of USD 5cents per KWh, accordhgly the ESKOM conoessron for l(ll.ra and NalubalcPowcr Statrona whrch ls due to end rn 2023, w l not be renctrred lt rshowcver a requrement that ESKOM rs rermburscd the hvcstmcnts andretums drat aie yet to bc recovercd from the Ta-r fThe amount that was determrned by the El.ctnclty Rcgulatory Authonty(ERAI was USD 18 8 m llon Whcreas ths rs sEll subject to an ongo[rgAudrt by the Audtor General, rt rs a reLable eshmate upon wluch resourceswere avarled m the budget eshmates Farlure to rarsc thrs buy-out a.mountwrll mean extensron of the concessron unt l ESKOM recovers tts outstandmgrnveatmenta and returnsThc Commrttee observed that supplementary requcst of UCX 45.7 b honparhal provrsron awartrngfinal au&tby the OAC on 25th March 2023-)f %19AIIIAhc Corantlttcc lecoa,lctrdr i. Approvrl of lrCX 45.7 bllllo! for MEMD to tnrlc parthl payEcatfor ttc tuyout of the ESKOU coaccr.loa.. ttrt OAG crpcdltcr thc f,ld aqdlt/crrlurtloa to dctcrotLc thatotrl rcinbEt.cactrt to EdlKOM. GoecraDeat .honld Erovtdc thcrcn lalng rnoult ol the bryort la thc budget lor Ff 2O23l243.12 Votc Ol8: Xld.tty of Gcadcr, Lbour and Sochl DcealopIlcat -t GX 2.590 blllon for thc rehab rtahon of Gada.fr Natronal Mosque.tho Colnalttcc racoEBclda rDDro?al ol UGX 2.59 bllllon to rfinl.tryol Ocnder, hbout rad Sochl Dc?clopacrt lor thc Ehrbtlltrtto! olhdem l{ltlold Mo.qtrc.3.13 Voto Orlor Mlnlrtry of Inlorantloar rnd CoarrrlicrtloatTcchlologyl - Ucx 39.2 blllioa as thc shortfall to provrde 50% (UGX113.755 blltonl on pensron Arrears to former employees of thc UgandaPosts, t TL and UPL, lr\ oider to pay the peasroncra o!rcr a pcnod of twoycar8Thc CotoElttcc rcco!!!oG!& rppro?rl of UGjx 39.2 bfioa for Ilaa.loaA.Ecrr. to forac. caploycc. of utc lrgridr Poit , lrTL.ad lrPL3.14 Votc lol: JudtcLt, - UGX 1.653 bflllon for handhg of the sccuntytheats agarnst Judges and other pubhc omccrsThe Commrttcc obscrvcd tlEt tIrc Jud8es and other Judrcral o(trcers facesecuflty threats du-nng the erecutron of thel-r duacs aB a r$ult of handLngscnsrh\rc matters (cases). It was reportcd Orat rn the recent past there wereattempts on thc hves of the some of the Judrctal Omcers Hence the urgentneed to enha-nce s.cunty of Judges arrd othcr ludrcEl olnc€rsThc Co![alttcc rccolltrcadt sppro?d of UGX 1.653 bllllo! to votclO1: JudtcLry to calurc ttrc rccudt, of Judac. rad othcr ofnccr. lrn|rtccd.3.15 votc llL: ltrtlold Curiculu.E DclrcloDaant Ccatro ([cDcl - Uox6.OO0 bllltoa for the developorent of thc ncw Advaiced lrvel curnculumThc Commrttee obscrved tlEt Parlra-ment approved a competence-bascdscurnculum 6r th.$cs 20l{anscconda-ry educaton Implemen for O'&JFt-hsta-rted m 2O2O The fi.rst cohort wrll srt thc[ ctams rn Novembcr 2024 ar\d'traasrt to 'A' level Thereforc there rs a n.cd to enaure that the 'A' let elcurnculum rs revrewed a.rld rcady by Dccembt 2024Thc Cor!,llttcc rGcoa.EG!& rpptornl ol UGX 6.0 bllllo! to l[rtloarlctrrtculu! Dc?Glopracat Ccnttc for t{rc dG?sloDacat of thc aceAdlanc.d Lt Gl curlcuhE.3.16 Vota 117: Ugudr Tourl|la Borrd (UIBI - uox 2.6 blllloa to catcrfor the tlage requr-.cments under the Vote.ThG Co!!.tllttcc rGco[aettdt epprovd ol lr(l:x 2.6 bllltoa to votc L17:lrgrldr tourlE Borrd GmB to crtct lor ttc srrgc r.qulraaelb.3.1? VotG I 19: Ugudr Rcd.tntton &r?icc. Burcru - UOX 1.33?bllllotr as External Fmancmg from the A.frrca.n Intellectual Propertyorgamsatron (ARIPO). Ttus rs requfed to fac rtat the Vote to absorb fundsrecalled from Ugaldah sha-rc of feea account rn Afrrcan Inte[cctual PropertyOrganGaaon (ARIPOIThe CoEmrttee observcd that Uganda r8 a Membcr of the AArcaI RcgronalIntellectual Property orSarusahon (ARIPO). AzuPO recerves apphcahoas andtranamrts them to the Natronal lntellcctual Property Oftccs (Nahonal IPOs)of rts membcr statcs such as thc Uganda Regstratsoa Scrvrces Bureau foreramlnatronThc fces for such apphcatrons are pard to ARIPO ald held rn trust for cachmembcr state. Thesc fecs arc meant to fund achvltues of the Natronal IPOSthat promotc the protectron of rntellectual property m mcmber statcsScctron 18 of the URSB Acq Cap 21O provrdes that all rc!rcnuc collected byURSB should bc pa.d mto the consohdatcd fui1d Accordrngly, ARIPO fees goto the consohdatcd fund arrd URSB can access tlcsc funds f thcrc rs wrrttenapproval from the Mrmstry of Justrcc and Constrtutr.onal A-frarrs m Lne wrthSectron 19(41 of thc URSB Act wtuch, provrdes that the funds of URSB shallcoasrst of momes appropnated cach year by Paihamenq grants arrd loansfr:om the Government or a.rry person, authonty or orgamsaEoni and anyother money that may bc rccelrcd by or made avarlable to the burcau wlththc approval of thc Mmlst.rIn that regard, the Mmster of Justrcc arrd Consatutronal A-fiarrs recallcdUCX 1,337,409,500 equrvalent to USD 35O,O0O from ARIPO to theconsolrdatcd fund rn rhe FY 2022123FJtht21 ffi.ha. _ur) gOX 3.SOO bllllo! to purchase secuflty vctuctes for JudgesNIZ *. coEndttcc rccoanctrdr rpprotnt of Ucx 68 blllloa to Ugrtrdr'4' Pollce Forcc to aGGt cortnctul obltgrttoaa oa CCrV (I,GX 3S.sThcrefore, URSB requests Pa.rlEEcnt th-rough the Mrrustry of Fnance,Pr,annmg and Econo&rc Dcvelopmcnt for a supplementary budget of UGX|,337 ,4O9,SOO fot f{ 2022/23fhc CoElllttcc r.co|nEctt& rpprot rl of UOX 1.337 bltlton to UgradrRclLt rtlo! Scn lcc. Blrrcru r. k rtrrl Ftnrlrchg toa thc A&lcraIltc[cctErl Prctlcrqr Orttnl..tlotr (ARIPO3.18 Votc 139 - Pctroi.u Authorttlr of Ug8tr&(PAUI: UGX L l billionThe Commrttee was rnformcd that UGX 1I brllon rs rcqured by PAU formomtorurg of orl compames wrthrn and outsrde the country grven theongorng works on thc East Afrtcan Crude Ort hpellnc (EACOPI and orefncry derrclopment, short term consultanqes on techmcal, cconomrc andlegal salcty and eavronmcntal aspccts of vanous proJects wherc tlrcauthonty l"acks the reqursrtc slolls and estabhshment of envu.onEcntalsafety managemcnt systcms for thc d-r Lmg ng (I wrsh to cla-rr& that whereaathe summary tablcs rellcct tlus expcn&hr-re as caprtal expendrture, rt lallsundcr recureat expcndrture)The CoEmrttee obscned OIat supptementary requcst of UGX 11 b lrcn toPAU was foreaccn but resources wera not provtded. Thc commtttec furthernotes that tlu8 cxpendrturc rs unavordable srnce crrhcal o actruhes thatrequre morutonng a-rc ongourgAhc CoD.Elttcc rccoa.Eca& rpprcvd of UoX 1l bulto! lor PAU for![onttorin! of oll coapuicr Blthln ud ortsldc thc courtrri gteea theongohg lrortr oE thc Erlt Alrlcrtl Cnrdc O Ptpcltic (EACOP] sld otlrcAlct7 dcvcloDaGEt, ahort tcrn coatultraclcr o! techaicel, ccoao![lcand lcgd dct, rtrd caelrollacat l xpcct of rntlou. Drolacts.3.19 Votc L4,t: ggudr Pollcc Forcc - BOX 68 billlo! as follows4 UOX 3a.5OO bllllon to mect contractual obl4auons on CCTV Phasc Itequlpmcnt,ul UOX 25.OOO blllloa for marntenancc of CCIV equrpment acqur.reddunng Phasc I and Phasc II of the prolect, andblllloLl, antntclrracc of CCIV cqulp![crt (IrGX 26 b[lton] rnd putchr.crccurlty ?chiclcs for lqdgc.,ffJR(-3.2O Votc 155: Cottoa Dc?GloDlac8t Orlrlrb.tloa - UGx 9.5Oo btltotrhas becn provrd.d as follows.ll IrOX 7.5 bfion for the cotton buffer stock fund to enable the Voteprocu-re all the lmt bales requrred as shpuLated at the hee of rncephon ofthe scheme m 20 1 5 In addrtron, thrs fundng r8 requred to enable thc tocaltext e m ls to mcct thcrr cxpandcd production capaclty and cusluon themagamst the rncreasrng cotton Lnt pnccs,Thc Cota![lttcc !ccor!r[c!& appro?il of Uox ?.S bllllotr to Votc 15S:Cotto! DclrcloDlmctlt Orgrtr&auo! for thc cotto! buficr rtocLu) UOX 2.O bllllon to catcr for the transport rebate for Frne SprnncrsUganda Lmrted (FSt L) m a brd to support rts global compchtrvcncss andsafeguard rts opcratrons the transport rebate for Fme Spmncrs UgandaLlmrtcd (FStrLlthc Coa.nittcc rccornEcad. rpDrovrl ol UGr( 2.O bllllo! to CottoaDqrclofraclt Orlul,r6on.3.21 Vota 3r1: MaLr.rc lratecraltt/ - UGX 8.Oq) t loa for rcno tron ofLumumba and Mary Shrart HaIs gave thc dccrsron by thc UrurEsltyManagemcnt to closc thc two halls of lesrdcncc as they arc no lonSerhabltable whrch has rncreased prcssure on the al-rcady constrahcd studentaccommodatron fac rtres Ttus was provrdcd followrng provrsron of thc B lsof Qua-ntrtres.fhe CollElttec reco!!,!ca& rnnrct .l ol lrOX 8.O bfioa to Votc 3Ol:Urtcrcrc Unhrcl.lty lor rcaorrtloa ol hrrllr,rbr rnd Mrty 8tnrrt EdL3.25 Vota 3O?: lhbdc Unlt crttty - UGX 3.213 bllllon as Non TaxRelrenue (l,ITRl to cater for tlrc mcreasmg students demands because of therncrease ln nurlrber of sh-rdents-Thc Comartt c observed that thrs lIfR rs for repars a.rrd renovatons of oldbu[drngs, thc pnntrng of exa.mrnatrons, facfitatron of part-trme lecturers,purchase of liaboratory cqurpmcnt, purchasc of a Scnerator to hght up thcUruversrty, rnstallahon of secunty h8hts, rnstallahon of th-ree-phase power atlnnovatron and mcubahon centers and fac rtahng stalI recrUrtmcntprocesscs and othcr Counc operahons+( 'l\(v23A,ry- rF+$rfdlThc CoEralttac n coa[cn& rpDrotnl of UOX 3.213 blllloa to Votc3O7r Kebalc Ultvcr.lty3.25 Votc 532: USradr Eaba.sy tn Aondtr, fogrdlrhu - U(lX 0.731bllllor to mcet Shortfa-lls on salanes, sccunty, nvuntenance, and repali8The marntenaice rs due to the tugh lerrels of saLmty, the corrosrve nature ofthe envfonment wluch raprdly deprcoatcs materials, rrchrcles, sccuntytotrrers arrd gates, accommodahon arad oficc prcfabs (contarners), rn addrhonto rnsecunty m the countiyThe Comrn-rttee obsert ed that ra-ndom attacks by the Al-Shabaab hctudrn8use of Improvrsed Explosrve Deuces (IEDs), Vchrcle Bomc tmprovrsedExplosrve Deuces (VBIEDSI and shellrng wrth Morta.r proJectrles whrchrncrcaaes the danage to l\,hssron property and rcqur-res more sccuntyenha-ncementThc Corlalttcc rccor!.trctr& rDpro?.I of UCX O.?31 bllllotl to Ug.adrEEbrtry ta Sotnrur, UogadLhu to aGGt ahort rffa oa trhdGrraccurltyr Edntcllncc, ud rcDaln3.27 Votc 858r lhyrr,lgr Dtrtrlct - UGX O.83? bllllon as unspcnt tundsswept back to the consohdated fund at the end ofFY 2021/22 to cnablc theUPDF enBrr1ecnn8 bngade complet thc constructron of Nsokota HealthCcntre ltlThe ColoElttcc lcco![acndr .pprolnl of UGX O.83? bllllo! to votc858! Ihnrltr Di.trlct e. u.upcnt ftlld. fircpt trck to tho co!.oIdrtcdfEnd rt thc cad ofta 2o2ll223.28 Votc 893: ultoora. Dlrtdct - Uox 2.628 bllllo! for rehabfitahon ofKqnda-Rutookye-Brtcreko-Rwempungu road (279hn) and Rutookye-ksua-Icyanga road (19 lkmlfhc CoEtllttcc rccorlr[cn& rpttto?d of l]dx 2.62A bllllo! to votc893: MltooE Dltrict for rchrbllltrtio! of Xldnde-Rutoolrc-Bltcrclo-Rwc![pnrlgu road (2?.9Lal atrd Rutook c-flttd-Nlyrlrga roed (Lg.Ll!r3.29 vot€ 92.1: Rulnuglrl Dtstrtct - UOX f.795 blllloa as unspent fundsn w 2O2l/22 for the Uganda Intergovemeental Frscal Transfcrs (UGIFllreform for thc of Seed Secondary Schoots and upgrade ofHealth Centre IIs to\G[21Thc Contalttec rccoEncn& rlrDroerl ol UOX 1.793 bfioa to Vota924r Rutulglrt DLt ct for ttc Ug.ndr latcrgorrcr[.mcltd FLcalTr.tlrfcn (UOIrT| rcfonD lor tAc colrtructloa of Sced Sccoadrry&hooL rnd uDgredc of Ecdth Ccrtrc IIr to [I!.3.3O V.rtou. Ccatrrl rad Lcrl Gov.raDctrt Votcr - UGX 4O2..tOlblllloa to meet wage shortfalls a-rrsrng from thc new Pohcy to enhance the! ,ages of screntrsta n N 2022 I 23 (8cc A!!cr 3lThe Comlnrttee obscrrred that UGX 7 2 m Lon for wage shortfalls underVotc 112 Educs and Integnty was not rcqucstcd forthc Cota.ndttcc thcrcforc rccoa.Ecad. r!!rcrnl ol UGX 4()1.58 btllloa3.31 UOX 1.62? tllrtoa aa reallocatrons wrtlun the lacal GovemmcntBudgcts as shown m the tablc bclowVotc CodcVote I{rEa A.rnou.at427 Buta-abala Drstdct 1,soo,000,ooo926 Scmbabule Dlskrct 12?,469,L7tTotrl r,62?,t,69,1?tTtus rs rcqufcd grrrcn that fund8 were allocated to non-budgetary rtems and therequests for urements on thcsc rtcms arc aot tn hne wrth the 100/6 thresholdstated m the PFMA, 2015.Coemrttec was rnlormcd that Ugx 127 469 m hon was appropnated for r,rote 926- Semababu.le Drstrrct rn Ft 2022123 to support hcalth ccntres ln thc drstnctHowerrcr, the Accounhng Omccr requ.st d for thc aborrc fund8 to bc rcallocatedfor a purprose of purchasrng land for a health centic rvMitustry of Hcalth lnlonned the comerttee that thc sa.ld land was donatcd to thc&stnct by ara hdlvrdual4 In lt8ht of thc rboeG, thc Colorllttcc dccllltc3 appronl ol rc.llocrtloa olVG;x 12?,469 Dllllo! for Votc 926r Scmbrhule Dlrtrict locd govcrnEcntto proclrrc Lrd rldIt ortgt!.d purpo3crccoD.Ecndr ti.t thG.. frln& .hould bG rctdn d forr) ThG CoEulttcc rcco!!![c!dr appro?d ol rcrllocrtlotr slthi! thcLocrl Gorrcrnmcat ofBqt rlbah of UOX l.S b llon.tF+.*JIs2SAPT.RT B4.O AUppLEME tT.X{r REQUEAIS AEAT RrQrrrRtaPTRLIAUEITTARY APPR,OVIiPRIORGovernment rs requeshng for UOX 1.538 tr Lon under schedule No 1,addcndum I,2,3 & 4 that requres pnor Padra.mentary approval (above 30/6lcgal lmrtl for both developeent and recurrent expcndrture. The det is arcas followd4.1 votc oo4r fitrLtry ol Dcfclrc snd Vctcn! Alhlrr - UGx 339.409bllllon rs requrred by the Vote to cover the shortfalls on lrage Thrs w l bcfunded by a correspondrng supprcssron rn thc cLassrfied cqurpmcnt proJect.thc ColoElttcc rocoaEcadr rpprolnl of U(}X 339.809 bllllon tor'lnl.try ol Dcfca.c ud Vctcna A&ln to coGr thc rhorttrrlb otr rtrgc4.2 Votc OIO: Mili.try of Agrtculturc, A.ntad ladlr try rlrd Flhcrle. -UOX 12.979 bllllotr ls requ[ed as external finalacmg from the World Bankfor thc Uganda Multr-Sectoral Food S.cunty and Nutnhon Prolect TheWorld Bank has approved extcnsron of the Projcct end datc hom 31.tDecember, 2022 ro 29tt' Dcccmbcr, 2023, a^d, the prolcct snll facfitateachvrhes rncludrng:. ScalmS up of WASH mtcrt .ntrons at coEmuruty and school level,. Strcngtictuag of s.ed systcms for multrphcahon of nutnent nch crops,. Provrsron of support to adapt good post-haivcst ha.trdlrnS prachces andfood preservatr.on,. Incrcasrng coverage of cocmumty levcl productron rntcrvenhons oforalge flesh swect potatoes, r.ron nch bcans, frurB and vegetablesThcac ar. rn Lnc wrth Government's cllorts to rncreasc food productron arrdproductrvrty of firms, fa-rmers a-nd houscholdsthc CoEtnlttcc rGGora.EGn& lDprovll ol Uox 12.979 b lioa tovotc OIO: Ulnt try of AgrlcqlturG, Allorl lldn try rlld FLhcrlca4.3 Vota Ollr ftnt try ol Lcd Oot crlltrcnt: UGX 13.9?8 blllloa rsrequ[cd as follows.4 UGX l3.lz) bllllo! cxtemal fnancmg from thc Alrrcan Dcvelopment Bank(AlDBl for the Markets and Agncultural Trade Improt .mcnt Prolcct (MATIP-2) Thrs rs requ[ed to fac rtate replemcntatron of planned achvlhesfollowmg Afncan Development Bank's approval of oflastDrsbuiseraent for MATIn-2 to June{R,30,2023,,ff .,W'a 062 Rrsk Allowance for Covrd-19 StaJF11.500 Court A$ra-rds to Srno A.frrca medErnesMantenance of Orggen Plants 5 000Supcrusron of tntcrnatronal Speaalzed Hosplt l atLubowa2.700Counterpart Fundmg for Busolwe General Hosprtal Prolcct 3 60000Totrl 3r.aa2u) UGix 0.799 blllloa rs requrcd as unspent extemal fun&ng from USAID,fro FY 2O2l122, for coord[rahon of the rmplcmcntahon of NorthernUganda Dcvelopment Enhanced lacal Governance Infrastructure a-ndLrveLhoods (NUDEILI Prograomcthc Corulttcc r.collEcads rpDrovrl ol Uox 13.978 bfion toVotc: Uhbtry of Lcrl GovcrtrECat4.4 vota O 14: Miltetty ol llcdth. UGX 208.825 bllllo! aa followsfl Ucx l?6.943 bfion was provrded by the World Bank to UMCEF forthe pu.rchase of COVID-l9 vaccrnes under Uganda Covd-lg RcsponscEeergency Prepa.redness Prolcct (UCREPPI It rs rmporta-nt to reflect tlusexpendrture under Mmrstry of Hcalth, rn ordcr to effcctrvety report on andtrack thc grant follorM-ng rts drsbu-rscment by thc World Bank to Aftrcanvaccrnes Acqursrhon Trust (AVATI through UMCEF on 296 September,2022Ahc CoElllttcc r.co!ol!c!& rpprotnl of UGX l?6 ,9.3 blllloa to votcOl4: Xtdrtry ol Bcdth.u) UOX 31.a82 blllloa rs requrred for rc-rmburs€mcnt of funds Bpent byCOU on procunng COMD- 19 Vac.rnes Ttus anscs frorn the fmancngagreement bctwecn Cou €nd World Bank, for the Uganda Covld- 19Respons. Emergcncy Preparcdne8s ProJect (UCREPPI The finanongagreement provrded for a refund of Governaent expendrture mcurrcd onacqurartron and deployment of Covd-lg vacclnes pnor to dlsburscEcnt ofthe proJect funds for vaccrne acqtuarhon and deploymcntThe Co&mlttee obsenrcd drat a&.ount rcfundcd ra to covcr thc follorpin8expendrtures hsted ln the table below (m UGX b [on]N.(&A21Ill RLk allo?racc. lor COVID-19 6trfi (UOX 8.O62bulto!]The Comnuttce was mformed that 843 t orkers lrrho lrrere recmrted on non-Braturtabtc contracts to harrdle the COVID-l9 parrdcmrc w€re not pa-rd nskallowa-nc.s a-aounhng to UGX 8 062 b hon The contracts wcre termrnatcdon 01.t Ma-rch, 2022 (sec Anlcr 4)The commrttee observed ttrat au-x -ra-ry health workers wcrc recrurtcd to olfersupport to the olrer strctched health workforcc at the pcak of the Covrd- 19pandemrc. ln addrhon to domg a comaendable Job rn prevcnhon andEeatrnent of Covrd- 19 patuents, some of the health workera dred m the llneof dutyThc CoEatttcc r.coaEc!& ttrt UOX 8.062 b lioa bc rpproecd lortlrlarcat ol rlt dlorrlcG IttGT. for thc COVID-L9 sorlcn. Th.lt slllEothntc harltt-?orlet. shcnavGr crllGd qDotr ta thc cerc of futur.cpldcElcr.ffl CoErt rtrrrd to afro Aftlcr Mcdlclnc. rad Ecrltlh (UOX ff.Sb lioalIn 2012, thc Mmrstry of Health conkacted Smo Afnca Medrcrne8 and HealthLmrted to supply equrpment and furmture to health fac tses rn the countryat a cost of US $5 8 mrlhon A down paymcnt of US $4 3 m Lon was lnadeto the company, lcaung a balaracc of US$ 1 5 mrlLron The equtpment wasdehver.d rn Novcaber 2013 but was found to bc sub-standard by tl.eNahonal Adusory ComErtte. on Medrcal Equrpment (NACMEI However, thecqurpmcnt had already bccn dehvcred to thc health lac .rhes arrd somcfac rtres had startcd usurg rt bcfore M[ustry of Health could retneve themfrom the 6etd SINO AIrrca filcd a case rn the CommercBl Couit m 2019 andwonConscquently, SINO Atlca was awa.rded costs a.rrsrng from thc aurt asfollowst^Spcaal damages -lat 2 USD 1,082,348 32 and Lot 4 USD 445,584 75 asdEcct loss anslng from the supply,USD 282,403 84 for hue of consultants,Genera-l da&ages of 86/o of thc basc elarm amounhnS to USD 317,450 94for Lot 2 and USD 130,689 26 for L.t 4,6yo rntercst pcr annum on specral damagcs from 3rd September, 2015 t lpaymcnt rn hrll,6yo rntcrcst on gencral damagcs from 196 June, 2O2O unhl payment m(J{rkkq.-frlt\28AJSt--s..-In total, the awa.rded costs amount to UGX I15 b lron The AttomeyGencral advEed the Mrmstry to pay thc decreed amount wlthout detay toavord accumuLatron of rnterestThe Commrttce obs.rved that Srno Afnca Medlcrnes a-nd Health Lrmltcd hclda legal clarm to pal.ment as had bcca awE-rded by court arrd gurded by theAttorney CcneralThe Commrttee notcd that tlus rcqucst docs not conform to Regulatron 18(5) and (6) of thc PFMA slnce rt c,!rs forcsceablc and arrordablc yet there a-reatfl cnhcal unfunded pnontrcs that should take prccedence F\lrthermorc,no explurnatron was Brvcn by thc Mmrstry of Hcalth as to why SINO A-frlcawas chosan to ba pard yct thcrc a-rc Earry other cnhtrcs rn the sa.Ee categorywhLrch have not been pald.thc Coraalttcc rccoEEcldr rpp3ovrl of UGX Ll.S bllLlon to Vote Ol4:tltd.try of EGafth lor CoE t rsard to Stao A.&tq UGdtclDGr rlrd EcdtL.d{ frhtclrtrcc of orrgclt phrtr (IrOX 6.0 btltorlThe Mhlstry of Heelth contract d S[ver backs to 8ct up or.ygcn pta.ats rnregronal rcfcrral hosprtals When tIrc COVID-l9 pandeDlc reached a peak rn2021, thc orygcn pliants w€re producrng oxygen 24 hours a &y and hencenecdcd regula-r scrvrcmg and malltcnance beyond what was strpulated rnthe contiact S vc.backs had to ca-rry out the scrvrcrng rn tandem wrth theacaelerated productron schcdule of the plants Procuremcnt by thc Mmrstryof Health of 18 hqh-capaqty orygen plants wrth hlgh feld rs unden ray$rh e Global Fund rs sct to procu.re 4 more and tlus w l bnng the total to22 Ttus w producc an addtronal 3,235 cylmders of orqgen per day,bnn$ng the total naUonal capaqty pcr day to 4,336 cylmders. Ttre essentralneed rs 5,420 cylnders per dayThe Com-orftee obscrved that UOX 6 O b lron was a.tr unrcasonablc amountfor mrrntcnancc of only orygen plants arrd upon furthcr probmg, themrmstry offiaals r.ported that rt was mea-nt for morc than one actrvrty TheCommrttee tasked the Mmrstry to brcak down the fundmg request of UGX6 O b lron and thrs rncludes crght transformers, poq/er stabrhzers and tughpower clectnc cablhg at UGX 4 b lron, or.ygcn pliant rcpars at UGX1 5b .hon, a van for the oarntenaice workshop at UGX 4OOm ton and UCX1OO m lrca for tratrung, supervrsron and morutonng of the cqulpmentmarntenancc actrvrtres country wldeThc Cor[lrlttcc rcconacadr thtt:rl Duc to thc .clltlttuc rtrd crpcL.lvc ncdlcrl GqrlDECnt ll.tc Cf-gcraErchhcs, X-nF, trbontory lnrchhca, tlrcrtrc cqulDacrt, ortgetr rsI!4n<-19phnt! tn rcglorul rclcrnl hopttrlr, r tot l of gGX 5.9 bLUtontn toad of UGX 6 bllllo! rcqlrc.tcd for should bG Drovldcd r. follossrA totel oIUGX 4 bllllon bc a?.llcd to procuc elght tna.forncrs radacccr.orlca for olght RRII. arEcly! Ma..ta, Jtarr, {lorotl, Gtdu,Arurr Hotanr l(rtdG rad Uoroto.A totrl of lrGX L.5 bllllot bG r?rllGd for rcgllr of orrygca Dlrltr tnthc rcgion l rclcrnl horpttrL.A totrl ol UGX 4q) D lloa for thc tatr lor tlrc a.lntctrrnccrrortrhop.bl The CoD,iittcc fruther rccoEaaadr thrt iccrrlrctrt rctfirltlea auchlt tntat!3, luDcn illotr rtrd aoaltorlng ol thc cqnlpl!'cattlrhteanlcc rcthdticr courtt:Trrldc .hould bc prlorlt&Gd uadcr thcar&tt4 tudfctrry provLion.cl Ln rddltloa, upol la.tdlrtlo! ol thc ace o*ti8ca Dhnt , ttc cutrclt.tocl of orgigcn plrlrtr lhould bc crnhrtcd rlrd dccollllbdoacdalncc thcy hrvc bcco![c crDctltlvc to tmlatdn.lel Snpclarllotr ol latcrlltlond apcctrlt cd Ho.pltd Lubo*r (UGX2.? btltonlThe Commrttcc was uformed tlEt the contractual works for constmctron ofthc spccrahs.d hosprtal rcqur.re threc (31 layers of supervrsron projcctstccnng coltlrtuttee, a tca-m of Engrnecrs from thc Mmrstry of Health andMrmstry of Works arrd Transport and a Drrect Works Supervlsor A total ofUGX 2 7 b lrcn ls bemg rcquestcd to fnance supervraron costaThe Commrttce was concerned that srnce rncephon oI tlus prolcct rn Junc2O19, no funds have ever b.en allocated for supcrusron tlus mega proJectworth US $379 m LonThe Comrruttee obscrvcd that there has not been any officral update by thcOH to the Health Commrttee about the progress of works at IntematronalSpecra.lEed Hosprtal at Lubowa. Attempts by the Commrttee on Health m thepast to acquant ltself wrth tlrc proJect as e,/ell as exercrsrng rts ovcrsrghtfunchoa have been fog$t wrth no clear rnformatron on the ptannedconstructron actrvrtres and scope of works The Mr stry alhrdcs to the factthat thc Pnme Mrmster of Uganda ls the cha[ of ai rlltcr-mlnlstenalcomlnrttee that provrdes oversrght over the hosprtal prolectThc CoEalttac rccotrDctrds thrt thc I,G,l 2.? blLllotr Drolrorcd lotaulrcrvLlol of IntcrtrrtloadBf "*.ffunot$q30BorDltrl rt*v"':IBLacct thc crltcrla of bclng u.nNotdrbL rad uaforc..ablc ltrd hcnccttcrc L ao ur8cnt rc€d for rEpplcacnt ry fundhS.Tha CoaEitt c rr.o rccoEacn& th.t the Mtntttry ol Ecdth .hooldprovidc r cornprchca.hrc ncport oa thc prcgrclt of thb nrolcctdctrlllng both thc ilrlchl rad phydcJ pcrfortlrttce tod.tc toPrrllalocnt. ParlleEcnt should coltlldcr rpproprirtln! thc rcqlrlscdfur& rftcr lt'a srdancd lrlth thc IEogrG.s rnd erluc-for-aoacy apcat rof.r.el Colr,rtc4lart torldLag for Burolsc Ocrlcrd Bo.pttd (U(}x 3.6bllllon)The Commrftce obscrved that t}re SpaJush govemment extcadcd a grant toUganda Got emment for the rehabfitauon of both Kawolo and BusolweGeneral Hosprtals m Burkwe and Butalela dlstncts respectrrely Wh eKawolo C€neral Hosprtal lpaa comptcted and handcd ovcr, the rehabfttahonrporks at Busolwe Oeneral Hosprtal a-re st l on gorngUganda Govemment waa requred to provrde counterpart fundmg of UGX9 6 b lron - I^ tlrc FY2O22123, a total of UGX 6 b lron lras allocatcd ascouaterpa-rt fundEg leaqnS a fundrng gap of UGX 3 6b llonThc Commrttec on Hcalth vrsrtcd Busolwe hosprtal rn June 2022 dunng rtsoversrght acavrtses arrd obs€ncd that the rehab -rtatron works wcre onSomg.Thc Commrttee notcs that honounng counterpa-rt fundrn8 obLrgatrons rsmandatory and any breach of tlus agreemcnt w l Lkely a-ffect the progrcss ofworks at Busolwe Oeneral HospltalThc CoEElttcc rccotlmca& tht UOX 3.6 btllio! rhould bc tlroelded r...upplcllcntery fuadhg for rchrblllbtlo! ol Butolec Crcncnl Eosplt .th" Mlat try of Earlth .hotrld e!.urc thrt lf thcra l rlry co8t o?crrunthrt rany nacalsltrtc .ddttlolrl fu.ndhg o! thc part of Govcrruncnt, thc4.S Votc Ol8: MtnLrtry of Gctrdcr, Iaboqt aad &clrl DcvqlopEcnt -UOX 2l.600 blllto! rs requl.red for the Generatrng growth opporhrmhes a-ndproductrvrty for women prolect (GROWI Ttus prolect rs fundcd by the WorldBank and the funds a-re for rruhal actrvrtres, $rluch w l focus on womcnempon enncnt and cnterpnsa developmcnt servrces, access to fnance forwomcn entrcprencu-rs, rnfrastructure and lac rhcs for women enterpnsagrowth and ti€-nsrhon and prolcct managemcntThe Comrtuttee observed that Government of Uganda has secured a WorldBank IDA Crant US$217 M Lon to finance Generatrng31AFe 1-e(t\Growth Opportumhca a-nd Productrqty for Women Entcrpnses (OROW)Projcct' sta-rtmg tlus financral year GROW a.r-ms at rncreasrng access toentrepreneurral serqces ttrat enable female entrepreneurs to grow the[enterpnses rn targeted locatrons, mcludng rir host and rcfugee drstncts It rsfocusmg on,a)blc)Woaen empowErment and enterpnse dqrclopment scrvrccs,Acccss to fi.nancc for women entrepreneu-rs, andEnabhng mfrastmctu-re for shllrng womenThe Commrttee observed a requcat from the Pcrmancnt Sccreta-ry Mhrstry ofGender, Labor altd Sodal Dcvclopment addressed to PermanentSccrcta-ry/S€crcta-ry to the Treasury to th. effect that out of UCX 21 6bn forGROW ProJcct, UCX 6 Obn rs a subventron to Pnvate Sector Foundatron -Uganda as per the grant financmg agreementthc Coa.atttcq racoEaand. rpprotal ol UOX 2l.6ba to Votc Ol8 fotthc GROlr Drolqct.4.5 votc O22: ut!.Ltt, of Tou.rl.mr wlldllfc alld A.atlqulticr rcqulrcr -UGX f.359 bllllo! rs requ,red aB unapent Non-Tax Revcnue from FY2O2O l2L for Uganda W dffc Conservahon Educaton Centte (UWEC) toaccommodate aid rehab rtate rcscued w dLfe that have rncrcased thccurrent number at UWEC fr:om 2A7 b 621 arumals Tlus fundrng was notspent followrn8 the rcqu[cGent by MoFPED for all MDAs to t ansfer alll,lTR collechons to thc Consohdated Fund UWEC was not able to effect theabove grven ttEt lt had not been enabled on the Ugalda Rerrcnuc AuthontyPortal The mahtutron has srnce been set up (lst Octobcr, 20211 a-ndremrtted UGX 1 359 b lon to the Consohdatcd Fund.Thc cotMlttec rccornaoads .Dltro?d ol UGX 1.359 ttltotr to Votc O22:Mtntltry ol TolrrilE, Wildllfc snd Artlqultlcr as ultpcrt Noa-TerRct lLuG ftoa ta N2Ol2l lor Ugradr Wildli.fc Cotrrcrvrtio! Fducrtlo!Ccatrc (UIf'ECl to rccoEaodrte and rch.bllitrt rc.cucd slldtfcUGx 3.8 bllllo! as non Tax Revenue for emergency relocahon of the UgandaHotel and Tounsm lnstrtute to rented preorses and etabhshment ofstudent accomaodatron fac ltres rn Jlala to pave way for the sraoothl2&.--v*"7umnterrupted constructron as well cnabLng the Instrtlttron contrnue wtthtrarnrng of studentsfhc coEalttcc rccoE![Grdr approerl of UGX 3.8 bfion to Utntetry olTou.rLEr lmdllfc rld Alttquittcr for ctnorgctlcy rGlocrtloa of thcUlladr Hotcl rld Tolrlx! Iartltuto to raatcd prcEls.a udcltrblbhE.at ol.tudcrt rccoEaodrdon hc[ttias lq JhJr.0.? votc l2O: Itrtioarl Cltlzcnrhlp rad ll!.Elgrrtloa control (fclcl -UGX /f6.?84 bllllor rs requrcd to fac tatc the Drectorate of CrEzensluparld tmmEratron Control (NCIC) to purchase Gore passport bookleta Tlua rsduc to thc consrde.able rncreaae rn demard for passports duc to thc h18hnumbcr of Ugafldafls seehng employment abroad and thosc rcnewrng t]rcrrold passports.The Comhlttcc observed tlEt the addrhonal passports arc duc to rncreaaeddellald at 44,0OO booklets Ircr month, translatmg rnto a-a snnual demandof 528,O00 Thrs rs aga.rnst the prolected demand of 24O,O0O passportbooklets ctcatrng a shortagc of 288,OOO booklets Wrth tlus demand, thcgovernment w l generate UGX 65 b hon rn Non-tax rc,r.nueThc Collolttcc rGcoEBoada rpDrol,rl ol UOx 46.?84 bfior to votcl2O: natlonrl Clt&cn hlp rnd lErEr.ttol Coatrol.1.8 votc 122: Ihapelr Crpnd Crty Authoritti (rocAl - Uox 34..t46tfioa rs requred for unspcnt balanc€s n FY 2O2l I 22 and addrtronal fundsfor the Second Kampala Integratcd Infrastiucture Developeent ProJect(KIIDP2), from thc World Bark Thc p.olcct was not completed on trme dueto rmplcmentatron challenges cncountcred mcludmg liate commencementbccausc of delayed clearareccs, dclaycd mob l"atron of personnel andcqupmcnt due to CO\,{D-19 and assocrated Eavel restnchons that furthcrslowed down thc rcsetdemcnt achon pla.n achvrtrca whrle acqurnng the nghtof wayThc Cot!.rllttcc rccoEllcn& rpprc?al of UGX 3.1.44{i blllloa tol(rE.!.rr Crptt l Ctty Arthortty4.9 Vota 126: ltrttoad llfornrrtlotr tacinololt . Authortty - U(lX5.510 bilton External Frna-ncrng fr:om the Wortd Bank for rmplcmcntauonof the Rcgronal Commumcatron lnfi'astructure Prolect (RCtPl followmg rts.xtcnslon I?us fundrng was to covcr shortfalls on cont act stalf salanes aswcll as for serhcas and equrpment,vlAItG+The Com-mrttec obserrrcd that the Nahonal InformatDn Technolosr AuthontyUganda (NITA-U) mplcmcnted the Rcgonal Commumcatrons InlrastructurcProgra-mrne (RCIP), wtuch was lorntly funded by thc World Bank and thcGolremmcnt of Ugaada from 26tb May 2016 and was supposcd to end rnF.bntary 2022The proJect howerrer expenenced s€tbacks such as delays rn the supplychaln, raport, and transportahon of Eatenals, wtuch affccted hmelyrmplemcntatron of sooe actrvrtrea, leadrng to fa ure to coEplete thescactrertres by 286 February 2022 T}re outstandmg payEents as of2ShFebruary 2023 was UGX 5 5O7 b llonDue to the deLays m repleeentatroa, a rcqucst was madc to the World Bankby thc Mmrst r of Frnancc Plannrng arrd F4onomrc Devclopmcnt (MOFPEDIto extend the prolcct's closrng dat to 31.t August 2021, a,jld, tI s rcqucstwa8 granted and approved m Febnl€ry 2022 At thc sam. hme, the budgctestrmatea for the Fmancral Year 2022123 had bcen finafzcd by MOFPEDThe pendrng paymcnts had not been catered for rn the budget for FY2022123Thc CoEElttcc rccollrrc!& rpprct d of IrOX 5.Sl blllioa to ltrtloadLnforErtlo! Tcch.nologlcr Arthorlty for Ef,tGr d FhrlctnS lron thcWotld Br[t for lElrlcEcatrtloa of t'h. Rc3lor..l Coaau.alcrtlonIrha.tmcturc Prolcct (RCIPI fouoslaa lts crtcadoa.4.lO Votc 3O4: Xhr.nn UntvcBttti ol Sclcrca rad TcchnoloBr - UGX1.660 btlllon as Non Tax Revenue (l,lTRl for payacnt of Lung out allowanccfor non-resrdent gove[rment sponso.ed atudents, management of 3rdsemester cxarnlnauons that resulted from the covld 19 pandemrc andpurchas. of thc bus that repl,ac.s thc a$ng onc to fac rtatc studcnts andstalf outrcach achvrtresAhc comaltt c recoaactr& rpprot rl ol IrGX l.66obillton to Votc 3O2rUbrran lralver.ltti ol gclcncc and Tcchnololy Uabcrsltti to co!,arof ltgi!! out dlosatrcca lor tron-rcaldcnt lovllr[Ecat-qroanorcd atudcntrr &rmgcrncllt of 3rd-aclncrtcr crlahatlotr!, rndrcplrcGracnt of rghg bu. bc rtlpro?cd.4.1L Votc 3l3r MonotriDr ol thc Mooa Unfucrstttii UGX S.9OO b lioa asNon Tax Revenuc (l,ITRl to cater for provrsron of teachrng and officcrnfrastructure grvcn the rncrcasrng prcssurc on thc cashn8 rnfiastructureQ\t\(clt /t3tJ€L-resultrrE fiom the hLrgh student effolment (from 2,170 rn academrc year2O2l122 to 3OOO rr 4c,^dcatc ycat 2022123l.Thc corllllttcc r,ccol!.rlcrdr rpploval ol UOx 5.9OO b lton to votc 313:liorrltrtn of thc Uoo! Ualecnlty.4.12 Votc SOI: Ugudr Mbloa rt thc Unttcd l{rtlotr , I{cr ?orl - UOX0.660 billioa rs rcqu[ed to replace the otd arr cr.rculatron umt andassocrated anc lanes at the Uganda House, New YorkThe Comrllttee observcd that tbe arr c[cuLatron for Uganda House hasnever becn repliaccd smcc rts purchasc ln 1975; thrs urut breaks down fromhme to hme a-nd nccds to bc rcpl,accdTtre Commrttee also estabhshed that the l\rrssron had requcsted for UCX1 O27 b hon for repliacement of the old al-r arculaton umt arrd assodatedanc,llancs at thc Ugalda House, New York Howcver, only UGX O 66 b Lonqras provrded as a down pal.mentAhc ColaDlttce icconaca& rDDrc?d of UGX L.O2? blllloa to VotcSOL: Ugrndr fbdo! rt thc Ualtad rtlora, llc!, ?ort4.13 Vrsioqr Cctrtnl rlrd Locd Oo?crn lctrt Votcr - lrGX lO.?52 blltotrrs rcquncd a8 unspent external financmg lrom W 2O2l122 under EUBudgct Support These funds were rneant to b€ d.rsburscd to L.ca.lGovcmmcnts and support acavraes under Central Govcmment Agencres asdetarled beloq,VotBcacictrry A.motr.atoo8Illrrustry of Fmancc, Plann rrg and EconomrcDevelopment2,200,00o,o00oo5Mmrstry of Pubhc S€ruce 620,000,o00o18Mmrstry of Gcnder, l.abour arrd SocElDevelopment1,295,220,OOO011Illrrustry of Local Govemment (rndudcs fundsfor 41 LGsl2,33?,229,646143Uganda Bureau of Statrshcs 3,700,ooo,oooL22Equal Opporturutrcs Comrllssron 600,o00,o00tot l to,?s2,449,545Thrs rs requred to facrhtatc Votes fulfill the drsburs.mcat Lnked rndrcatoraas per th. financurg agreernent to avord losrng the UOX 4O.OOO btllioadrsbursemant for(fr & I(PL2lvrH{K.The Commrttee obs€rved that the UGX 600 mrlhon for Mmlstry for PubhcServrcc sras for purchaec of two vehrcles for past leaders namcly the formerVrce Prcsrdcnt Rt Hon Edera-rd Sckandr arrd Former Pnme Mrmster, Rt HonRuhalrna Rugunda but $ras releascd late and swept back to consohdatcdtundUAX 2 337 b .Lron werc a grant under the Drscrehonal DcirclopmentF.quaLsatron Grant (DDEG) financed by the Europearl Umon under caprtale4)endrturcs to aI local govcrnmcnts m Uganda Ttlesc funds wcrc swcptback to thc consohdated fund at the cnd of thc fnancral ycar as most of theachvrhes could not be completed rn b-methc Corlrlllttcc ncoolo.rlclrdr rpproerl of UGx 10.752 blllioa to vuionCcrtnl atrd lacd Govcrlrlcllt Votc! [.tcd above.4.14 v.rlou. cctrtnl rnd Lcd covcrltaettt Votc. - UGX 404.96?blllloa to meet wage shortfall8 a.nsrng from the ncw PoLrcy to enhancc thcwages of acrentrsts n fY 2022 I 23 (Scc Anacr 5)thG CoDatttac racoD.EGadr rDprotnl ol U(}X ,rc4.96? bllllo! for dllrotea h rucr ra rrle cnlrraccEcat for aclcltLtr.4.15 Vrdon Ccatnl rld Locrl Go?GmEoat votc.: Ucx ll.O?O billloars rcqurred aa nnapcnt extern l financtng trom fI 2O2L/22 under EUBudget Support These funds were mcant to be drsburscd to LocalGovemeents arrd support achutrcs under Central Covernment Agencres asdet rled below8/!rBcacici.ry A.Eonnt1Mmrstry of Fmance, Plannlng and EconomrcDcvelopment2,200,o00,o002Mtustry of Pubhc Se.uce 8oo,000,ooo3Mtustry of Gende., Labour and SocnlDcvelopment1,200,ooo,ooo4Mmrstry of lacal Govcrnment (mcludes fundsfor 41 LCsl3,526,465,723SUganda Burcau of Statrstrcs 2,564,0O0,0O06Equd Opporturutres Comrlrssron 600,000,0007t cel Government Frnance Commrs6ron 180,OOO,0oOTotrl ll,(yro,46s,?23Thc Commlttcc dccllncs rpprolrrl of UGx ll. o?O btlion to Vrrlousc.ntnl rnd L.cd Ooe.rnr!.nt Vot ! lLtcd .bovc aa thcr€ fun& srcrcdrc.dy provl& PPro?cdbudlGt lor F?2O1 2/23. I\J//363PL,-4.16 Votca 5OO - Lcrl Gorrcr!.aont!: UGX .t1o.3?f b totr rs requtedas follows4 UGX 5.639 blllloa rs Localy Rarscd Revcnue Ttus rs requfcd tofac rtate the Lacal govcrnments captu-re una-ntrcrpated revenue at thehme of Budgeung aa well as undcrtake the ptianracd acuvrtres for FY2022123,1 arLnex IThc Coaolttcc nEcollmcnd. rpppt d ol UOX 3.638 b[lloa tolrrrlou.. locd goecm.nclt votc. (A.an r 6A ald 68l rcqulrcd toirctlttrtG thc lacd govcrlncnts crpturG unrttlclprtcd rcvctue rtth. ttac of Bqdgcdrg r. qrell a. undcrtaLo tiG plenlcd rctlvltlcr forpt 2022123u) UGX 0.288 blllioa rs unspcnt balalces for Northern Uga-ndaDevelopment Enhanced local Gorrcrnance Inlrastructure and LlvehhoodsPro8ram (NUDIELI,Votc Vota lf.lnc AEouat (UGXI468 Krtgum Dlstnct 59,363,020479 La.mn o Drstnct 152,369,7019t2 Nwoya Drstnct 76,32L,O44Totd 288,OS3,aosThc CoaElttcc rccorlDcrd! rpprovd ol UGX 0.288 bllllo! u,llpcttb.lucc. for ltorthcr! Irgrn& Dcv.loplncat Etrhrlccd LcrlGovcrnlrcc Infrrttructurc rtrd Lleclthoo& ProEnE (NITDIELlrrl UGX lSO.6Of b llon ls unspent tunds l.ll.FY 2O2l122 for USMID Ttus rsrequred to fac tatc Lacal Govcrnment Votes sctue contractualobhgatrons ansrng from deliayed procurement proccss due to scveraladErrustratrvc revrcws and avord the rntercst cha-rges that are rmpeded rnther respechve contracts, (tcc A!!cr 7 |Thc CoEaittcc rccot!,!cn& rpproeal of UGX UGX 15O.6Ol billtoafor USmD, to hclllt tc Locrl (iorrlrnE.[t Votc. .cttlc coatr.ct[rlobllgrttoa.L) UGX 225.233 blllioa rs unspent tunds ,n fY 2O2l122 for the UgandaIntergovemmental Frscal Transfers (UG[FT) reform for the constructron ofS.ed Secondary Schools, upgrade of Health Centre IIs to Ills, sraterprolects and mrcro-scale rrngatron prolects (see Altrcr 8 |17 t6+ThG Cot nittco n coa6ca& rpprclral of UGX 225.233 bllllotr tr!.Pcntfua& tn FY 2orlll22 lor thc Ugudr Intergov.rnmctttal Flrcal trarrfate(UGIfTl rcforE for ttc coa.tnction ol Sccd &condrrrr &hooL,upgndc of Bcalth Ccntrc IIs to mr, setcr prolcct .nd alcro{crlclrlgatlon prolCctv) UOX 28.611 bllllon to cater for reallocatrons wrthrn the LocalGovcmment Budgets Ths rs rcqurred grvcn that funds werc allocated tonon-budgetary rtems and thc requcsts for vremcnts on these rtcms arenot rn hne wlth the 10% threshold stated m the PFMA, 2015 (see Annex9 for detarlslThe ComElttcc rccolomcrda rppro?d of UGX 28.611 bllliol to crtctlor rcrlloc.tlo!. eltAnn tha l,ocrl Oolrcrll.lllclrt BEdlct5.O CO CLUATONRt Honorable Speaker and Hon Membcrs, I request the House to consrderthe Commrttee's recoamendahons and approvc the SupplcmentaryExpendrtures under Schedule No 1, Addenda 1,2,3 & 4 for W 2022/23 ^3outlned m the table below and detaJed m the Annex I aad 2 of the proposedSupply SchedulcsRccu-rrant Irct rlopEctrt Gtrnd totdSupplemcnta.ryExpendturc1,714,590,568,914 883,184,203,92s 2,597,774,7?2,439\l/4tta4-laAlflfEX 1: aUPPLEiTEImARY EfPEItDITt RE ESTIUATEa FOR aUPPLY(R.ECrrRRrr{TlA.Eouat IUGXI00rOflicc of thc Prcldent 1S5 000.ooo002statc Housc 2 t t. t43.aoo.ooooo3Offic. of thc Pnh. Mur3t . sr 253.146oo4MrnBtiv of Ocfcncc ,+32,309.322.170oo5Mlnlstry of PubLrc Scrvrcc 214.200.OOO006MmBtry of ForcBn A.ffalls l3.a70.ss1.a2ra)?Mtarstr, of Jushcc and CoNutuoonal Allars 39.000.000oo8MtaBtry of Flnancc, Plannrnq ,nd EconolD.lc DcvcloDmcnt 8.320.140.0000r0Mlnrstt]''of Agnculturc, .^nl[El, Indultw 6. Fr3hcncs 2.667.137.33SollMurBtr] of Local O,ovcmmcnt 28.200.OOOot2Mmt3t4. of lands, Housmg & U.ban Dcvclopmcnt 4.39t.O7?.490ol3Ml.Dl.try of Educaoon and Sports 23.545.873.400o14Mu$try of Hcalth 23.33r.200.O00orsMlnrstrv ofTradc. tndustrv and Co-oDcratrvcs 66.2t9 .942.29to16Mmstry of Work3 and Trrnsport t.4a2.o?e ?Got?Mrmstrlt of Enc.E a,ld Mhcral Dccclopmcdt 784,800,000o1aMrmstry of Ccadc., labou. and SocBl DcccloDmcnt 3.59,+.7r8.892019Mlrlltrl' of Watcr and Envronmcat t.207 .14o.972o20Mrnrstrv of loformaaon. end Com.rlrullclboni Tcchnoloev 39.298.400.00002rEelt Alrlcan CoEurruruty Afiarr8 ,r.800.o00o22Mrnr3tiv of Tou.Bm. Wlldlfc a.nd Antrdurtrca 3.?44.420.3S)10?UEanda Alds CoD.Drssron ruACl 121.443.603111Nadonel Currrculuh DcvclopmcDt Ccatrc 6.000.000.000114USanda Canccr lastrtutc 5.108.534.20,r115Uganda Hcalt lnstrrut€ 2S3.200.OOOtt7Urarda Tounsm Board llrlBl 2.620.000.000r19Ulanda RcasEatroa Scrvrca3 Burcau 1.337.409.500120Natronal Cltzcmhrp tnd Imm,qatlon ControlNCICl 4?.022.4?? .O20l2lOarrv DcvcloDd.at Authontv IDDAI 426.OOO 3r6122Kaaprla Caprtal Crty Author(y t7.6?7.O41.?68124Eoud ODDortu tr.s Comm8sron r.?94.330.600T2?UBnda Vlru8 Rc*l.rch lnlhtut€ IUVRII 137.,tOO.OOO132Educaton Scrl'rcc Com6rssron 7.2o,0 OOOl3iDr.ctorat of PubLc P.o*cuno.3 17,400,OOOli4Hcs.lth S.rucc Comlnlssrcn r4,400.000135Drcctoratc of Covcrndcnt Analvtucal Laboraton (DGALI t.o27.444 852139Pctrolum Authont\. of Upanda I l.ooo.ooo.ooot42Natlonal A8ncultural Rcaca-.ch O.aenrratron (NAROI l.ooo.ooo.ooo144Ugenda Polrcc Fo.cc 7.0?8.800.000l,+5Ugan& Pn3ons 5.960.146.891{F+\ s"39$t.IIIIIItIIIIIII!IIIIIIhA-a6unt llror(l Vot r.ac159.309.084 146Publra Sarvrcc Commrs3ron7.200,000 144Judrcra.l S.rvrcc Codrmrssrcn,t95.OOO.000 151Uganda Blood Tr3nlfuston Scrvrcc (UBaSl857.q10.OOO 152Natronal Asrculturd AdvBorv scrucca IN^ADSIUqanda lffd Com6r$lon 17.400.()00 r561.825.473.200 rs8tntcrne.l s.cunty Organrraoon 0SOlsoo.ooo 000 rsqErtcmal Sccunty O.ge-aEatba (e.SO)l _235.OOO.OOO r6suprnda Busncas 3nd tccbnrcsl Eranrmatron Eosrdr 6sq.q78.286 302Mbarara Utuv€rsrh of Sarancc rnd Tcahaolo(v?.695.Ot2.?9? 303Mekarcrc UDrvcrsfty Busrncas School625.?4232r 3063.213.006.662 307(aba-ta UmgcftrB.1.646.60?.404 30443r.8?S.752 309Gulu Udrvcrsrty3.?93.257.856 310r.330.79S.483 312Ucenda ManaEancnt lnsttutcs.900.000.000 313MouatdnB of lhc Moon Utuvcrsrw4.359.OOO.OOO 40lMulaao Holprt .l Complcrsl2.400.ooo 402Butab*a Hosprt l864.I4S,100 403Arua R.fcrral Hoaprtal82S.000.000 404Fort Po(al Rcfc.ral Rosp(il| .232.At6 .A22 405Oulu Rcfcr€-t Hospltal1.363.()43.239 406Holma R.acrre-t Hoaprta-t542.600.ooo 407Jlnta Rcfcrral Ho3prti667,644 9t2 408liabrlc Rcfcrr.l Ho3prtat67S,600.000 409Masaka Rcfcrrel H6prtales4.600.000 410Mbalc Reacftal Ho3prt -t637.200.OOO 411Sorotr Rcfcrral Hdprt Ir.o47.s19.737 4t2Lrra Rcfcral Holprti.lMbarara Rcfcrral Ho3p(al s77 200,000 ,t l3505.800.000 414Mubctrdc Rcfcrrs.l Hosprtal895.423.320 4lsMoroto Rcfcrral Hosplte-t634.200.OOO 416Nagunr Rospltal9ls,oo0.o00 4l?Kruddu Rcfcrral Hosp(al4.? 3? .A2t .230 418Kawcmpc Rcferral Hospx.-t406.200.ooo 419Entcbbc Rcfcrra-l Hospltal420Mulato SpcclalEed womcn and Neonatal Hosp(al 4 .992.O53 .292600.o00.000 421Ka!,unPa Rcfcrla-t HosDltal3r0.000.000 50sU?anda Hmh Commrssron rn l(cnva. Nafobr47? _949.420 so7upanda Hreh Comorssron rn Nrscna. Aburasr2UE nda Embaqqv ln EthroDra. Addrs Ababa 550.000,00032aA59.o?? 51:tucanda Edbas3v rn SMtzcrland, Ocncva300 000.000 518 ln B. Bru3acls Etaba U-$yIIIIItI!IIIIIItIIII\( E(Votc l(.a. Ainaunt lt Gtals21U@nda Emba$v rn Sudan. Khartoum 200.000.000s23Uqanda Eabsss! m G.rarnv. Bc.lrn 3r r.665.000528Usa.ada E rba3sv ra Unlted Arab Emlratc8. Abudhabr 333.201.4OO532Ucrnda Etubassv rd Soaell,- MoEadfhu ?3r ooo ooo601 r r.392.633.473602Fon-Portrl cty 3.035.3r0.553603Gulu crtv 7.065.OO1.2706MHolha crw 2.O22.346.44e605 1o.020.673.o?9606trr"a clty 6.552.34r.83860? 6.44?.s)O.402608Mbalc otv 6.?SA A?2 S4A609 9.660.8:l8.OO46loSorotr cltv 5.3t2.?26.663?orApea Muo.rcDrl Counc 819.9,t 1.393?MBuon MurucrDal Councrl a99.S4t _3? |703Bushcnyr- lshaka Muructpe-t Councd r.7s?.?3t.26t?04Busra Mudcrpal Counc 635.r89.234705Entcbbc MunrcFsl Counc 2.202.9?O.22r?06lbanda Mumcrpa-t Counc 2.86e.244.4? 5?o?lEarga Munrcpal Counc a?2.t93.48??oalAbsl. Mu .rpe-t Counc s.045.963.r69709(ahuh Munrcpel Counc r.3?6.148.080710Kap.horwa Murcrpal Counc 1.632.211.S497ttKa3ala Muncrpal Couac 13.3?7.418.2417t2kra Mumcrpal Coutrc 2. r23.002.66r?t3K8oro Munrcrpal Counc 3.275.493.993?t4Kltgum Mutuce.l Courc r.i10.q36.ao?715Koboko Muhrcrp;.I Coudcrl 609.996.,r,16716Kotrdo Multrcrpd Councd 53?.80?.890?t7Kuru Muo.rcrDa.l Counc 850.19A. 19?IALuaazl MunroDal Counc 254,6? elq7t9Mgkradii.-Slabtuaabo MurucrDal Counc r. r37.397.153?20Malrrrdr Munrclpal Councl.t 1.34S.703.8?4?21Mrtvina MungDal Counc[ 1.769.623_843?22Mornto Mumcroal Counc 1.297 405 97S?23Mub.Ddc Muorclpal Counc 1.520.507.050?24Mukono Munrcrpal Counc 2.24t.224 .X56?25Nansana Mumclpal Councd 3 2tl.lla.1lr?26Ncbbr MurucrDal Couac,-t 483.312.O34?2?Ntcru MudrcDa-t Councd 1.393.052.SOS?24Ntu.qamo MurucDal Couac ?4 t,6?3.16??29Rukuaorr MunADd-t Counc[ 2 296 . t t4 .t+)IIITItItIIIII!IttIIILaoo-nt IUOrO VotaVotr l{ra.3.O?? 1,]4 56? 730Sh.cma MumcrDe-t Counc?1rTororo Mumcmal Councd 1.744.16S.251r.463.153.106 aol6.979.().+A.l6A ao2AdtumaDl Drstfict1.ASr.()42.570 803Aearo OBtnct2.265.205.242 80{ALbtonc Drstnctao5 3.089.887.720t .22? .949 .?49 806Amudat Dl3tnct12.069.34?.O53 ao?AEurra Dratnctt _?42.O?2.O4? 808A-duiu Dratncts45.2qa.a4s 409Aoac Dlstrlctaro r.248.599.30310.523.205.56r 8llBudaka Dlltrrct4.796.996.198 a12Bududa DBt ct2.AAl_ 149.490 813Bucrn Dratnct4.7,+O qA6.1a8414BuEwE.r Drltnct8lsBuhlrcru Dl8trlct 3.332.525.119a16Bu&B. Ihatnct 4.O50.447.0082 r8r.880.894 at?Bukcdca Dtstictr.640.65S.693 8tEBukoda-asrmbr OGtncta19Eukwo DEtflct 1.424.X4'4.9?3410Bulrrnbuh Dtltn t 2.503.964.839a2lBullka Dl3trlct 2.451.449.O344 .O3? .r49.4?4 422Bundrbusvo Dlltnctr4.o52.SaA.609 423Bunvanrabu Dratnct3-958.334.410 824Bu3h.n!,r Dr3tncta2sBulla Dratnct s.s67.243.824426But .l.r, DBtnct 2.368.571.4936.t22.O22.625 a2?Butambala Chitrrctl.7to. t? 1.004 828Butcbo DBtfrctr.s??.44o.o43 429Buvuma Drctnct830Buvend. Dtltnct 1.794.411.2083.250.129.1i I 83rDokolo D6trrct2_602.60?.OO4 832Codba Drstncta33Oulu DEtflct 2,306.208.33?334 6.118.295.4?44 .562.524 .362 835lbenda DBtnct436IEanEa DEtnct 5 034.218.018a1?Iimtlro Dlatrlct 10.181.o41.66 tI .264 .024.260 838Jrnta Dlst'rct2.aag.loo.,+?4 419Kaabon€ Or8tnct840Kaba-tc D13tn t ?,4?1.29r,t30841lGherolc DEtnct ^t ^I .446 .780.? t?' _JB{--'ltt1'Vot iha. Aaollnt lIrOXl442(ab.ramtudo Dl3trlct , q?q 6ss.333443lG{adr Dlstnct 2.609.33? .6? I844Kaktrmrro DBtnct 2.O30.??9 .36984SlG-te.Lr Dlstnct L.417 .?46.2?3446lirlancala DEtrlct 1-477.SOO.414e4?lGlm Dratnct 2.r13.561.960848lirluncu D8tnct 4.3r2.195 24S849(,-auh Dlltnct s-o54.o34.945asoKa.6wcns€ Drstrrct 3.33r.425.806asrl(enuatu DGtrrct 7.111.388.849as2(apchorua Drstnct 2.51r.979.518853l(aDclcbvoac DBtnct ?02.20?.435454(rrcnla DEtflct r.$9.218.O34a5sKftandr DEtnct 4.73r.908.137456 r0.088.65S.909857Katakm DBtnct 4.209.s46.42S858Ka!1rnca Dratnct 6.402.434 50S859Karo Dl!tnct r.653.090.921460 2.430. r44.5,+ r861Krbosa DBtnct 6.4s9.340.61o462libuku Dtstnct 2.25t .2AS .O4.2863kkuubc Dlstrrct 2.ts4.715.6?A464 3.843.63,+.292865Krvandonpo Orctnct 2.5?A_7??.3866l&6om lhlt .t u1.247 915 039a6?Krtatw€nda Ol8tdct 1.989.932.869a6alirtard 2 8S5.,+27.080869Koboko Drctrrct 3.34S 22q.O40a?oKolc DEtrrct 2.380.791.938a?tKotdo Dratnct 612.515.821e7,l(umr Oratnct 6.790.745.601a?3l(wama DEtnct r.883.966.602a?4K(E.n Dstn t 2.873,656.03?a?sK!'alLearur DBtnct 1.770.43?.494a?6K\rcccswa Drstnat 6 50r.8S8.908a??l(l'€alloro Dlatrlct s.oa2 014 355a7al(yotcra Dt3tnct 6.65t.6??.544A?9b,trrio DBtnct 1.930.067.564880l,r.ra OGtnct 1.922.840.8r4881Luuka Dl8trlct 3.714.0r6.865aa2 12.4t)4.408.178aa3Lsrcnso Drstnct 3.883.547.18S884L(rntondc Drstrrzt\ - 2 208.040.655 I+.IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIbI/i3L-+VotVot l[la. A.Eouat IUOIaasMadr-Okollo Drctnct 994.t5. 32?aa6 3.243 _3?6.703| .ao? .?aa.92t aa7Ma.taaha Dlltirct888M8rka Drctrrct 2.114.153.137889Masmdr Dlltnct 1.320.638.?88490 6.69,+.84?.S13aqr 4.234.559.7333.542 qO,+.60'492Mba.ra.ra Drstnct893Ittooaa DBtrrct 3.184.3?3.?8r494Ihtr.ana Dlltn t 4.O9? .657 .641agsMoroto lhatnct 4,+8.S{4.638as6 3.4rS.'.t61.9875.232 160 AO7 a9?MDro Drstnct898Mub.ndc DBtnct 3.498.256.770499Mukono Dlgtilct 7.295.348.481gooNeb atuk Dtstnct 1.o78.854.288qor l.2ar.6l l.6al NlkaDlrlplnt Dlstnct6_S93.420-3ql 902Nakalck DBtnct903Naka3odeola Drltnct 3.129.510.820qo4Nlrnai.lnao Ol3tnct 3.336.55?.887qo53 _464.920.t?6 Nanllndwa D{!td.t3 6q5.O23.639 906Namutumbe Orstnct22.260.411q 90?NaDaL Drltnct908Ncbbr DBtnct 2.957. r0?. r5r909Nrora Dl3trlct A.242.24r.542qroNtomkd Dtatdct 2.357.220.7?64.643.202.44,t 9rrNtu.dmo Drstnct3.244 l4A.Oaq 9t2N$ova DrBtnct913Obone Dtltnct 667.t44,731914Omom Dl3trrct r.867.955.321qlsOtuk. Dlitnct 2.59S.419.157,+.241.05S-q02 Ovam Or3tnct9r?Padc. DBtirct 5.613.SO3.603g1a r0.9?5.r62.8041_?90.942.320 919Pallrsa Drstrrct920Reker Drctnct 5.85 r. r7?.916-921Rubrnda Drstnct 2.352.910 8846.317.216.256 9nRubr.z Dlrtd.t,.6rq 658.249 923Ruloea OBtnct924Rukunpln Dlstrlct 6.2t? .4?9 .651q2sRorrnbara DBtact r.918.5r2.SO52.r23.6?2.465 926scmbabulc Dlstrlct92?Scrcrc Drstnat .t-. 4.434 S978S8(RWA.${ 'JBIIIIIIIIIITIIIIIIItIIVotcVot iLac A.Eaunt lucll924She.ma Drqtnct r r.171.658.439929Srronko Dlstnct 4.441.3??.8rcq306.954 759.565931Tcrcao Drstnct 6 _444.644.29?932Tororo DBtnct 5.276 S14.,+36933 16.602.854.78s934 3.r98.070.203q3sZombo D8tnct 2.S29.115_,160oR rD nmrl. 1.714-EeO.65t-e1,4A.rNE ( 2: aUPPI,EUENTTRT EXPENDITITRE EaTIUATES FOR SITPPLY(DEI'ELOP EI{TIA45A.aao.at IUOIIo03Ofircc of thc Pnmc Mullstcr r-soo.ooo.ooo005Mrmstrv of hrb[c S.rvtcc 620.O00.ooo008Mmstry of Frnancc, Pla.onrnq ,nd Ecoaoanc Dcvcloomcnt 8.978.600.000oloMlnrstn of A6rculturc. Anmal Industn and Frshcncs 12.97A.739.300ot IMrnrstlv of lacel Covcmmcat 16.3rs 5qa 424ol3MrnBtn' of Educatron a,Id sDodq 4.400.000.000o14Mltrrstr! of Hcrllh r8i.162.880 000ol6Mlnrltry of Work8 and TransDort ?_4 A.Oq3-4ASol7Mlnratn of Eacrcv e-od Mrnereh 88.867.000.O000r8Morstry of O€ndcr, Labour end Socul DcvcioDm.nt 22.495.220.OOOo22Mrmstrv of Toudam. W dllc end l.nhoultrc3 2.800.ooo.o00101Judrcrert l.6s3.ooo_ooot12KaiDala CaDrtrl Crtv AuthonB. 3,+.445.823.849124Equal oDDonumtrca codols sron 600.000.000126 Natrona-t Info.daton Tcchnoloocs Authontl. 5.5lO.OOO.OOOt43Uaanda Burcau of Sllatl3tr.3 ruBOSl 3.700,000.000144Uqenda PoLce 68.000.000.000155Cotloa DcvcloDment OrEaflzalon 9.500.ooo.oooio1Mikcrcre Uruvcrslt! 8.oOO.OO0.OOOso1lj.arr& Mrssroa at thc Umtcd Nahons. N.$ York r o27.305,40060rArue Crw 3.Ooi.390. r2 r602Fortportal ClB. 4.543.1?9.s8,t603Ou.lu crty 5 2AO.OO0.OOO604 4.603,643 823605Jlnra Crw 4.529.171.753606 4.642.823.5a5607 I Masaka Crtv 239 _927.344\V{\wvotc f,trnc A.aaunt lUOr608 533.546 463609 Mbarr-ra dty r6.663.662.020610 Sorou Clty 3.760.8r9.453'?otAoac Mudrcroa-t Councrl 3.897.3?9.O4170sEtrt€bb. MuarcrD..l Counc 6.634-?0? -446704Kabalc MunrclDal Coutrcrl 4 S65.634.6rS?09 Ka.muh MudrcrDe-t Couac,l 6.8 r8.961.?S3?toKaochorwa MunlcrDal Councrl 191.144. tot?tl Kaaesc Mumcroel Counc 2.4Sq.O28.O34?t2ltua Mumcmal Councl.l l.o1r.q55.ooo?txl(Isorc Muanpal Councrl 36,78 r 514?14Ktgu6 MuDrcrp3l Counc 8.200.ooo.000715Koboko Mu-orcrDe-t Counc r.s16.104.o?3?taLups-a MuorcrDi-t Counc 6.943.746.560?20Maimdr Mu ctDa.l Counc 342.34S_AAa?22Mdr6r6 Muntcrr)al Councd 2.? 52.8t3.371723Mubcndc Mumclpa-t Counc 3.902.666.455?2aNtunraho MunrcDal Counc 3.300.883.r82?1rTorom Murucbel Counc t3.o?4.299.999801 1.259.698.363ao2Adtuma.ol Dlstnct 6 994,326.O22ao3AlrEo DBtnct 3.405.A78 139ao4Alcbtons D6tnct r.946.305 24380s 3_O56.509.S32805 r 4as.?sa.?gqao? 3.607.717.591808Amuru Drltnct 8S7.O98.r038loArua DBtnct 2.89,+.633.15 t8t 1Budaka Dtstnct 3.247 .O34.70Iar2Bududa Dl8tnct 3.Ot?.?3?.064813Euon Dr3tflct I .t97 .319 .87?8l,tBuqwclr Drstnct 890.050.3048lsBuhlieru D$tnct 4 _2rA.424 .O22al6Burkwr Drstnct s6s.269.61?at?Bukcd€a Dtstnct r .622.72t .923alaBukohansrabr Orctnct 23s.670.269a1qBukwo Dlatnct 4183.1?4.33r820Bula-dbuL DBtnct 2.61l 401.0 t4a2rBulllqa DBtnct t.081.149.212422EundrbuEr.o DBtnct i.a19.719.0?6823Bunvanpabu DEtflct 2.06r.902.349824 | .652 71 t .246a2SBusra DBtrrct 3.153 626.404v/r\45hsVotcVotc naac Aaoo-at IUOXI426Butalda Dlstirct l r2s.ls4 3aqa2?But rnhah Drctnct la4t.9?1.2t4arq 3.283.,+58.47883rOokolo Olstnct 2.564.q37_SS1832Goaba Dlstnct s94 312 63?833Oulu Dlstnct 1.905.811.119434Horda DBtnct 9?4.494.24?835Ibrnda D6tfut 440 069-4t?836 Iqa-oqa DBtnct 990.788.736a3?IsmBro Dratnct r3.627.5r5.380a3aJrnta D13tflct r.663.920.3?98,+0l(abalc Drtnct r-162.s25.8?g841l(abarol,. Drtn t 2.930.547.670442(abcre-m{do Dlatrlct r36.950.OOO443lkcadr Dlstnct 2.9s6.924.30se11Krku6rro Drstnct t.651 .oq2.??9845KeLln Dlitnct | .280 .64? .12a846 Karanaala DBtnct t.? t7 .t?9.592447Kalrro Dlst ct 1.592.64S.S44848Kalunru DBtnct srs.aga 063849 Ke.muL Drltncr 1.?26.?90.??4850 Ka.ar\pcnlc Orstact 13.850.759.,+29asll(.nunlu Dr3tnct | .722.759 .323852 KaDchorwa Drstnct 1.2?3.102 SA5853Ka!€lcbvona DBtnct r.329.607.0r8as4Karcaqa Dr3tnct 1.O77.500.OOOassliararda DBtnct 2.235.? 511442856l(a!.3c Dllt .t 2.2?9 .909.2L185?(atak\nr Dlltrlct r.95r.92 r.016asalAvuara Dr3trrct 1.635.2A3.02aass Kazo O8tnct r.644.O1q.371860kbar.le Dlstrrcr 3.790.354.505861kboqa Dl3trlct 658.5,+9_6148,62kbuku OEtnct 2.329.24 t .OAO863lokuubc DEtrrct r.303.060.344854Kruhura Dlitnct I . 156. 196. 170a6sK,lvrndonco Drstrrct 6.231.9a5.393466Krloro DBtnct 1.187.146.541a6?Krta"wcada Dlltnct r.239.3,r9.699868Krtqum r.247.359.333469Koboko Dr3tn.t 1.36,+.369 421a?o K6lc Dr3tn.t 1.124.S47.404a?l Kotrdo D6tnct 992.32!.O23tG+41i\vAaoE t IUOXI2.641.590.231 a?2Kuru Drarrct3.12?.276.O3? 8?4l(w€cn DrBtact2.S13.244.44r a?5Kv3nkwanzr Dlltnct(v.a.rn a DBtnct 3.?59.6S3.088 8?64.o24.29?.ort a??Kvcnlorc Dratirct2 _416.465.592 a7al(lbtara D8tnct4 2U2.?t3.901 2?9aalLuuka Dl3tnct r.262.029.0182.r??.344.?5t aa2Luwcm Dratnct1.75,+.589.6 t3 883Lwcmo Orstrrct| .455.??? .396 ae4Lvantotrdc DBtrrct| .192 e?? .t tq aasMadr-Okollo Dlltrlct3.6? t.664.2?9 886Ma,la.ira Dtstnctl4t3.2lo.5ol 88?Mrracha Drstnct1.74S.705.651 aa8Maseka Drctnct1.240-43r.S92 aa9 Ma8mdr OlltnctaqoMaurec Dlgtn t 3.?O3.70r.655MbeL Dlatnct 1.385.€ r.308 89r446.064.r?? 492Mbarara DBtnct4_624.36S.316 893Mrtooda DGtnct8q4 s28.6S3.639933.468.976 895496 1.203.?45.e?6586.259.033 a9? MDrEr D[tnct3.320.517.O17 a9aMubandc Dlstalct5qa-912.475 agsMukono DtltnctgolNsLabrnEmt Dlstnct 8ro.455.859Naka.ckc Dllrn t 2.164.1O4.829 902r.153.241.r l3 903NakaloaPola Drstnctr.s90.39 r.095 90,+Nrmavrn[o D8tnctr-466.r23.OOO qosNarl'lsmdl,a Dr3tnct906Nernuturnba Drstact L.O92.?aO.491.599.026.582 90? Naoak OBtrrct2.460.O5,+.699 904 Ncbbr DBtnctgogMrora Drctnct 308,S?O,1862.642.?92.t51 910Ntoroko Dlstnct1.632.146.86,+ 91rNtunca-ao Orctnct259.420.4?A 912 Nwova Dtlt .tql3Otanor Drctnct 3.36s.438.040954.565.866 914Omoro Dratirct1.O19.564.245 9rsOtukc Drctnct4.142.o75.455 916 Ov3.Ilr DEtflct9l?P:d.r Dtstnct .t- f\ 2 129 .065 .49?(qA.e,r\$,lA -XUIIIIIIItIIItIIIIIIIIIVotVotc l{rac Ainau-at tuotl918Pil(\ .ach Drctnct ao\223.247s19PaIIEa Dlstrrct 1.042.508.331s20R.k,r DBtnct 1.586.242 la6921Rubanda oBtnct 1.3qA.qOl.6?a922Rubrna Oratnct 2 .O79 .662 t7?923Ruldca Dlstnct 1.2 r2.638.945921Rukuneh Drstnct 1.794.?00.80Sc25 Rtra-oDara DBtnct 12 r 3ao.ooo926Saababulc OBtnct 1.,+23.218.94392?l!..c.c Drltirct 730,557.r46924Sh..ma Dlltnct 1.2 16.565.65r929 2.544 3? | .er?930Sorotr D[trrct | 392 2?O.OO,]93rTcrceo Dr3tnct 5.604.281.546932Torom Dratnct 3.?26.17e.462s33WrJa3o Dtitnct 4.704-58S.714q3ut lo.4ao.44a-608t{}rA,. e&l-la,a.2O3-e23ANNEX 3. WAGC SHORTFATTS 6.low 3ta L.a.l (SClEtltlSTSla9Ainol!-lt llr0llls6.ooo-ooo oo1 Omcc of thc Prcadcatoo2 Stata Housa 598,800.000oo3 Omcc 6f th. Plnc Mmtstc. 51.253.286oo4Mln'sta 6f D.fcnc. 2 350.OOO.OOO,t4 200.oM 005Mffitry of Publrc Scrvrccoo6 Mrnrstry of Foragn A.fierr8 r4.400,000oo?Mmrltr] of Jusbcc ard Coutrtuhonal A.ff.rrs 39.OOO.000oo8Mtnrit^ 6f Flnrnc.. Pl.rnnrn" lnd Ec6n6.h'c D.vcl6Drn.nt rqs.ooo.oooo10 Mmr.try of Agnculrurc, Aflmrl, tndu3trl' & hshcnca 1.378.200.000oll MtDlEtry of Load Golicmfunt 28.200.000ot2 Mmlstr]' of knds, Houlrng & Urban Dcvclopmcnt 2_L?4.tt4.944? 215.473.400 013 Mlnr3try of Edu.ahon alxd SportsolrtMhrstn of Hca-tth 469 200.000ol5 Mlnlstn' of Tradc. lndulttv and Co-oDcratrvcs ?4.400.000ol6 MlnBtry of Works and Transport 889.200.000ot7 Mmtstrv oa En€rBr and Mrne.al Dcvelopmcnt 784.AOO_OOO018 Mlnrstrv oa Ocnd€r, Labour and SocEI DeveloDmcnt 133,3,10,301orq M1n$t4. of Watcr snd Envronmcnt ?t7,324,467o2|.l Mmr3trt' of lnformatron. and Comruorcatrons Tcchnolofl 98.400.00002r Ealt Akrcan Commu ty Atralr! 4.aoo.ooo{i\rr\EsAaouat lUCtro22 Ml,lrtstrv of Iourum. wddMe and Antrourtres 24L162.425tt2 Etlrca and Intcgnt! 7.200.oooll4 USanda Canccr Instrtutc ?8,r 800.000I lsUSanda Hcart lnstltutc 253.200.000120 Natronal CluzcnsluD and ldruEAuon Crarol[Nclcl r{ 400.000r22 Ka.mpala Cap(al Clty Authonty t? .6?? .o4 t.?64t2? Upanda Vmrs Rcs..rch laqtrtutc luvRn 137.400.{lOOt32 Educatron Scrvrcc Cofi nlaslon 7.200.ooo133Dr.ctorate of ArbLc Prosecuhona 1?.400.000134Hcdth S.rucc Commlssmn r4.400.000r3sDrcctoiatc of Oovcmmcot A,lalvucal Laboratorv {DOALI 194.600.o00t42Natotril Agncultural R.s.arch Orgaruzahon (NARO) l_ooo.ooo.ooot44 Uginda PoLcc Forc. 7.0?8.800.000145 Ugaada Pnsoa3 2.O29.800.000146 Arblrc S.ruc. CotrrJrlsslon 7 200.000148 JudrcEI &rvrc. Com-tl1ls8mn 7 200.000l5l Uganda Blood T.ansfuson Scrvrcc (lJBfSl495.OOO.OOO156 Uaanda land Conmrs8bn r?.,+oo.ooor58lntcmal Sccunty Orgaflratroo (lSOl 500.o00.000159 D(te.tral S.cunty OrAanr.zahon (ESO) s00.o00.000401 Mulago Hosprta.l Codplcr( 4.359.OOO.OOO402 Butabrka Hosprt l 512.400.OOO40i Arua Rcfcrral Hosprtal 627.OOO.OOO4M Fon Ponal Rcfcrral Hosprtal a2s.ooo.ooo405 Gulu Rcfcrlil Hosprtal 825.600.000406 Homa Rclcrral Ho3pltal 890.400.00040?Jlqa Rcfcrral Hosprtal s82.600.000404 (abe-tc Rcfcrrra-t Ho3plta-t s6s.400.ooo409 Mas.ka RefcrrJ Ho6pxr.l 6?5.600.000410Mbat Rcfcrral Hosprtal 954.600.000411 Sorotr Rclcrral Holprtal 63?.200.0004t2 lrr'a Rcfcaral Hoaprtal 415.400.ooo413 Mbarara Rcfcrral Hospltal 5?? 200 000414 Mubcndc Rcfcrra-t Hosprta-t 505.800.o0041S Moroto Rafcrra.l Hospltal s02 800.000416 Neguru Hosprta-t 634.200.OOO41?loruddu Rcfcrra-t Hdprtal 915.000.000418 (ewcmpc Rcfcrral Hosprtal 1.237.320.000419 Entcbbr Rcfcrral Hosprrrl ,106.200.ooo420 Mulago SpccElrred Womcn a.nd Nconat l Hosp(al 1 .,[46 000.ooo601 3.130.961.O25602 Fort-Pona.l clB 2. r53.656.406601 2.O99.60a.100IIIIttIItItIIItItIII(/+rsorF+^.,4sIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII\:...-..Arnotrnt lUGx)604 Holaa crtt 1.444.O',]S.2S360s 5.229 .29? .92t606 Lrra clty 2.801. r,+2.65060? 3.9?8.009.,+r r608 M6atr cltv 3.694.920.255609 Mbarrra crtv 4.645.r92.25?6to 2.14?.67.,.21??or ADac Murucroal Cotrncll 819.9,11.393702Busn Munrcroal Counc 543.39q.5097o3 Bushcnln- Ishaka Mumcrpa-t Counc r.665.490.44,+?o1 BusrA Muarclpal Counc[ 4?O.t?O.24?705 Entcbbc Murucpal Councd r.307.28?.S59?06lbnda Muruclpal Counc 1.232.O94.O42?o? lganga Munropal Councl.t 499,3?9.O?S?oaKablc Mudrcrpe.l Counc 2.A22.503.2?9?os KemuLr Murucrpal Counc 3? r.2?3.3327r0lop.horrra Mumcrpal Counc t.tt2.??6.964?tl Kasclc Munrcpal Counc 1.s12.642.6qS?12Kra Mumaps-t Counc,-t 1.063.704.722kloro Murucpal Councd 3r2.383.428?t4ktgum Mutucpsl Councd 611.187.11,+?15 l(oboko Mu crpal Counc 5S3-232.451?t6 Kohdo Muarcrpel Crunc 4t 1.494.06 tKufiu Muarcpgl Couac 663,408.5r4?IA Lurazr MuD.rcroal Councrl 2SO.O23-O20?t9 Mslondrc-Ssabacaba Muolcmal Counc[ ?9? .O32.nA?20 Masrndr Munrclllal Counc I .O44.3 14.884?2t Mrtvana Muo.rcrDel Couno.l r.207.33?.9r6?22 Moroto MunrclDal Counc[ 674.552.5O2723 Mubcadc Mumc6a-t Councd \240 .AO9 .2r7?24 Mukono Mumapal Counc 2.24t.224.3567rs Na.tr8a.na MunrclDgl Cotrnc l.g(x_ 107_ssg726 Ncbbr Mumcrpel Counc 353.?32.03,r?27 Nrcru MunrcrDal Couacd 946.449.?6972e Ntunlg-mo MtrnrcrDal Councrl 38A.7SO.S3A729 Rukun6n Munrdosl Counc r.2?1_4?6.195730 Shc.ma Mumcmal Councd r.884.295.04673r Toloro Mutucrpdl Couacrl 1.240.?45.632801 1.005.711.653802 Adtumanl Dratnct 2.45? .502.46 |803 Aqaqo Drstnct 1.838.039.05980,r Alcbtong DBtnct 1.433.828.214805lr*l^tn orl*rt( 1.444.326.49351(_Vot ItrEC Aaotrlt IUO:Iao6 3?2.3t2.r152.O1S.714.515 807 A-muna Dr3tncts46_076_265 808Aburu Dratnct809 Aoac DEtnct 945,298,8,r5alo Arua Dlatrlct r.248.599.3038l IBudaka Dl8trlct r.95?.r53.8382_O3A.$6.,t90 at22 r3A.4qS-O4q 8r3Buon DBtnct814 Bupw€d DBtnct 1.585.529.5r3als Buhweru Dlstnct l. r88.105.624a16 Burkcrc Drathct 2.089.799.O80t .?9? .645.?25 8r? Bukcdca DEtactr 4q3.420.675 818Bukoaenshbr Orstncta19 Bukwb Dlltrlct 1.879.8?9.4r r420 Butambuh Dlstr|ct r.741.9r0.268a2l BulLBa Dlrtact | .o7 L242.8?82.352_644.646 422 AundrbuEvo DBtrlctr.11o.994.?64 423 Bunvancabu O8tnct424 Bushcnr.r DEtflct 2.932.602 .7? 4ar5 Burla Dtitact 2.685.535.8122.364.571.493 426 Blrta.lqa D8tnct827 Bute.abda Dlltnct 3.250.056.866I 2utut.537 aOS a2a Butcbo Dlstnct429 Buvuma Dlltnct 945.120.798430 Bulcndc Dlstrlct r.2s3.s84.O531.785.O19.81t 831 t okob fhltnct2.101.166.674 412 Oomba DBtnctI 061.811.q67 433Oulu Dtltncta3 Horma Dlitrlct L.44t.922.242a3s r.?22.911.?503.574_929.035 836kanla Drstnct437lshoro Dt8tnct 3.8??.'tO3.?22a3a .Jrnra Orst ct 4.O9?.99?.251l.l9s. t 12.316 839 l(rabonP Drltrrct,254.112_914 840Ka&lc DBtrrct841 Kab.rolc lhitrlct t.244.995.9??623.Oa4.O35 842 Kabcrarnardo Drstnct1-483.026.529 843 Kaeadr D8tnctu4 Kakumrro Drltflct r.2?5.?O3 rO?a4sKrl,rk DEtnct 1.35?.?24.2?Al.16a.934.?1? 446 Kalaneala Drst at2.113.56r_S60 a4? Kalrro OGtncta4a,Llun{u Dlltnct 2.434.521.319l/HL_^52.)(Araau,nt ltrA,a4q i.000.?17.4s8850 Kafirwcnac D[tnct 2.196.0S8.134851 Kanunru Dratnct 3.90s.908.89s852 KaDchomra Dlltnct r_645.i?7.OSOa5i Kab.l€b$ona Dlstrlct 697.r85.206as4K&cnla Dr3tnct 3is.458.9r4855 Kesanda Drctnct 1.9?9.913.13?456 Ks!€!e Dtltnct s.?64.t24.??4a5? 1.986.003.078asa l(allrnca DGtrrct 3.?42.@?.410859 Kazo Dlltnct 1.20? 409.1a3860 l&bae.lc Dlstnct 1.337.Or 1.9O4a6r K bo,' DBtnct 1.909.886.9328,62kbuku DBtnct L2A2.O?6.172863kkuubc D8trat I A6A.409 .27?864(,mhura DEtilat r.4ss.2qa al3465 k-rverldonro lhatnct 1.882.,r42.r88466laioro Drst ct 3.r49.O15.530e6? Lrtaswcnda DBtnct I .,+26.5 14.6,+9858 (rtqum I .6?S .??4 .??A859 lioboko Dlstrlct r.o87.382.539A?O l(6lc Drsra.t L934.?o3.26?8?r Kotrdo DBtrrct 612.516.A21a?2 Kumr Dl!tnct | .545 .6?2 '99a?1 l(wenla D6trrct LOA2.A2t .?608?1 Krrcca Orstnct t.?9?.295.25?8?5 l(r.gnloren r Drstrrct t .422_216 037a?6Kvcr.lwa Dlatrlct 1.717.754.523a?? l(vcnlolo DGtnct 2.5?? .O52 .969a?8 Kyotcra Dratnct 3.5AO.363.a40a?9 | .t44 .t.33 .?A2aao 1.589.6r3.3r r881 Luuka Olstrrct 1.564.424.313aa2 Luwcro Drstnct 6.990.?24 .966aa3 L$anto DBtnct 1.943.146.?6?8A4 Lva.Dtond. Drstflct 1.6 to.l71.723885 Madr-Okollo DEtnct 994.t54_32?886 Mana.fr a Drstnct I .7eA_348,.2?6aa? Ma.Echa Dlstrlct 1.373.358.O r5aaa t.r8r.?94.6848E9 Malmdr DBtnct 1.214.314.867890 Mavu?c Drstnct 2.?9?.239_286491 Mbale Dlst}ft/ 3.570.602.428L-v,,,\rbFAinau-nt ltrCll492 Mbaia-ra Orctlrct 1.913.293.925893 Mrtoama Drstnct 3. r84.373.?81ag4 2.446 .329 .666a9s 366 3S3.712896 Movo DBtnct 1.854.1,18.242a9? MDrla Dratnct 3.648.253.352asa Mubcnde Dtltn t 1.960.992.820ass 6.O42.S43.q75900 Nab atuk DBtrrct ,r9 t.025.ot7901 Ng-kaDrnbrnt Drsmct 553.476.406902 NeLaleke Dlstnct 3 t60 .r9? .40?qo3 NaLasonaola Dr3tnct 2.39S-O87.2641.409 532.143 904 Na.aravrnEo Drstact905 N3lrlsrndwa Drstnct 1.244.?40.72?906 Ns.autuaba DBtrrct 1.79t.997 .L3t90?NaEk Drtrrct as5.?80.814qo8 N.bbr DEtnct I .434.,r,16 .94S90s Ncora Olatnct | .?29 .490 .9?5qto Ntoroko OBtnct 989.268,2489rl Ntunparno Dlstrlct L795.t29 .3??912 1.s27.036.816367 3ea.64l 913 Obono DBtnctI  57.955.321 914 Omoro Dratrrct915 Otukc DEtnct l.561.680.836916 Ove-m Dlstrrct 2.392.?22.94?9t? Padcr Dlstnct r.772 39S.565gra I .?AA.t34 .22?2.OO3.O? | .r14 919 Pallrla D[tnct920 Rak l D8tnct 2.523.14r.59 r92r Rubanda Dtstnct L654.442.442s22 Rubrnz DBtnct 1.605.303.923923 1.706.155.645 Ruhaa Dratirct924 Rukuaorr Drctnat 3.9S1.498.24692S Rwa,nEara Dlatrlct | ?42.342.?tAI .939 .?24 _9+8 S.tnbabulc Dr3t.ct92?Sdclc Drstrrct 2.14r.o52.r39924 Sh€.ma Dt8tnct 2.63r rA232A929 Sr.6nk6 Dat.rct 2.399.149.165l_as?.159.399 q3093r Tcrcco Drstnct 1.390.684.,r84932 Torom Dlstnct 3.?03.906.647s33 a.654.S99 988934 Yulmbc 2.6?8.139 693,&$(s4Aq+Aaaunt ltrGll935 Zoabo DBtnct r.635.420.3r2oRrltD totrl 102.&.*.21AfIilO( S AOOmO.{A| WAGE S(ORIFAiI.S - Abov. tta t sal (SClCt{tlS?Sl)tsrh+-lY-)VotcVot l(rac LEauit IUO:Io06Ml'lEtr] of Forcrgn Afarrs 327.,+SA.2SAoro Mmr8tn of A8nculturc, AnlmEI, Indultry & Frlhcnc8 r.284.917.335ot2 Mmrstr] of La.nd!, Houllng & Urbr-n Dcvciopmcnt 2.216 .962.s42o16 M[u8try of Work8 and Traas@rt s92.4?4.78olaMmtrr. of Ccnd€r- t bou. ,nd Soctrl Ddr.l6omant a71.378.5q Io19 M|I|atrl. 61 q;t.,.. ,o, "nvEonmcnt493.852.506o22 Muustrv of Touns6. Wrldllc and Antroutrca 1.1,t +.6s7.484rc? Uqenda tu& Cotud.rsllon IUACI r2 r.843.603l14 Uganda Cenccr la3dtutc 1323.431.204tt?Ur.nda ?oudsm Borrd {UTBI 10.oo0.000120 Netrona-t Crt cnsfuD and ltDhrEatron ControllNclcl 224.39?.O20l2l Darrv DcvcloDmcat Authoaltv IDDAI 426.OOO.316124 Eoua.l OaDortubrt a Corlabralron r.7q4.330.600135Drcctoratc of Oovcmmcnt Aaalytrcd [aboratoryIDOALI 828.8,+4.852145 Ugr.ada PrGoag 3.930.346.4qrr46 Pubhc Scwrcc Coarmls8ron I 52.1O9.O84rs2 Natron l Acncultural Advllor9 Scruccs {NAADSI 85?.9r0.000r58l,rt rnEl S.cunqv Ora6n zatron (lSOl 1.32S.4?3.200r65 Uce,tda Busm.r! arld Tcchnrcd E rmrmtron B6erd r.23s.000.ooo303 Mskcrcrc Umvcrclty Bu3rdcar Schoal 7 .695.Ot2.797306 Muor UruvcBrtv 625.?4232r308 r.646.60? .44309 Oulu Umvcrcr0 431.875.7523lo Lra Umvc.srty 3.793 2S7.8563t2 Uaanda Manaoaacnt la3trtutc 1.330.79S.483403 Aiua Rcfcrral Hosptal 237.145,300,r{)5 Culu Rcfcrral Ho3pr(al 40?.216.422406 Holma Rcfcfial HGpltel 172.643.239408 (abslc Refcftal Hosprtrl 94.244.912412lrra Rcfcrrrl Hosprtel 272.1t9.?3?415 Moroto Rcfcftel Hdprtal 392.621.320418 l(awcmp. R€fcrr"al Hospltal 3.S00 so1.230420 MulaSo SpccElEcd Woaca rnd Ncoaata-t Ho3prte.l 3.546.OS3.29242t Ka$rnEa Rcfcrral Ho3t)rtll 500.ooo ooo505 Uaanda Hrdr OOaftlssroa ln KcN{ Nallobr 3r0.o00.ooo507 lJanda Hr&onjl(lssLoa rn NrE6ra. Abura 47? 949.420/_An6mt tuoxl Vota l{eac5r2 uean& Eaballv ln Othroola. Add6 Ababa 550.000.000sl4Utan& Embasav ln SMtzcrlrnd. Cleneva 324.459 _O??sra Urandi Embe3sv In B.l'lum. Brusa.la 300.ooo_ooos2r 200 000 00() ura'l& Embasse ln Sudrn. klertouhs23 Ucanda Embas8tl rn Gcfi[aav. Aarln 3l1.666,000528 Uqanda Embass! m UDrtcd Arab EDratca. Abudhatn 333.20r.80060r 4.26L.6?2.447602 aar 654.147603 Oulu crtv ,+.965.393.170604 Holma crtv 578.31r,23S605 ,+.791.3?5.rS8606 3.?Sr.23g-rA82.4SO.374 qql60?608 Mbalc crtg 2.199.01s.629609 Mbar&a crtr 5.01S.645.7476ro 2.A65.O52.4,t6?02Buon Munlcloel C6unc 356.54r.462s2.210.4r7 703 Bu3hcnlr- IBhaka MuorcrP3.l Councrl?04 Bu3rA Munrclpal Counc 165.018.98?70s Entcbb. Mudcrpel Counc 89S.682.662?06lballdr Munrcrpal Couac l-636. r90.4333?2-At4-112 ?o? lgrnga Mumcrpr-t Counc704 liabaL Munlctpal Councd 2.2r3.459.ee5s2a.60s.4so ?09 Ka.@uh Munrcpa.l Counc?to l(apchor$a Mumcpg.l Counc 5r9.434.5857tlli^,!.rc Mumctpal Counc tt .464. .?? 5.546712(rra MunrcFal Counc 1.O59.293.939?T3 2.q63 l lo.55s KBoro MuDlcrpg.l Couacll7t4 Krtgu6 Munhpal Counc[ 699.?49.693?ts l(oboko Mumclpa-t Couac s6,763.5947t6 Kotrdo Muorcrpe-t Counc r20.s9a.?24?t? t(urnr Munrdr)rt C6un.'l 146_?SO.306?ta Luaazr MunrcrDal Councd 8.2,r,+.828?t9 Malondvc-Ssabacabo Muturos.l Couac 340.36S,025?20 Malmdr MunrcrDal Counc 30r.388.990s62.ras g5a ?21 MrtvarE MutucDaI Councd?22 Moroto MunlcrDa-t Councd 622.853.0?3?23 Mubendc MumcrDat Councd 263.t62.? 16?25 Nansrn, Munrcrr,rl C6u.ctl | _279.654.1945 00() 000 ?26 Ncbbr MunrclDal Counc?2? Nrcru Mumclod Counc 446,602.736?28 NtunEE ra Mullcroa-t Coutrcd 352.922.629t.o2t .63? _?47 ?25 RukunE \ltauaroel Counc[{As6sVotc l{raa Anount lUGr?30 Shccaa Mun cloe-t Counc l.192.a89.52273r To.o.o Munrcrpal Councrl 503.419.619801 Abrm DEtnct 265.226.923eo2 Adtumanr D8tnct 4.521.S4S.30?803 Aearo Olatnct r3.003.sr r804 ALbtoac DBtrrct 83S.377.068ao5 164r.560.826ao6 Amudat DBtnct 495.4??.53480? Amuna D8trrct r0.o53.628.537808 Amuiu DBt.rct 795.995.822811 Budaka Dlltnct 8.381.8,+0.288a12 Bududa Dllt ct 2.? 5A _459 _?O9813Bu6fl Orstnct ?42.651.842814 Buq\rcn Dlrtnct 3.r55.456.6?58rs Bubwqu Drstnct 2 .t44.419 .496ar6 ButLw. Dt3t ct t.960.647 .922AI? Bukcdca Dtst ct 384.r9S. 169818 Bukoman8unbr Drstnct r,+6.835.O18819 Bukwo Dlltnct 2.t33.? t6.82e20 BulrmbuL Dlrt ct ?62.O34.3? ta2tBul[sa DBtrrct r.380.206.rs5422 Bundrbuqlro DBtnct L644.464.749423 Bunyangabu Dl3tnct r2.6,+1.593.845424 Buahcal.r Drstirct 1.O2S.736-O36825 Buara Drstnct 2.88r.708.012a2? Bute-ab;le Dlltnct 2.47 L965.? 59a2a Eutcbo Dritrlct 465.633.199429Auvuia DBtnct 632.3Sq.14S830 Euvcndc Oratnct 540.827.1SS831 Ookolo Dt3trrct 1.465.109.32 r832 Combe Drtnct 501.440.326433Oulu D8tnct r.2,r,+.396.3?0834 Homa Drstnct 4.6?6.3? 3.t9383S Ibanda DEtnct 2 .659 .6t6.6t2436I€nta Drstnct r.455.284.983a3? Iilnsrro Drstlrct 5.233 253.939838 Jmla Drstrrct 166.031.009839 lGabonr Ol3tnct 1.593.988. t5a840 Kabslc Drstn.r 4.492.270.1 t6841 Kabarolc Dratdct t9?.?84.739M2 Kabarrrnerdo Drltrrct 2.346.5? r.294843 Kacadr Oratnct ?26.31t.t42e44 Kekumrro DBtrrct,z> ?55,0?6,262h+(\\N,,o d,l./Aaoult luoro60.021.995 84S Ka.la.lo Drltrrct308.566.O9? 846 Kelan?ala D8tnct| .a?? .6? 3.926 a4a Ralunsu Drstncta4q l(rmuh Drstnct 2.053.317.4881.r35.36?.6?2 850 (arnlr/cn(c DBtnct2.4?4.432.126 851 (a.ntrnsu Dr3tnct866.602.464 852 l(aDcholwa Dr3tnctas3 lGb.l.bvone Dlstnct 5,O22,2291.203.759.120 as42.?S1.99S.000 855 Ka8anda DBtrrct,+.324.531.135 856 l(aicac DBtnct2.223.543 34? 85? l(atakq,r Dtltnct854l(allrnra Dlstnct 2.620 .34t .O?5859,irr6 Dtst ct 4,+5.681.?38t .o93.t?2.?3? 860kbaelc DEtnct4.9,t9.453.678 86r Krbora DBtnct969.204.571 2kbuku DBtnct2.1?6.401 463(ll(uubc DlltnctIl&flrhura DEtrrct 2.42a.335.479696.33S.162 865 Krn andonro Drstflct1.(x)4.499.510 466 l(rsorc Drstncts63.418.220 a6? (rtalwEtrda Dlstnctr.17s.6s2.102 a6a(rtru,na5q l(oboko Dl3trlct 2 .29? .816 .SO2422.O44,6? | 8?05.2{l 113.302 a?2 Kumr DBtnctao 1 . 1,r4.842 a?3l((ama Dratnctr 0?6.350.74o a?4 l(l^r€n Dl.tnctXvankwrnz Dratnct 34? .62r.85? a?54.68r. r57.589 476 Kvceecwa DEtflat2.5(X.,165.396 Kl.carclo Drctnct3.O7r-3r3_704 a7a KrEtera Dl8tnct?85,633.?83 A?q333.227.503 880 Llra DBtnat2.149.592.552 881 Luul(a Drctnct22' 5.493.679.2r lr.940.400.423 883 Lw€nPo Dratrrcts9?.464.932 884 Lvrntoadc Orstnct1.4SS_O28.424 886 Man -6ra Dlstnct88? 434.430.907s3 r.1s r.082 888 Masaka DBtnct102.319.921 889 Masurdr Dr3tnctaqo 3.49? 60? .62?*&A5tttfirVotc lfrDc A.aount IUOXI89r Mbalc DBtnct 4.66? _957.305492 Mba.rara DEtrrct | .o9? .456 .2??a9,t r.65r,327,975aq5 Moroto Drstnct 42.|9O.926896 Movo Dratrat 1.96S.213.745a9? Mora Oratrrct l-sa3.so7.4s5a98 Mub.nd€ DBtnct r.537.263.950aqq Mukono Dl3tnct t.212.?64.506900 Nab atuk DBtnct sa? .429.272901 NakaDhDult OBtnct 604.444.943902 NaLa3ckc Dtstnct 3 433.222.584903 Nakaionrola DEtnct ?34.423.552qo4Ne.aavrnco DBtrrct t .926.925.?O4qosNa.uuarndc/a DBtnct 2.220 .t?9 A4A906 Nr-mutuaba Orstnct 1.903.026.50990? MaDak Dlltrrct 2t .404 .634 .t?2904 l{cbb1 Dl.tact 954.? 10.206gogNqora Drltnct 12.534.6r3.r9rqtoNtoroko Orltnct 1.367.952.5299tt Ntuncr.ao Drltrrct 2.30q.697.64S9t2 Nwova Dlltnct r.75?.ttt.272gl3 Oboa6 Dlitnct 299-4O2.O939rs Otukc Otltnct 1.o33.73A.332916 O('arn Drstrrct 1.S,l4.33X.SSS9t? 3.84r.r08.038918 P.kwach DBtrrct 9.t8?.O2A.S?A919 Pall$a Otstnct L?A? .e7 | .176920 Rakfl Drtrct 3.328.O36.32592t Rubandr Dl3tnct 698,068.3429r, Rubmz D[tnct 4.?t t.g 12.333923 Rulola Dr.trrct 9r3.so2.544924 Rukung.n Olstnct 2.265.981.405qzs Rq?.dpera Drltnct r?6.t69.?47926 Scmbabulc D6tnct 14S.947.S1692? Scrcrc Dtltnct 2.293.5,+5.6r9924 8.540.176.r r I929 Sronko Dtsmct 2.O42 .22A.645930 Sorotr Or3trrcl s.og?.600- 16693r Tcrcco Drstnct 30r.68S.984932 t.5?2.60?.?AA933 Waloso D8tnct ? 94a.254.?9?934 Yumba Drstnct s1q.g30_sro935 Zombo Dlltrlct 893,695,148rA&.(Vota nrac Ainaunt lucrllORAIID I\OTAL 404.966.S94.205AirN6'( 6A rOCAr- RAr€ UC (RECURREirtlvotcVot l(rlnc Aaourt lUOf607 Malaka crn 18.706.OO0?@ KamuLr Mumcgal Couac 2?6.269,299?t6 Koudo Muaroprl Counc s.?r5. ros?23 Mub.ndc MunrcrDel Counc 16.535.114?25 Ne-nslna MuDrcrDal Colrac 2s 3s5.SSA?26 Ncbbr Mutucmal Counc 123.580.000aor 192.2r4.S30806 159.AOO.OOO8lr Budaka DBtnct 184.211.43S819 Bul.wb Drctnct 390.?52.?OO435 tb3'lda Dlltrrct 180.O00.o00a3? r.070.0?4.o00Arto 326.94a.1OOa?6 KgcPcrwa Drlt ct 1o2.q46.?a?? l(!rcnroro Dratnct 500,000492 Mba-.ara Dl!tnct 571,754,400901 Nakabmotnt Dlitn t 123.690.293908 Ncbbl D[tnct l6?-g50.oooORATD NofA.L 3-03?.OO3.?34A[{N:X 5A tOCAI REVET{UE (OEV€IO9MEi{I|got ItrEG A.aau-at llroXl606l,ua crtv 159.3?S.000a3?lslnoro Drstnct 190.000.oo0a4aKalunru lhatrlct 56.348.5008?? 340.473.947aa?Maracba Orstnct 50,000.o00888Masaka Drltrrct 264,262.2008q4 r96.608.355926Scrababulc OBtnct 444.685.31SoR ltD torA.L l.?O,il. 153.,15?Af{f{ct( ? uNsPE t FUr{o6;oR fy202vll (usMtolVotcVot lLlnc A.aou.at IUOXI601 3.O03.390. 121602 4.543.179.544s.2ao.ooo_ooo 603oulu crty ,///€a)Vot nrD. Ainalrnt llrctl60,+ 4.603.643.823605Jmla Ctt!. 4 .529 .t? | .? 53606lrra clw 1.520.445.594607Malaka Crtv )39.52? 544604 r3,+.133.00360q 16.663.662.020610Soroo CItv 2.914.038.950?otAoac Mumclbal Counc 2.75t '?4 610?05Eatcbb. MumcDr-t Counc 6.634.70?.446?oeKaba.lc MunrcDal Councd 3 .4O2.620 .232?09Ka-6ull MumcDal Counc 6. t,+7.,m4.4 I a7tlKr!c!. Murlclaal Counc 2 4Sq O2A O3,+?t4Krtaum MunrcrDrl Couac 8.200.000.000?t2Lucaa Mu[rclDal Counc 6.983.786.560?22Moroto MunrcDal Counc 2.? 52 _At3 _3?4?23Mubcddc MumcrDal counc 3_qo2.556.4S5?28NtunEa.mo MurlraDd C6unc 3.300.883. r82?11Tororo MumcDal Counc 7.500.000.000ao2Adrumalu DBtnct 4.414.940.14S8r0lrua Dlltnct | .?2r .439 .83',t437l noro Dratnct 13.437.515.380asol(e.awcntc Drstnct l r.88,+.sog. r59865lorvandoaro O6tnct 5.S,13.241.324a?9Lamwo Dlstnct 2 .995.t32.922aasMadr-Okollo Dtltnct t.t92.9??.ttg896Movo Drstnct 49S.547.37r913Oboaa Dlstrrcl r.gr7.?45.26s931 2.590.662.?20q34Yuaba DBtflct 6.539 2r? .?46IOTAI. 15{!.6{x).2m. 159A IEI8: UNSp€t{T FUNOS lN fY202r22 (UGIOt161L-Votc l(rac A.ao|rrt tIrOXt606 2.962.$2 9476lo Sorotr Crty 846.780.S03?ot Apac Munrcroal Councll 1.146.I()4.421704 Kabalc Mumcroe-t Counc 1. r63.Or4.383?oeliamuh Munrabel Coua. 671.552,9357to KaDchorwi MurucrDa.l councd lqI.t84.I0l?13($o.o MutucrDal Counc[ 36.78 t.5r{715 1.S16. rOA_O73 Koboko-MumcDil Councd &€M*vota l{a.ac A.aourt IUOXIaol 1.259.698.3631.775.413.415 ao2 Adtumam Drltnct3.40S.4?4.139 803 Asaao Drlt ct1.986 305.2 3 804 Alcbtoae Dlstnctao5 Amolatar Dl8tnct 3.056.509.532ao6 | .449 .? 54.?993.607 _? t? .SSt ao?Amuna Orstnct457 09a.to3 808 Amuru Drstnct410 Ama DEtrrct 1. r?3.193.314811Budrkr Dlstrlct 3.24?.O34.?Ot3.O17.737.068 a12 Bududa Dtstrrctt.re? 319 a?? 8r3 Bulan Or3tnct814Bulwen Dlltrlct 890.060,3048r5 BuhwEru lhstrlct 1.21a.424.O22BurLurc Dlitnct s6s.269.6r? 816| _622.?2r .923 at?Buk dca DBtnct255.6?0.269 8r8 Bukomenarmbr D8tnct8r9 Bul6 ro D6trrct 4.r83.r?8.33r420Bulrmbuh Dt3tnct 2.61l.4o1.Ot41.o81.149.212 a2lBul[sa lhstrrct3.41q.71q.O75 422 Bundrbusvo Orstrrcta23 Bunvancabu DBtnct 2.06 r.902.349824Bulhcnvr Dlstnct 1.652.?? 1.286a2s Busls DEtrrct 3.r$.626.404426 ButaLra DEtnct r.r29.15,t.38S34t.973.2t4 a2? Butambala DBtrct3.243.154.4?A 429 Buvuma OBtnct431 Dokolic Dlltilct 2.564.937.59r212C,oabr Dlstnct 994.342,65?433 Gulu Drstact 1.90s.81l.l t99?4.494.24? 834 Horma Drstnct835tberda Dt3tnct ,r,r0.069.4r7436 990.?AA.?361.663.920.379 838Jm|e DBtflctq l2_s2s.87q 840lkbalc DBtnct841 (absrole Dlarirct 2.930.34?.6?O442(ab..amad6 Dr3t ci 136.950.0002.9s6-q24.30S 843 Kaeadr O8tnct84,1(ekuorro OBtnct t .6sr .G2.??9445 l(alala Dlstnct t .240.64? .424t .7 r? .r?9 .592 846lirlrnrela OBtnctr.592.64S.544 84?Krko Dl3tnct8,+8 tie]L.l^at D.sto:rc. ,42 ,159163+Rt-62^(Araount luo]ll849Krmuh Orstnct 4.?26.?90.774450Iiadwcnla D8trrct r.966.250.250a5lKrnunru Dlstrlct 991.O75.5779ia.ch6r{ra Dl3t ct r r73.r02.sas 852853 Kaoclcbvonr Dratnct 1.329.607.018854(rrcaca DBtnct r.077.500.000455 l(asanda DBtnct 2.235.? 54.442856 Kalca€ Dratnct 2.2?9.909.2r1a5? Katskwr OEtnct r.95r.921.016858 liairunca Drltnct ?94.243.O24459 Kr2o Dritrlct r-644.O19.3? I860kbaalc Dlstrrct 3.790.354.506a6tkbora Dl3tnct 5S8.S49.614462libul.u Dlstnct 2.329.2,+r.O80463Kkuub. Ihatnct a43.SO2.OOOe64 I156.1q6.170865 KfvandoaEo Dratnct 688.?04.069866 Kraoro OEtnct t . l8?. 1,15.54 Ia6?Krtslt enda Dlltrrct 1.239.349.699a6a Krtzurn 1.188.006.313869 Koboko D8tnct r.364.369.421a?o Kolc Dlstrl t t.12,+.587.40887tKotdo Dl!tnct 992.324.O23a?2 793.269.585a?4 l(w€an DEtnct 3.t2?.2?6.O3?875 Kvankwana Dtstnct 2.S13.284.44 r276 l(eco.zwa Drsrnct 3.759.653.088a?? Kvcnroro DBtnct 5.224.430.269a?a Kgotcra Drstnct 2.4r6.,165.592a?9b.m(o Dlltnct l.l7s.21l.2a Iaar Luuka D$tnct 1.262.O29.018aa2 Luwcro Drltrrct 2.t??.514.75t883Ls.neo Dl8tnct 1.7S4_54q.613844 Lt'rntondc Dr3tnct 1.455.777.396886 Ma.aa-6l,a Dr3trrct 3.67 t.664.279AA? Mrracha DEtnct 1363.2IO.SOl888 Ma!3ka Dlltn t 445_69t _96?849 Maahdr DEtnct r.240.43 r,5928qo Mavuac Drrtnct 3.703.701.665891 Mbalc Orctnct r 38S.431.308492Mbarira Drstnct M6.064.r7?893 r.99s.7q6.330aq4Mttta aDJ!/!.lrcr .// 332.045.284ts{F+1%t63(Araont ruoxl895 Moroto D8tnct 933,468.976895 Moro Drstnct 708.rs8.sosa9? MDIII Dlstlrct 586.259.O33aqa 3.3rO 517 0l?899 Mukono Drstnct 598.912.8?590r NakaDhDrnt DBtnct 81o,455.859902 Naka8.kc Dlltnct 2.16,+.1o,+.a29go3Nrk 3oar6la Dt3tnct 1.1s3.241.11390,r NamalrnEo Drstnct r.590.39r.09590s Nafir6rndwa OBtnct r.466.123.000906 Namutumba Dl8trrct t.@2.?4o.44990? NaD3k Dlltnct r.s99.026.542qoa 2.,i50 05,+.6qq909 Nrora D[tnct 308.570.1869r0 Ntoroko OBtnct 2.392.?92.L54912 Nwova Drstrrt 223.O99.394913 Oboner Dlatrlct 1.417 _652_??5914 q64_565.466915 Otukc DBtnct I .O 19.564.246916 Ova-d Dlltnct 3.914.32t.96?917 Pader Dtltrl t 2.429.065_49?gla aot _223_24?qlq 1.o42-so8.13 tero Rakar Dr3tnct 1.546 242 lA5921 Rubanda Otstnct 1.398.901.678922 Rubm2r DlAtnct 2.O?9.662.r??923 Ruhea Dtltrl.t 1.212.63a.945925Rwrm.era Dt3t ct l2 r-3ao-ooo926 Scmbabutc DBtnct 9?8.533.628927 Scrcrc D[trrct 730.557.1,16924 Shccaa DEtflct r.215.565.6S1929Sronko Dlllrlct 2 _544.3? LAt?q30 Soroh Dlstrrct t x92 2?O OOz932 Torcro Orstlrct 3.? 26.L?4.462933Wil.lso Drltncr 4.708.S8S 718q34 3-q41.230.422nml. 226-243-6e3-294 qN(w-A64Ws-airilEx9. tE llocalloNs wrlH['l r-oc t-6()vtn {MEirr auo6atsRacutrcatluoxtDcecloDacatluoxr totd rUOtr608 Mb6Ic crtv 904.936,664 {99.5r3.460 1.,+O4.450.124?12 Krra Mutucrpal Counc r.0r r.s55 000 1.0 t l.955.OOO?20Marhdr MutuclpelC6un. 342,345.888 342.?45.888?3rTomro Mumcrl)ilCounc s.574_29S.SSS s.s74.2gg-qqgao2 Adrumafl Dl3trlct eo7.5?) osa 807.572.054440 Kab.lc Drat..t 250.000.o00 250.O00.00085r(rnuncu Dt!tnct 326.64?,S2A ?3t.643.?46 1.058 331.274863 Krkuubc D8tnct r24.r30.000 ,r59.5S4.344 s43.644.344a?2 Kumr Dlltnct 1.848.3rO.645 I 444.320 5zr5a?? 2.462.992.?53 2.462.992.? 55aaa 40t,207.3? I1.035.75r.484 r.435.958.85S909 Nrora DEtnct 18. r37.4r6 1a.137.416910 Ntoroko DBtrrct 2SO.OOO.OOO 2SO.OOO-OOO911 Ntunla,tro Dlstfict L.5?A _3? 5.12r 1.632.145.864 3.2r0.522.285Ovah Dt3tn.t 304.OOO.000 237.?53.AAA 54r.7S3.888q31TcrEqo DBtrrct 4.?96.317 .429 3.0r3.6r8.826 7.809.936.65sGRIIfl) T'}TAL 4.is3.?s2.22A 20.15?.s12.9S4 2e-6r1.268-1e5N,ffitsJELrF+V55a(IIIIIIIIIIIIII!IT!tIIIfiN$erl,.li :Sir\ri\G H.r'kljstilf .{Ll-O\\ .-\CLS rOi:Hi:-,.Lfil \', O.{IJ,R( IJ):!Ln\ !''. i(-rf 1\ 1.GE co\-ft)-i9 P,\ IIE\Tss.\ \ 'r\[ I I I,ILL 11 oRK Sr.{ rtD{lLr, \t-r).J1\ -\l,A\.,n..r.- ..C..,1: ' r,L.3.cai Onia:, .--."a L:.: l ,t r t:.1,s0 JJ.r 2 O.ei,c \1.1.. \{.Crial a.',-:.r A:-Jr Li:iici.,:.:3r:oiia : \ie3..a Locra:o:i;..:i,-:'.1 i d_ua R-\-U.\.ie.t\s iasarnc '-i \-:s.re O;Ii*ij i f. i:.5 b i.E'a\a DeoarcloJsA.ssrs',n: N-.s.r; ss-L.:i \L.s,i.,r C:4,.-^,... i.ii:, 1.,'-r: R-lir2'J-aJl'-,ri c1,l? i.-r'e,rr iero\ae .{ss.s:i^i N.:s.1t Oace: .'j ,,C.JS \a..'r:;: Sl's,mI Lss s:l,t N-:s-rt O5cer ' -Ar"a RR!-i !, r,i li | )-..'r::2! A:'q.'la ' Ass sirit \.ristng Cif..r -{:.. aL{ ss.0::.I 1l 1'1^11226 :3r,u5-.t-is,s:ai,: Ndasla.g O^'faa r.!:r: fu1li s, liLO ;.3.cid ' i,ss.stal -\-L's.1q riiLaer Ar,: llits 8C ti.'1 {,)..1 5. C,5r a i-r:clled \r..rse ).1,g PGi-:I Jrlc Bo:eo Ei:Jrlaa )i.l,sa a-:)r RRi irc roi,.r 3re..ai: Arnbulataa {ss.3tan:j-a..i RRI-: :ccccI j i \r.-r:.( i-.1..1ar11 A.ibulallce As,(lst&- i A-r.! l-L?r- ti oat ,!3 i:lttrilnae 1.S\,S:ar: L:-: i1i-: \i.(,J.]f-rr '__r'--:s a-'i i la. ,i:11'ulerca D..\e. I 1-:!a ful ii 30.3CCir,/rz-.loa i:ec lvlaa {,:ci..a1aa D.!'. !' A:.! {R F: sa, cot,9 , .{r.oc$,i^ Gloaa I O\..a Plm: ar,t:o. A-rLl R-Lt{ r:.0cvs0.Dcc I rx i )ra-+t.' f aL.nc's Cr\{eq P,!n: OOa:1to Ar.,iitR.l-l rI ,r.s Oin l:13 ' Daia CI.rl CPi{ r- t0.010:c.cio I OliliI ).:. C1:rk' Dai._. ( le!'.c1i.rL', CPt'i - :t\ Te.Jv1: e:1b: i'rcd , D.ta (,e, i cti:t 8,)-CCCli a' h.li Oi:ke Dria ClerL .PHi sl n0x ' la:.' Cr: "i c-)Hi i-1Ji: ,D:'c Ct.rL c pi!!_sal'. 4!.'-. ":. \1. D r:: ale'iDzi.l Cle_:st(t i,.,.{-t-\l:i'....e:lr ?:ossrll \-(:., Pirl -i.rie Oiic:. su.()f,rl, li:c Ct.it: c i:i: s0t1i:r.1!) /:h.:()''c , D:t.r O iic-' cli:-j,r Cr)u ,ll -\.:.-!, ;{.s r:- e Di'c. c:.!L !l.cql,",..:.',,.,^.n..-. C ').jr 1,,-(: ,il'i5 iin(<r '):e:.il--1r,::a!)-. rel:n.-ia-' .i a'l ).:5 i:.r:. i: l.Lr):: :a-'c,i:oa!:aah.;.ar\i.,l.-_'a!''.1i..!.t-(:'-caa L.car-laN:ilrr'c-:|1 4,...:-l-1,:.l.:','\i1':.1 l."r:. !-L'.,:". 1E1 -.: i. ", 'jni l- i,..,iJir .t 1, Sa.:al:.i...r-,-- t:o:r1..-r :e: 'r : .: c t--: _3r. s !i.$. ): :r . ....-.1r.'rr,.^- ,. . .-9.,-_ I_) '<^..J \,..('hil 1.'r.,:,::tar. l:c,.'. :r -' C-'1.' \' .i,a .).r-,..-, --., ,;.1- \i: -..r /c i.'ii -1 :'-b. _?-i_, '. -. a_l-St--:-:-.u.:-r".W-t-.'n1,,.'lu,', Tc! t 1 t,-'!.r.',J .i,('\, y T((hn"-r.lr' { ,,r lr X() (.1'[ tr r\ (i)i7-. :r,,.1.-.-, I ..-\ : ,.f ]'.\ . ler.r^,-,,...,.i S',(lr.r5,, rtr,\,.jtir-rna..a'\l\..,.\-,.li,n."ori1-(ll.t,-l.rr(- si r\,il' .,(r(\.(,)r\ fc!'t rr- -i I ,' :i): \..f .,:li rlc ll\ :.rl-',.n.:'i)r v Te,\r,ra ..ri i :l\., r:\1.r,r )tt '!I .tr(,..,o:v 1.c! , (,!,,trt,-. i., ]. iec, r,oio.ir'. .,1'i--.5 :r-r Jc rd., \.r.r. !,r-ir! .!xol. tr \ 1.'il11oi( !,.: ' i :'l ilj : : .r:u.:-r-' (" '...J:1-.r.r(,..,t1,,' 1 ad.,'(n,,.- s. \,1'1('i;Nr \\ i n.-.. (r,cL.!c ^\( lv,Lnbo:t(oa acl!.6lJl,\\\'Js.\r al(d .\\^ l L.'boreton Tecl roloa 'rlD.r St r',,1j., | ^(,,n u Jaro ,r . i,.,'ho,.tL)^, Tac.,t.aio(t.i ('l,Il- l;l l ',J'-0 i \\ rrtrho 7...,-u.,-r.r i-Jou!.!o! r' [('c,i.'o.o,.l sl| ..i i.l.,r,s, I'r,.'r iabl,.':on i ci\uct,,-r. C s'),v)(il,rr , .i,r. taa(l(\'(-l .Lr.l\. r.rr(' . I !(Inololr!\lLi!'' $:,1-,4i , gt.\, , Cf ilL 8:..'i'u6l .()l\.tnt, Rot..:lt Llhir.J.On'l'cd)L(,r(,x \.CIHLr.'.{tr)L I6S i;rz n::, lol.,l LJh/Jr ci,f i-,i6 \.!l,.rix U .:uJ., l:ootato.r'licl-r.t-rt,sl rC,':'1. \0.r)..ir,l.r Costlo\ !.rL\, .r:tr\' ec\'oL.Ji,5i \. r,(,r ,.i\ FL.:mr PiiLr(l !.r50r.x) r I'cL-l,lol,Jn <: sr l, t,6i r \dm' rlrr iiCrty LJbordlolrl'(.1!roiolrs'(,Cllil. :it.lr)n?'J , OttLI.l,u l.rno(c:11 I rh,rr.,tory'echao!r.:.rrsi('l)!-- l_ srr ()cr) iI,r S+:r'. Clrot.rr i- r,,r,,.rr Ic.'rrr,l.:.: ' st :I lr,',r. ..1 , '- r,, , ieci o ( ):11_?l \.,.o'11 ', !r: /\(:.rr. '-)( r-1u.1 Ti.\-lolo!r.7- , ::-\-.!. 3L,r-rd i lln.r1lo.r Tr-hrcic si,. !,1?S , .\.$0. \1.,-\,r Lrborato^ Technol,) ( t)iiT 6 Bc!.(rf \iDilx K'\.rrr\. i LrSo.aiorv Ta.\nol.l( .1 ( Jlll J{riril[lA'r.," \'.'ct,. i. hl,:,,i : i .rho:.'to \ t;ch,rrl.': rt ) rl S?. r'l .l,s"""""':""1l-.:rxr.rion'.\\n(,ior-,- t-'.'i- 3,;i.r\1.'rr.tr,, ( l:-, lcs | :.roo at(.r\ l{h(o,orl s CF:"- ,t..r{,il.js0lrarsllr ( -r'oi.re i "h.)rar.1 I eL ilnr / lc'.!.tt C:.IL .{.).',(irl.i' lt,l ci U.r\r 3lr'io. : .,O.rlltr).\ . ('(l.r('htl.t S0 :,:r,3; N.,i.r,a1, r.:1c..il ' i..,rrq, (.:c r.._.ao,drcn (r hro, s C?rc ';'-!-:-.1 ,rr.h:\i.t,',\rr :,.,. ..-1^,.,ot rr-,,iu,,r,- j.s' ll.]fc:.. a o,:.-. l\'.1'r ) T:-r"- ','.'\i, i\,rss.,l Sr,..,..,ix -.1:ro!.lrn a), r.r)l, t,,7 7..0c.. B, ;.r -.tJu..ao,r , L- ., . , /-n ii_;'! .r.. . o :-- )('!r... \ a.(.,1(,r^.-,\. ,.,.!lsi, i \r .jrr \... I . rr-,-.'-\ -, J'.rl fea..).,.\-.\,'n, (-..-,).\,,\....,:lj , ,.a.r 1(.y lca.nc,t,:-,. (. r' l-i -1.1.( , ,.i,r'-i r..1. ( -r_... -!(.\(r. {\.\r.,tH.' (r-.rr(.-i (-\.,_,-:\, -. r!.-r (_/.1'-1,\l-,i.. ri ('l:-!<i, ',-rl ( ).,ic.rixt-h r- i.i _,lt? .. 1, \: -...,4rr i. i - ,l:.:.( ,!:i ,^,,11\:..'.!. ir-1,'..h::'t1. t,,,ii'\l-r' (., I r'r'i(..r ;t.,r1_ .t,i ir,ll 1 ':'r.' li,tll \l--.rr. , ir- tu lra.llL4 r, l, I r .,lt ., L,.-r,.t \ It,::. rl '1 E r'. ):. ({'{-: \l (,c(,'ji lj, I ilel.c.l OiI(- i,,r-'l,q -.rti-l 8,t,1_a.^ \i,\ ,!! ri{,,(,. r)lrl1cr- \,c(r(.,ti,) ir..r ,r . ,,. ,1,'i. s'., ' (,(r. \ -_.. ,,\s- - , :,'- .h... \-1.;- .l1{S \r.L.,r r. Cr-,,!-\ l.,rL.r.,rnN.r,.rr.- Ot:ic-, -.. -iltHj,.,.-{.:19 :'t r\.:,t :('s.. ni91a,1. i,t ,.'r N.. s og O.i.c , !, ,- .).: llliljkr(u n.-. l),;. i , N(r:.r- O l:ccr 'l( r 1,,:1,1 .,\5e: irnli{Jr.-I, \.,,.'rn.! U::ic..:, ,\., t li '),r('r rl -\\c(ur.r o.r.,-Jl \,:1(, l.lr.- r\\,tr.} ,ri r r:,,r.i )( illliI, ,l rrah.' trret ..r \ r\\',,.,n - \:\'.'.' E:lleh.rr l.{-!!Sir,:aq '-' S.:r:tL - Jt r 11..65.r.sl.. rjl ri6.; I E:1t..:], r{ili: l0 "L:al r6 r [lt)c l.!c-] .\.r.r.'<....1,c O"lcl E,) ar5. Rlt: I k,t,)'Jil\,Lrra Oo. r-rcrt ilj [l?.1\<.'\' i\rinccl:9i\.-lrc:.t-,lr:(l'ii..r :rles.c ?iJ: ,O:fic.r lnilc:rc irRti)!ic. !i:ii.i - I','{":rst-r,l \L (,n.: Ol:'c. I f ti.o'.-:;rr lr,, rf:.t o0.lS0 r(lll'lL :i',, , r, it:rl,\ I.'-, u \,r.- .,ll\'r.l {i\ \r.rnr \u,.r.i! O'.fia,r t-:.'-'r: i.R, :.J '.)'j,lOr :-: S , 1,'(i\.r .t',( \. \(, r l,.rr!.:l \s'rs'.r' Nu,. r\! (: i,r,rr,rl, I S,c^1r.i.., i."-r:. \.s,ctr,'l Nl..s, i (tiic; ir - 1." 1iL'' S,r-'l')r' I, t\ r,,,r'.,,.\,i !:_. ,,rlirn rr)ir,r {aslsl-.:t \'.O!li!-' i"i: !. : ltl'.,:-.,]\0 Jlo,15 \.,r.,r,..r !- -, 3.r,rqL!. \ssrsll:t NlA-,.1,r (J,l:c( n,..:...\, il \l x,, i_,ri,rl:? | \\'.,,'l!uL ' ,.ih(iu \tric,)r l:.:,orlid trl r\!r.- \4. r,lt '....rlio R,r.L' ' €. oilc,- \r- s..: ti?t. \( l:rI l.) hlur z-'. <,,,,..r., :'r (\l:.!l Ni rYri j \,,,,,1...r r- \ ..1.\r \ ,.!.r J\ t Er:'tr,:: ' II _1t ,\1l l\rr., ..r- i..1,.i 1..1.. ,i {.ti-i\:,tt{f , !ii 1(r ,,!-LrL.l r.,-_(,r._'t , -,-.\t'i..' '-'-.i )i- _rl'--- \', rr ,rr(( r,lli, i-l , i..t,,c ir-1,.r, )-l: \'--..,' .r _-i,.\ :-.'.,a.1,: .,i-:.r- 'li, li \', ..'-, .,: i', t. , t ,,'.. -..'',. i ---'l' r -., ":l-c.i\ !1...(--! r- .,,..r I-- ::---:--:;:--=w7\F+ 4h@- t-1c,,.' \i . a-,r !il1- \. t', r.,i,lf ,' -ct,\ \!-.\ ',_. ' \i. r\ \- i,,\ir.\(i\ .,rhl-rlrt.- (l-.. (.J ()r.'L.l:.- 1 -:-'- '\... a i c;r'\ ! .r r ,S( i\,-t{r::\i,- {r.lf Sru5br,n \kr rc.'r 'll1'r-r :r.lc-'r: Nc\ ,'i ,iri Li0 )r -3 LJJ!... l)rt,.ri' \ii..l.(., ( \f''.-ll{, I :\:.,r..ii .\t nL(, NJ5, ! tr( hlrr \..\ ( iL rr0 ): jfr i i\r',.,r.-, .'r'r:a$.rl, \ la.i c., O:1'..:r L-i'.cnb. \1.., ( , .1.'., ;d'i, 5....) C,r.,rl., 1.,i.- rs \1,., ': Oiii.rr ( N.' sr '=,r "na )i: \.:.\ C',:1 (.,..r1,. 1(r.-..\ruir, r :rr,,s ,'t ()ariic- r,\.,,i,r-ri ::. -ii:. \c\. ( 3J 0,,r, ,r:j A'i.r,,Jn(e,\ssrs'.1. t :.1-o\.: \(\, ( l v. ",rtl .:- krcr. ri.r..rSi.r'xn.1.r< A.ss,s*r.r N.t. s, n,r .\l:(.1 - ,t-a\ N.\. ('j55 \ r.. .,1., Ton s,e. r.\. s..r,l. \-ir,n{ O!ll.c'_ r1,:hF- !- .'. ,1l.o \i.r !,.un./. {i r.x , ,1!s..l1r): Nr.sr u (,'l'r:-c , .t! -rrl'- \_cL, ('! t(l ,,0Jii? .!:...r\. i)at,\di ,A.ss,\t.'nt \Jr5-.1( O[t'ic! i trchl.< \er, a i s4,r.,)iiS K.. \-.,a \or:n Assisllri )iu $( )lIcc, i-!- 1hr \c,{ C I xrr {r.i,r59 , \J,) .r"- irr.|rr \.<r-tlit \ur5t,! Ofliccl .!r;.(lr{' ILl'.lll{)' 'ot) ' ircr l.-r.r lo.,r'rl' | -'.s5,....'t N!.\,i,r Uati.c'in, I N.tr(,o!.lv- Slrr,.,ah \!, .L.,,: \. r\,',r ()li',':r E:r'eL'r,e ^!e'r ( i s{' ,ii\)5l i \.:,rt c:, ro,'. L-nc,:rtr1 l'rLl',)olc!rsi F.,'.cr.oc \dt" a r st (lcu(,1 , \\ r$qJ Drtrs (ad(.Lr . .,i'o..rh-\ i(cl'dolo.-at , Erl.o5. \.\ C I '10.0')06-{[J5o rb.l.l.d Ch.r,:e5 i\iecr-r, Llrolrtc^, Trrl!n,c,3n En(cbr.. \(..\ C I tldt/l 'r6: ' r ru r.' (,, h 1\. [ftlh.rn i O\\ g..:n Pltni L)prrator Inrchix'\.\' C I.ic u0(1.16 | Anrr.r.r l.v:'-rs Marb.r , O'-!,.ic:. llinr 0pc.aro, rtccn. \.,v C1 Sl1 ('J'jU ,,6'i T. .2:,,..r (r !L ldr\ I \IOSC (()ijS,O!.Nl !.r1:'urrr t:t, S0 t r,i-ti.i -r- .r rr ".)r.l,rr.. \ieC,c?l (),!iLe. i F(| !)c:{:r R.t: sll('tr(lr,r(\ l\,\.:r \::d.al()1,:cc: ao-L Pn(.,: ,{l{l' ,"'J{llrr7_, \ r, i,,-tr, . , S-c'i1 L!(. rca' Ciri(e, i.ri [\r 1..! 'l{rl {u ri(rt,?r t\. -, r'.i) Niedrc..it'-\ifucr r (.rr li.r1.:i :l {, 8il L!0,1_S.,niu | \ursrrOillecr !, r, 1(.....1 { '.1, ?1 O:li.c. (C rl.cd...I!) ir,li^'.r; Rk; y).(OrJ, ?r ' ilrcl ,! .4 \ r\oi:s , i'o,i Po i.,! 1'l't $rr i)r){l'?S , ker:h.r,i,-(1.-i.,\\lo SC ' r0,rl)('o.-,r.,r'e r.crrn ,\NO :10 u!li?7 t,", ..-',-' Or^ii:rr I o,i rrd,t.,. n.lr t0 ,)ir0; l !sc:...diJl. l, :r.). rt,.:icn l\ {siri|a.' i\.:.s,.t,1 Ofli-.:_ ' :,r r1' r. - r{(:' r::,,,'J,7,' , ()L.hn l)t,. -. \i(Jrc. ! l)..|i... ..i Pd r.'l ,l l i :, ,r.ri.'ill I,.rrhJi. (!r- ! r-.',,.\,:.,-.-'()iir(' i).,,-r 1l \c ;,o\' 'l ...-tl_.- : S((.rr\,. r,, \r,sr,:: nl'!-c. iN- :.q) i ts"r.'. '. 'r,ir(.n\ .1,: (1 '.-cr l{. ' ir,.:r o,i - ,,,.,, . 'l. S; '1-,,: .'C.:'s,n.r:,.r, -.^. P. 2'. r.r,' {n n vr \i..-i.rlci \!a,ti...j,: ae (;,,. ..' -1,i". ,-.. t,'I '\l.-. r *..-.- \lr,.i:,-,,: - ,.,,--.*-1S(' r,,'' .\.s,.-.'.' \r" I j L\.'(!i\r,r /u1\,'r\,n! L'.'i_. -.r.\l . .\., r. -, !.,. \-:.':iil,. \r. r.: .lr _--NJts,LtlFl.t:,r,. r. ,' \' ),r,,'ti\ \\s -tr. \. rs.'r (,!l ,-! , rl'(:;t ()t,.,s. \1..,..,r l,i:.:,.Jr L.ih{,r-:4,, .r,l'., r .1') s^ r' .a:.r I- 1' tr. P.-u I-,,-'.-,r, ,. lilll,11. I \.)1('' Illl r,,, il, I,.)i i (rr f.r jL,l.,,-, (,cu\r., ..,1 -\ rt' ,.r,'a.. lJ '1-lIll]rFl.ri\ r:-\1,,., " i1c.:'.r,:. -\\\'.t..r{ \- ls rl.- ( )r,i!(. i:- !-i,..),i \l ,,,"rot - l-.,( -\:.t.l.o:( N,:,.,rr \1. 4-(.1 );- L: v{),1''l| :{xl \.\,.- r.-.,,'- -\.\.r.'n:Nr...:,-),---. lr, -,.-.--_ ltttu.ll,, .lr\.\-.\r.,,' jr,.'i e. \:,-.. (--,1 NIrl ,l'lr)l Oru r.: O. ' .' O r.,i\( tnrt'ilco N;,"c (.!,1! i I I:t); \. .j--o, ,,.,f ,'--:t'.l rtc., r Tc.\.:l r,.r . a .,t, .rll 'r,i lr)!ll- : 'l,r,r..o \\: :.. I Nic(trc:l i!.Ln.'(!,\ ...'-{ -n (:r". ilrlrlri\ i ^,!.-, _,,., r!..,r \. . i\t.,.l,-xl uJ.c,ir6 I )(oair S!..-\ (_.,.j.j,t \l-J cal O.i,c-' (,r,. i'.,1 !i.,,,lr,:L,i (:".elcir' , ilr.rn | \la('1..r! Ollaa_ Cult. ll.,{r I1S (Jiic€. (iuru !{li.! l.l:.'.lc,.)9o ?at ,(k .\_u- s,O1l':re C-lL: t:{!i sC,.r,l1:iJ c\\." )r..11 .:i St!,(, ' arrr,. rlri!, \(, (r;':U,.r , qrl'r s"r l,rruh..r {.L.a\1 KazroD-, \:.,\t.rr.t \ll., qt',,.-rC,rr ilit-t ri (l'xi' t,r,r.':s.j.l: Ki,urti:1 \l{)s(l (OBSICYN)' {icll. R-tli' t ft'\.'11: lilli\,) 0l,rltiL 0Ir0 'lr i ,'r'lt I i N,:.i,c,l ()ifi.:c, \I 0c,, I.r6 \t.,llln -,-,".. t i\icd,..,i ()ln!(. ,o.al.: R .).l t 'i0'lt01r? i \:.,r. \".,.. f.i(drc.,l ()lli(.1 ,lo l'.1 R.l,r -lllj \\{:(Lr.( '..( )? .il!9 scr..\\.'. i(,.i:.rr\lc(lrc-tl OlliLr,M:drcal Ofliccr liornx -'i,(i !liir !lcCrc.rl Ollltc.I !o.f..' l{{! iNur. aOfrirr i io 'nx RLH1il N..L,...rutii. i .'rnLc sJ,,.r..,t\,..Jt.ri)l,i..r:)i(-",'{r',k,,n'..lr.RilI Sd Cu(r1i,\i l]\r r ,;0 l,it)su i(,"lll I \.1.r,,,r.!r D-.,... \i.t,!!-r'-ce {(.lstiat l,t .r).1 .iRi i.1 \.r)1.,/r .r \r..,,,rlto.. ' .\,irn'.,1..,ct r{is.slla' ' l_io,,r'.r r'. i: \- l.'r l t ':li \i\,..,\q. i.,.ldcu I,rJ. \ixhrl3nce --\silr'a ,r'r'uli'.'-' !s)rs'.''.ilu,. i(I"'_ Si.',rl{'I-.:,,r (,r'11,' ' \rt.,.r .., ,t: ,,-r'.,, t- -..rL . r-- _J \.Ci(, ' 1.,, , :-, . (,. 1 .r , ,l .r'...: r) ,v.l1.l \r,-.),\ , r,, . 1:(...st\..r t. \rl..r- r-)...., i.? II,\(i.,.,.'i,i.-r,1.!i,' i._, -\\..-.,n \. . .,,.1(- ''':-,-\\sr\...ii \-.s,r! ()'i ---'t\rrstdn, \rr-!,^, ij. :i)\!/4tF.k.\,,1-ri 1..,.,,..1'-,--'. -s1iI ,.1, I -. \(, xtt., L,,..,1i<rl.{, :-,-, .,1., .(l.i,.rlr--lr, .n. / ,.. &/ L l.\",.r ,. \..1!,t t,l. ... ( ),.c....,,i,\((,,,.,,.,( ( i. ,,.,1u..1..r )r:i){r i lll-r i-!r,",- .,,'r-. I \ICStlr ,i,r.,.'.r ". r' , .! i'\ir r .-,\,,,,(rr,,Dr'r,(\ i\1osc(/\,r,,-..i:rL\'3, I rC i ,'\.u J,1.)\(\ Ilr)ll-i \. 'i'i^'J,--:"ri.I Ii()SC( \r'.,rst t.s,;:-( N.:..., r 1...i,. \r... ,t.: ' i\!OS(.ri ir.Jr rr.'.!,r l:'r,\:r,.,:-.)ir,.'. iN.,t. lr L\:1 C!, i\, ,,.1T( '-1:j \.1f '-\\ , L:' ).:r)lr) ' Aatt ':' 1. N"rr, rI Oiri.t i[ ], \1,,rtsu ,rr.r, - -. cr Nr,.,rs ()i'i.., ._u r'a 'ri, ,., -rar,: 1.-..!i \d,sln,t ():;!e, S,:.ii'lsl',1) A(--:. l. (\i. Vo,i.1 N.r,\rnt)lilrr',:5'\ \,f..r,'\ (.' (, r, . (....ii r,,lt,i\,,r I't ,i.r:Sj ', ... , .,-. ,\.J.1li l ,r^r,r,i OIii.-r^,_.i0;155,15,' , ,\. , -(. 2r'rz \4r<-'ti. .\ \-o \:,.r..,rNur\rNt i.u(liiccrO.li(c,N.,r.,n(),',i.cr 1iIS.).ll(hr r{(r ,.rrrl. ir L,J{j1i9 O iiet '('r;\1.,'x..r! s. (0ulal, \ r., \11,.1 Ot,ic: ld{.'i\,iuiJ!o s$.lic'l1ar , 3.rl,n.' Zub.' ra Ndrsrxr Oilicc' ltrl000I 1r.l ' 8.rtr,lr.c ( .',t'lrnr. \ursrn..r Oftic.',iCLr,lvtL,l.r,-., \0.01{.) rl{r i)C'! ':, I !l. r- io,.rt.l.,l1NI I s, [,.i Oil:aa. i(-'Lr vLr.r:{4 J(iirlr.j i),,, eo,.. ru,, ,ii- . i(.d \urs,na Oaic.rNuittn,r ()r:ic=r:oS r.n-.1..:D< Sh. !rr,rl Nur\.n:r 0f!:i:'r. i.,i\,r.i.1if Lr,VL.,alLl-i'\1., Ji(L \r'.rr-.-, If'r.000lo.1 -r" ,,..,., \,.r.1..rSa l)0'r.s0.Lcd80 r1C0iri? "r 'rcs i;,.:.-rr.r rNt,,\rOiri:crl-,9 i i.-':- ii.rb( i. l ,!' \urs,Lr.!oN.-.),,r1 ,l.r' , .t 'rn:-1tr1 ,I NLrs,n( O!:;c,:r S,' r(rr.J:\-' - !,.r: \'t.\ Nurstuq ( )llic.,( ,, \,r :ilj O.{t ,..',..1|l,- i, ., | ' ) ,. .i\( r.,,),^ a)rtiLr 9r, oii!Nr!\rn{ Oflic!, ir- i-''\'r.::,-c S0 (" ('l?1 , (.r.. s. ,,I ?.r ......,N(,r\r,r- O -..::: \ , ,, (..-.'- \. ^r!a, :0-; r ..,,,-,,1.,r.' \.1.r'--.\ur.[r.r O1:lt:'.J .. S.i',- i \,r sr,. -r (\"-irc' ,.-'. I l_.t :llr r,r Il?,, \.. rii.,, , \,:rLir I ,1., r rr! ()t:1(-ir..,..r,g:t ',1 ,,.' I I L . ., \i, -_.,.,,1(lO1-i-:.1,._r:( \u.:r O:lii-, :,. -r':,l:-,'.rr:-,'-.,,!.,. N...,'i ( )i-c:: i-.-, \it r-'-rBLstr+!.1 .. -.':'-r'.1, ".,. -,.. 1 L.:(,.,,.. tl : us ()tlil..l\j'\,: (,\:\t tl. l. ,r,., r ..,.. ,,rs.r,qr)lii.-_- { .1 \ lrlr..!.: ':'.; \ ,,',.!., l.jtl,\ a! (\,i'..-.I),\.,',.,.'.,'',ll , r rl.,- ', ,l(1 \..r., Nr ,\, '! (_r:rl.r, .. , t,(,,,lrl N ,r n. ,. ' r;.(,, tn,s,,.- (),:i!-r:,r N.r,rr',' 1r,,.,1 il,.rii], N"r ,,rr.- ' t. -1,-.\i. LL-.r| 196 ' \rr,', s,-r.. (, \.r.i,,.,,. \r.,\,,r! ()'l'1,, ., I \i.,,.r:197 \rnr.r . 'rF, '' I\L,is. ,q r)l:'.-L:.s , \,. \! l5r,rq ( ti',:jr, l.'| \lL:..-{r^:)O ar1.i.e .r,,!100 ' \:1.,r, \ -. ., N.,r\!,ig Otlict. ,f' , \i-,,,,_ci,'). , )\-..\..s-'I o,.a(: \.,s,,.L'.)li.cr iL.' (::,i. (.,'"1: \.r-(: .,Ja ,..)':,, , Nu,s.nc t)l'.i;r, i- r, \1r t-.-JlLl \..r\ r:r.,..' i.lr rl : \.rs ne (-r:liLc, \:.''')- \r..r.t.',.,t.)-'c-.' l't" t'". { )' 1i'" 'i0j ()fu., !',(r .;,r\\.. r!\r, s.",r ()lri.c' ,,'\rr I:r ! .)a\. r ,\,a ' :l()'* si\,,rj S t,..r Olr:L,...(,1, , (10,;i07 il\ \. \1.,r!. liu:srne (lliic.: )1,','Jlri(lf r 0,,,.l( \.r,r'(,cr N,,r'r,'q ()l'r.c' SI..(,'JJ109 I'n,)rl., \.,..),!.r \.I{.t{ (-rrli.i.'r0 i R. !., (.r. r'.,aon!, Nr,,\rr,.r rl:ii-(,'i!,' 11..,'a.-r,.)r\..icr\.un\07. :Nur( ,1,.r OLli..., S ) ';l 1'!'l S.,\\j\..ir.,,:Zr.r..r' \.,.s,nSO1,i...: ;--1 )\.llii,-l-l . S.Zl ,.\\, r_.r!!sli.r I -\urs,a,l OIi,:c, i(u '. , .,- \,)..1,i)ii- -,,1o r.re\ 1L \u, j,ilp C''t-rr i(. \ ,. i('./ I ll,.ti I : ,' r1.., -!hcl.s I \ra.,r ' Nrr ,r, O,'ic<. j(.-.,,'-.r' l,/\1',r.,!(,s(, r)4,',1 '(' I Tr,,. . 5r,, , r la )r .! rr \u.sr.1,r (\fLi!-.. :r.) i,ir)i,?l.:rl..l,,,idi ',(.'s\I \,rs.n3 Uffi:tr lCii l.'.:ei.,t S','L{,i rN iu- r rrr- {,-..lrrr , NL,-srr'.- ()t icer ' '.ii-,',rir.,!;,r-. lii, ('il,I l,r i:r r.'. r,-.r. it,i:',trt , Neisrn.! O:i-(.' ri,r,C:(l \\ ,,,-'4.,r ,.,a i\: ,,r.r N,-trr.rr.- Oil.e, S r l!','\ i' ,n1.. {.,ii\,.y: N.-r.,nr ( ,lli-c, r l('' ,',i ,I ,',s\r5l.,... \r, \ , ,: (.lill(( 1,, ).,.., ii:i {.r. '.\s.\i., tt \i! !. ..1 .,r ,lr:-: ., . \,_ I _ \-\,i..,\ iir.. . .rr. --rr l- ',.. -'is ..,,' N. !, '.\..n',r ! . r.,,.1it . ,. ,,.\:\,.iJ li 1.1., - r-li:i 1. r! l-' ,. \-lr,.i,\ \$rs'ar.\...-.!i\l ^.i, ,'.'.-,.,,r, r... a, i'a-\\.,!Li i'.1 . !r,-*wv+4t('i' i,r,r:'-:,.'. .),, .r' 1is(r,ir. \r \ r: '.iil_ -.- \i 1,., ..i\.:1, .,:l ll ,: .'r,,., '.1 \s,,,srr,.r Nl',<,n,: Ofie:, . lt-',-i\:.,1.1r',) It' lt: r'_rt"?\(. - .ir s.r.,, \a :f..trr!- 1\- , r-r,i r 1.t,,: '.4.:i.. !i - I' l..r,\\\r.(-,,,'. ty. st 11-,l:.'.(s:d s.l.^1",,l-rl l'..rr..^-, EL.tr. \rsrsi.i lt Nr.. ,ru Ja.i!(' ,C.i,I !..1l-l ' l.!ro-.rr. \ia.. I 7'.ss siilli \usr ...r Oili-€. ra ( "\i-,ii,,,., 11 'l.r_ r,:.-.:- .,,-:. "Assrsl.r-,t N.. sr,r.: Oi'r- 'C.:,tlL..',' t(' 'i'r)i-: ,\,..,., \r,\s1.si.'.rl )!r . ,rr .'1 .--l.-- rr .'-'. ?r ...' C '":.'.1 il.ula A5srsu,'t \r:s. :,ia L).:'-i_ sc.t{11l-t \:,1.'^2, :..\e., Nrusr n2 f-,,'li a a. laf,i\i.rrii,2.,i.l7\t.'iir.. .i:' . \. 'o :c 1! Nus. r! Oiic., rL,,''.!.ra:o Su 3(,.r:;L.ri1 Ass st.rnt NLsrOri:: s0,'iall: r(' :-.a\.r\.a ,.rll:r {Ss.ita 1r .{.'s.,aq O:!i.'. Si.:1i,rliu -:.,s,r r e S- r'C a:e Assls.,r, ':-,1.i q Ci'..,.: (,lSl , \r,r'.<-s- h.o-'a | ,\ss.siJn! NG':,r iC'1,\!rIau.),.ltrr'i \ 'l.l\\.i \,:a ti En:clled \*-s. iClr/\ 1.,i1.ro a,) 'rr'-: Ilsl I ria,.. i: ! ,,.3 ' I EDroll.C N.,tse , rcii \iu:: sc.a{,C.ii- \r5\a\rl.rr.xr Efrcl'ed N!rs. lL(l \i 1., -oS(..11!jji \r ,s,,n:.r tu.,i r ! ro,,ad N.r,r. 'i-, \1 apr SC rlr,il5t Ll\\r l<.uL lin.oiled NLrs! ic'JA1"r.-.-- s,.).4c1i!l r rl.urlncr,,\ s I Enrorleo \urse ,CJA'rl.'-.'r st 0c0lj8 T,,r,i-r:,2: Ir',rrce Enrolied Nurx !r-./hiui s0,(r0lli9 S ': ..n 'iasrl|e Tr,rloih! Nl.dr(..! Lll:,'ic.r i,,,tr iU-l:l1,11 S:r,'i.rk. .1 -'.,...i\al ' \1..- :al Of:..r r a ., llrt' 80 r-uu16. :i.".: i,r.r -.,:' n.r,i , !l.d .r. a,aatcr l.ra rLlii: \ir Or,it\: :i ro'i; S-?rr. \i€c,c!l()'.!iL<, rla rt-r-:i 8r-, ...r I r:,c:, {, )a i\i1!i,:2 Joa.rt..2 , \r::s,nrr Of[*r N.-lr.il:-;t .i r ,r ra iL.lrllo- l,t.r.t',\.-, S.r, rr \u:s,rqOai:i:r,N.:s,ri' lr,',: l,--l-i 30 (1()',Jli5 \.:.s\.a fo l,r A--1a., I A,:t5u.J,.ia l.ss.Std.i si ,,cil5r \r ,-( -,1\r..r \li,.a ,\ss..L,i: \u!\r11OiTc., r,' . ltill iu.it .ti.17 !-r!anlba l\..1\, Ot-ic-rl6t . \ti-l\'u Sl,!'o.) Ass.scirt \'r,rs,nti C:!ce ir.r,a F.P'-{ ol';)J109 \:-,4,b,:,r.,sl A-\\lsi.'.,r: \ursnl,.r [rtii(cr t Jr.rra iil-{F._;j: N..:.-a'1-", ;,v, 4 O'jc- :-r -:.i:r \r r,l Iar. :rt!.\r s \q (ll'':(.- \"1,''\\r.t.! \ :(r r! 1..,fr1,:-L(: n,^-- 1 .- i.:... V.d ctl t-i(,..r,(,, ':'J-f,.... t : 1,:t;l i''i\ l.C,iJ- --.-:'n,-')r\ 'i'::.:rx. i f. i.; i litc,,, i:ir..,aid, -a:a\.('c!,, ar ll5!, \.al a.,r i)'i_,r._ t,:..i-\ rl'1''..:',- D,-'a-a I -l,,r-r, i--. ra, r ': -'a..": -s -) -:\ f'.i ,-'- \i.,l,r:,.,I!-q: ,,a uirrr.,' \r.r|.'.: \.:--5 \i.J rrrCll(. 'r \'t r\,r.,r: e, tii:li, r.r r r . -rf.-"'.i.:*JEL-.@/\Ftri(l _-.\. \L,.'!:l',c:-Af iul,rrr(( {s:.irr 1., l. , s..r r i,'i c.:r.al' ';: l I1d.; ._ .' - ,-r r( s. ) , r.':15ri.r.Lc :l ,..., i s,- -il,r, -....'r,ri,,.- rl.,: l\,,.1 r 1- r' r,(: D,,. - It't.,\. .^,.! (.,,i{ \r i:ri \\ i,. ,\r,,1'!l-,.(( u, "'t '\'Jl,Sll r,..:.,t. I i.-(.Sie\..!.., .nl\r|.,r.<-l ,\.' s,ls.t i.l. ,,.- '- :.r ::. , .r i :,r.trl- S',.i,,'l -, Ss.-r i. .r -, - ,, -. ,'.i. r' \\. rLu' \r : : rr':L .,ii.....1 !,l.r' ,\.r.rc- ..J.. \.<r:.rtr, i \L.tj:.1,- Oi '-- ,:,i.l.l Sse r rt,: Jorcp' ,\-s'r.t..ni \ir.,s r: O i.la.: a1:a-:rl N.r.!!c:.:o :ir '!'.1e NuhL {.ss.iiil. -! Js'-._,{ 0::_ai, il-'.i(r-t \1.-.. I .i. i?..r-- Er ra.lail N.,r* J n 'i.l'l lC ,1,',jci \tu. -rr Z.::: ! " :.'eri \ ,,]: se t R,: S.).'.,,,.:lr( \a.. r L1[. T<Lh\nijL,la lca {si si., '- . tiitF:r., 1.!ii, ,t"lq? Cr,aa.1 losap:: 8,: t.,.19\ {r.ii tlact)s,l', \'c.cai Ofi:.:,:- ,rii!l s: a i'Je\.r, rqa\J C!t.,an I i\.i...-- (ll!.- 8L ,ra l-CU ' \\,l!ob!^r- C" .t.1J:'-' tlei,- r, { ',ir- :4., tl -lg,i lurr-U,,r-,r.l11.r(' jr,'e, 'Nurs,rOriS,. llt,)-(l: r li, sr,i.-r\l ite-.. rJ :i...\..,lr N_,s.:lOJc.:. ('.:o.c I li{, \r.s,nl O,.ice. rCt.' :a ...,.) K.!rt...1:-{ Srr,'j.i0 -Cl Ss.'.rrra i.lrrrl l '' ..\, ,\: - icni BCsr(. i\..r! n{ Ofii(r, {\r. . .rq 3(' ir,f.l0j , An^u.i,J? Sa.itn '\!.1ir{a'b-rianat \s(,s(. " I i,-1.' E N,.i; ii01i!ii.r('6 -S-\e-!-\I1..,3an A.nl.dl]n.e A-sr,\ln,it x( C,jll ,-;- I rs..1[ , - [.:.-rier ds\,surri \tL5 .,] Oi'al, \rF--:r,lii{ l,,.tr"-aS \. .:r'.: "-css!()f::c: I K.r-.-'< :L\i': S0 ()illrl,n is€n,.-.r! (-:rci':a\ d 5s.silrl \ uls,n{ L'}il:a<t(-.h.rrc f,. i:1 8C i,i0.rl0 \ - .\ asr:,..: Ar-.s:ot {ssrsrnt Nq,s .\{ Oi'f (a- ' N.l'-\,re ?.Rl ! 3.,,0ti-t\r,r.at r: : Lc',t:c,r(],tl:-r\s:lSalli \tr.s,n(..--r -' 1L!i :t0.0c,,',rzhr - \l!r s._'.0JtsJ 000 {s, i-\ . D-,..: A-sslslant Nd,sr.q O!: -.K.r:a,:l1H, i-'b:': RLll 8i llj -rl- \l I .NII.OLLED NIJRS:.NROLLED \LRiE +i: 'l\o'rr: I\\: {.: olt ?i..:.,,: {Ri-i Nr,1,\oJ!.a Sr q .r\ Iia.,r i r lr ..1t6; \1,153 (.-,t.:. Xl:."., ltli'\,',.,. til \';'.r,li S.r .l.:'rLcl :,. J,lcl,l NLt' i; (-1," r S{ -,r'-:ir.r'- lL -r I ' .\ '1':,:',.( C.)\ 1,, \- \-..'.r 1.,.,i -,lo \ ':i1i(,,,'r .\': I .r: ! .:lo-rL\., .- , -s,-(,.'. 'i'.i'-ll !- !- 1- i..i,1!€' rr-r' -.,r - .-.:r.,, . i-.. r --,,.-.--! l .:.l)\ ..lcl: -:' 'na .)i\: . ,,?.; 1,.-:r I1 :r:..rJnc.- iir.:\i _. : a .r '.: 3--.- \-CSC r-{'r;:.1'.. '' i.-'-,-r.<-b. 1 ..::- C:.J rr -r t.. r.l n:1...1? .: . '- l:."( ,.r.1_\:-,r ":r': .l.'tr r:WV tH-&-., \: s-S\\,r\:.)lt- Nr Lr.1ll, sli .r(i)\\\r\(,.1, \lr.s ! { r'i,-!-- t*.,, ..', *r'- ,, .-"i,.rii' rl'iir l'.,1,,,.l...,sr,rrr \L,rs' .- Ctili.'.r . --_ ., ,illi l..,ll.lr Iffi' ()lti.ali , \' ., !- .\-." ii'.i. ..a t-..i)..: l:l \i,..-.,f:. r...' .\i' r:r: ..lr-,. l<.c,' l.t. .., I .LoJ,rdr-l ir..\.\ \ '.\,.., \:i"r.'.r: ()'li.r'(S-... r r..,i.)r,,:.1r-lMJl.ulclo \iL,iC., l't.\r.. , -\.',,..r1 C-l (.r iiL.(dl.r.\.t--rl (irJan$\ ),r, ., {i,.,!J\\ \!, . L.,r ( )l ri..cr ! K' '..f4! '\l 'r'..Srr r C:r--ii \r,,...c_u. I r) .'rll-- , \-.,r. Ll \ir(hcJl\,.1,d- I(rl.:i.,\ic(r'.1r t.),:icci.r - r.'.1rr:i q, i-. 11\., D.nq.ai.or .\ lL'd,cri (_)'lilcr.r.i.. , Stoa,&.1ll., )i,(l-,.,r;S r ,\s!,Sir1. ^wr.r.\ .r O lricc. . aaJl ,-\..,_i,r{7 I h nrrllu l,(r,rl i).1.,.r \\\r!...._! N.,r\,n.- Oit'c,:. ra r),\l-l-lj' leldr-.-,.i..,r.. rt,1,' \',;\.r/\\\r\lJri Nu.\,.- (jif(Ll Slr.0J'llirj c: r-'-!.lr):,\a .! .a. :cJL\( \ air- \,t, (iu, I \..,r \,\r\,d.r,li NL,r\ ,ld Oil:c:. , k,rrrliL lr._:tr'.r:t 8'-, l.;'.'. ' ri0 \',!:. .{\:rr .,it:'J (,'{:U.ri i i!,-!."sr i,..,)irr..( l':iL-.r (,rLdd.tr\.r'ro(rSlr. )($151 r N,r, (.sr\i'.sLani Nu, sll,"- ( )lrl(<,K ,.rd.r rNr -:\k, rLdr 1\.1-i'h' {51l..) 0o(l '.r i- lCr,rl.\r,, I .\\\r.ir|i \u..,,ic 0:'.Lr Slr r,f,r'r.r..rrt N,u.,a,.: Otic..ri,lj-l ir.r-as \lt!r' ,-:'a I N.,1. Lr-'./, -\an.,1. {lll.!\ I A\slstJni \J'\',tJffir.e, k,,rrrr.. ,\.,ri.:.,.\..r{.',}i tiu.:,ne ()1iilr. :i,.....:,, \.,1'Ln\,, r,i)\i.'.iur, !.1.1.t Ev.ta!\tSll '.1{,i , -l:S \,i$r' Olncr.\s5.-n. tt Nur.r.r( (rati;( 'l{Jr-,1\, r59 I \,f n\,1Ci ,r. \l) irilr II \ssl(Ll|ll \r:s,, I Ot'-iq.i | (,r..LJr {i''.r'llbr sr).Jl'u llt' D\\.1',rra,16l ,\511.n11 i ,,(, \is,slt"t \(.s,1c ( );_ir.r{.: , Nal-lc(ro r,).,'- \\!rstlrn N ,slr.: Oii-:r i:,.J'd.,Nr nl, d,i.{)l,l)r(,-i | \dl\arL \r'1., .'!rrr \ O.('cr. ' l( -L i.,u L\. .:':.i st:00u(.r\t.r, 1.s5ltr:al N(.\.r'l (-) r',icL'l(, r).rlr.l,rS\,.,,o.. r.' Dcus-:.r J: \ri: ' \iLi,ca'Oill'.:- r.',.:, Nli .N., r,",- (-\1-'(. '\1,'. ,r, '.,, ..,., t. \ (l-\leiir.- i.,a.' .-(a\ 'ea',' . i, :\\. l\lc.r.-.,1 r-.'n) ':,rr. ,'r-,r' r-r.t \, \lat\(, r,'l:-rr ,r l -.. _ tril -i.l'.'- -'rl'- \.--..i?'l '. \!,r,. r.r,i1i:n \ic.i,c-,. L'livi,':r';t?- \' r-.,, .,._r-. r.\S-.r,. \!.('rJ, vri i. .'rll.r$6-IIBL-rF+(, r!.. r,' (r ,11.,.-1 , i'r...-..*t.t,-l L ii'r',r, \\-' r(,,r i c 1, tJj(,..,r\L r \,,j(c, rNr,..,,: .r.r..J. rl:ir, Sl r. ,,\ -,,1r rrL;, rr (N"- , ).-( 3,: ' .l:,.r{1,,,.\..,i. c )r'n-r,..-1('r.ra. t- t,',---'r t\.' '., '','{ i., ; r.,10.,,l',a.'\!.,..r.1 r.u,, ,,r { I !i(,,r:l t,l i\\,r r)ri I,'(c.i.r'l.:o1',-.(' . .-- .il..l { '..,:rr .l'1. i.. t'. ,-,-.ii { c!,.,1i\,,-!. \'-'..r_i,.'!, 1 , \ir- a.tr i-.:.. rtdl, ..,.(, r., i llr-3? lrr r€ \.5r'.- I \,-rllirl r.,ir(rt.,(r \ -l( - -.L t.r,i,. iit.Sil !ti! 1,.,... \i.' r,,.-s9 t .,nr (,L.J\'. r , . -t''---r-, ,(.i 1.1-1-. i'. ,'.-,r'- I l.icr (.', a,'i'iai S-... -rr: I '.u ltiti'r.rl \aia.., ,1....,-i.1\. lte:,a vl.Jarr(),r'a., -tp;r.. .i.,' lt- ll l'.',: i, \..... .'ri: \!-(,,.-. (1',iL..i' l \n(: -' r.J\I r':,r l'1r-\-.;'. ()-: , \r i J\ \i r...,1 l llii(1.. S.Ja!.:r9- \rD( L(tL \,Lrorrr \ ...,-., t '-i_a --i'.j':-ri , A. r, , rc:lell.cca r \t-dr(ir { )lli!-r i {d.liI r St<-{ Ito (J,!,_u,. \.. rL stl.re \i:Lrc..lOili.r' i0 r,r,".rr)? Nr,,sr\,r (l!'l'!tr 14Crur98 ' \r()...r, !i,t.(..r , \r.rrs, r- Olliccr \r,.(u,--).) ".).....r c fdL \ -,.r.i O:^i:t< R, t.) Itrit I rI :o{r Sr.'r,,a\c \iu\.rlr, Ui'fl.i, (N( ', iI ',.- i( r,,itrl \lrh.i.r,lo l\. r: Nd,s,r,,r Ollitcr (\or -n:rl I I,r r ii.rllr 11,.. ('' /,1, i'Jl , : ^n,!.rlance A\\t\tJ:ri I r,- RRllI r .' 11'lN'i.0,r't<(il (rli \(,- , ,.e\ lic-ll{..r0(lar(a {\sit(.r- sr.ri(j'i4- \1.,(..1-- \ .:r. xr.|...1...1..nI ,;rr,jl]'.1: r: ! \ r..r\.r'.. t .UI'rsol S,' (t,-,j.rr l\r,',r.rd.(( d$,n \n.r.Slrt iL.tl,' ()..r1\] 3cl(\ \ncsirrllrc L)lia-, I , .' i.fii, N,.(;(,(l.. l!t, i s.t Lo.r idti {lLjo9 \r,.-.hcq.. i\'.,:( Cra.c ait!\.!rr' N{r\r:l! Or:-ca \i 0r),):0.r crl ii(r , Ircr. l (t n ar(r)'r, 1'i!.t \.' Nr.. "-irl(.,1'o-.,2. "., r,r/) ti(.,\\s,rt.,rli \1.,i.1orr.c, I .r.r -ilil'iJ q l',i:l i :...r',ii\- 1.,-tr \s\rsr.tllr Nu!5, r! flllj..( Sr irl,\. :t. r, \i, \.-.( Ol :c(,r-:.,!rrt N,us.r.r (l :1 i -i.jr rlr,l:i1l5 (. " -\ -.. -,r.. .5,\ l. \u..ri .- (, .:r-t\r. \:.1r'\'r s' r- (, '_(..i 1\ -1 tr. ( -\r ir.\! r.. r\r-.-l'. Nu r,r,- r )-i..-:ri, i, I i:-.'.'...- \-, .:.1il,) \n -.: !.- _ ,\r.:il ' ..,rr. -"- (,r,il: i, Lt. \ r....r \ -,,(.r r)ai--::-,\.\i- (( / JS !- \-\ .J<1. \, ., r, \.,. I-?vGrb+:t IIIIIItIIIII,\ !.,.,1 ! ,lr s ,.r,. ,I '.,: 'l '.'t... r .,1 ,:. -,ili :,,-.'- , . J ,-r. f. .\ i_r., .i!j.r-r.:,r-,l!j:j -\',-,.1. iLri( '.,,-, -- O,l,cL(.,'._i,l'iii..- !'r,: u'' " 1'.la la. -\5: :t.:r,. ._ i rr-,i::S ' \i.'.,r' r'.- -.\'. 1-,,.r1.r ^.-l.t.lr'l' s 1... il?\.,. !!1a,,-.. \-\\ !1,- .( ,-. Sr,irr.: i!::ar Jf:a {\\!\!.1'r .il-'. t"-'i.-s . - irr. ..' {,-rr.-Ri:i ss-, .,r'r: -r-l 1.,h.,.t..c rl-.-.t. 1r. s'. -. -\.ri,.r(ll.i-c. ..'r,t iil,:- -,,..i:N. )r!O ..,., iii 1,i,.)il. \r,l?\!-..:1r..i.i- 1: \ . i- "l{t.-:.! i., .f,:-? \.'. 'u'. S'.ri n r 'r,'-'-...1.!'. . rt-I r..' ri., i.e ,l'-,r is _ -':, i : it'-i ):, |'iL-'. !-':-'2, \rr '..\, \. r\r \ r,. rrrr ( i,,(- - \'...1i.1 'li,: Sr !,,,irj: i ..ar-.,t1,-., lJ5- 1.( .1-'.1.,'i- :ri r. 'r I,---.r ,., \. \ ..1 (-, \:-:..., :l t l-, ',,' Iii: ).i^ .\(ir5kr. \ r.rrr r, . i. rl,c-.i i \..'-,:..'r: Ea.Jl -.1 il J! 10J:.r-',-.1 ;\ r,\-. ,11 : ri. ji,J.i.l.c c.,l I r[aa.,:. : -r'',. . ,it..', ,.j', iL.l-,. ., -\rr'.,.r.it. ' r,r.:r,a,l L1i(\r, n, i:j'. .,! a: rl-i-,, lr!..t. a:-.( (lli,jl, Oa:'-:. \.,...'kJn.t'l{ j.\ \i ,j.n' - r )!x,. , \'-c.c-!Olliicr ,. .r ..: ?.ili,:i, \i-r ' ilrc { .:5, -rr. Dr,.:r , -., ..,'-: !.--,.' i<r., \- 1.\^,--r-1i .,ri)1,,:-,.i,..\,:'.x-r\!.rn,:()i_r'-- s., {".IIIt1.\.,.kt..1 \t, ., ..r r-,----.--'.1'L:. s -' \.-r..'.:'_ --'---:i--r:i,i\ i-. , 1., ..1-1il\,l. \li-l\\--7't,.. - I _\''., - rt,{ll\.r'..2 ''s!',,.''-:l ' ^'\:'1.'i,. .'. "'.',:, . 'l,.. (. ,, \r . -(,'1-'-.jiji\ I:'tr .. ,. L i. .\ . \lLh..t c.i '.,-.,'- , \ !..,r. -.ri(.. t\-,--.. ---'.!(-.:'1 .i!i,!.;.i.'-. ). ., - i.'\-i \: \,,, , \,:l -.' .'-: i-rir- '( ,-". -.. it-. , i...a .. :'.i, - r-.1' -. '--=--:ffi!, ,l . l' ! ,:, 1.. 1. ii'^rn:.r.:,1-.... ii: $.i . !,.1'"'ri .tl..r.'.. .-',.t.,'r''S i. r.:,. .. ( .,,: _r:1ilo rr. -f.'aL:. 'a.' !1. . a, '!i. t-- ,i r l('' 1" i.(J \--.r rJCr!.r;i .,-rSi \.'s-.,i'd.':.r -\ss s_al . \.i9l TL,'.:.'-..rj.: \Ii..-.\.'1:",-.li.. Ph'(C"f4,., .lt.i,lj.;. i(., ,\,n ' ,-c iq.:S01..,-.a'' ,, ra :r.ra.2t (.')'r.: \i s(-"(:16 l,.l-..iir.(t. . :lllJn \i ir., ...r i\.i--:I.-:r:\\,. \1,-'..!.- Blt!srn..!: \l-'1.!..:0-:':ji.r.S1i-r?l :r!ii, \i:..{ tl- -'ii]l,jl .{l';,!( S .r:' \lcu,r.r, O'Ie : S.r.tr:,,j:.:-l -.:- ()i'ii.-' \rt'rr.'- iliiJ :i' :-..-\ -. ,-.. t ).',- (i'r.: \1 .. . r$< i)-{.e!,r\i*,:J O,.-.r-:- i:.1.,.!r (4.,r.1,'. \ .l i\i -,.1. s5C- a:.i.'. i..'.i\ \le.rr." lJi--c-- 3r1rrI,-.rri , :.,1, )-i.r.-:. \-r:i_i.\ | :!i.:.'$, Oi':-e\! n.!,., Dd L'. \cl:l.,, ric.l,(.:1-, ,_.t ii,aj.-''..1 -, -.-.,. 'rr.r: \1F.,"--'.il,'-, ., i ,- u ll.,ii \r,r.l rr i ) i_it.:r \ \.-.r .- l("1 :: :r: ,'\' !- .:,- Ij'..{\r.,-s '! )-:.'-, \$ttef..,..., \r1,. 11. a''';!! S. l\-.- -\il ,'::l\-tt\rJIl rrr(r:{ \l-.! t {\r . s . '. '\,rr\, r- .. ri-il.: \ .,.'r,., i:.'. .,.:,r'\ '' -(l .--rj, ,',- \( . . (:l \_. .,'- - t.... r. II \i- -.2. r ,).: \,d!!.n. -\s\ \(.,u \\L , \r 1! i r'I. -\.r,i.r- , /t.:.': _ .. . .l./t\r ,..,.'...,-, )r'. rr '.:! -. ._ l \-,. r'r "):-'. -'l._. ; r -tl"irl.l :t, ,,n_'a . ,_ l'. \ f,.l I ).: '.lll'.. l-'-^- ,! \* t l ..rol-..1 \...: 1,-^-...ii.t 3' ,.1. .. .c.. \ : t:: .. .r ll't'1,:.', :. r lir(i:,rr,' !l ,\ ,'.'-.' - .r. :.:t l . i -.,..r | -. ' '(\r . rr.i6r: v(.1., ,,- , 1.,-"t.i .- C' ,.,. -. il.1- i S r., _,r. '-( 11 ri:.Jrr': a ),'i -: i'arI'r-r- \-r -\a.!, ar rL5 \.r,i,1'Ilae {\sl.r.lnl .i.l ii.,r'rrri ) ,.A!(\ 1 DrurJ I, !t.r.L,,iCe .\\\.5.{xi'1.S'r JU,.;\,.'|\Lr\(. \.r,-. ., .1, ,tlj{j,i \.,,r : l,',\;:{n'l.t :.r !.. .'.>5-sii ,' ii.r li-i{..:.., \as s ".r,'.i'L:.,, .. D:-r;-.50 i -i'r., r-: L'r,'-: t -::{.\ ';,i:l ,. ,- ',l-rr:\-.r'-:D,,.i(i1s. s ..t '\L' -. ,! arl-_ -- o,r \ ',, , l'ij l)i.Jr.,,.,.ri: ,,--,.r4,:, . :),j'- ' i ' , ,' , , . , , I ) . r ' - ./.1\ -: !-: i; "' Ij '.!..i:- \L'!.'t d''-cL, l:.:- '.', . ,Ii. ' r, 1,, .a,. ^: ,i-, ..IA--€&eri --.. i, \,4.!,.1...... ,. ( 1....\: \1.rI..1'. -(,--. I O:,:i :r il- _l rr,1,.t,(l: '.)r .'\!_'-_r.L.tr.i1., '4, ' ,. -,1 -(. !..-.1\!, r '1 _,.\i ..rc - ,),. r r,(ii'{ 'l' \:., r r,. . r. s ",.( \.J . -- ):a--.r\r i r.--,r!. r)r:...!!S -.x-:-. I -." - irr.r a1..9(, \:1.,i\.r-Lrc.. r)1i'-i:, lC,'lJ.l\!r.',irr ()f i':: f:r .- Ri-it. r r-.r, -r-- R{,.,- \.'i .' l'. L,.- \ ',:,.r I -'ii!- I r...lr,-< 1.{ I i,.tir.,i-i , i.;.i1.r;1.1 'o!c nr \.r,.r r\ \ li[.Ji..-.].. -\'jrst.. ! \l.,nc,:Ji Iiliii 5.r.rnrii,rae \!5 r.. ' :.1. \:a.i. 3 -1!i Si',"i$i:' ,, , -- 1. -\-.r:'-'ra,.Cc :r t\.. 'r ?i'"-- .;f , ... ..' i..r. \ _.i:.,.1,: :."rs -.rc.rt--.'rr T.-1, ",.,.: .\rr-;--,1: ir(cr'o 93,-L 'r., l'-t: A.i,\aaLl O,r Bln i':.oi arc- -,(. \,1t:,',r'. |i.iii tl,.r-1.),)tf' i i\.1::1.,. C rf.c", i, '--: -r:rc: { l-l-,i, ' .,..!r.r \ - .,r.,t (-,a'!L jr:-- j _,.1.:i.,r'\{i.-,,: : r' -, ^ ,rr- ,..'..-,r)r''.....,s\--. .1 ..-i, \i. ,- r. \i .1\:.,. q-.4)-li.-, I ' ril.:,-.' '.r i\,e. -., Ota:-:S i\.-..c IL .c.!< ),1-( ,-.,' r_)14.. 'l'"r.-,.\!ltr'i.:.-i r,i -.e\ ,.'| 'lL, -:.\ \t{)',ii--.. :: (,-'j--'\,vbks;. i ,\J'_\lI\r.,,.ro".. i.:.r' ....1, r\' r., .s',t ,'( --,\-. -.l. -,,.\. \1..:r1. i, jl>, a \...i:.r.r..- s,: r.'l1l .'r' !,', I(-t,.r !.'\ r,'. \'- \ (, .-,, \,(11 .a , a.,-::1riu,\,.. \i-. -: ' \-i I-lr "l-,-re(.-.,..e,1 \.i.-i-j- i-.]. ,,1. s.: L -. \- ., 'r O, ''r.:., .ii I f-tr \'l ri"'?1,. \..,r.e S -..., fiJ ,1.1?1; \..c ..'r, \r, 1..r 1i O.li.e,t\. r,r.--l \.. \r'r:,,:Lll'' i..\ I ,i r., NitH S , 1,,:t,\1,r.,,',6-'--- \'- l!.(; \ i:{ l,Lril0 \.,tuL <n.: l)rrr.:c .\r, .r,..r Olicert.l | , a- .:r )[., \: :nl \.,r. ,.-- O.I.:. l. . t. -., \il: 8, na,,?l: \'rr r I , . -, , r- l.rri \: r\ 1: l.'!i!- YL,i-'-r. \ l,lil-,I\ t'1- \..-l \n,\.^.! C\ ti-:r\ iurr..tr \r' \,- U.\r ,.-. C:i'i-- ri'-l\ltL,-)\. I I.i : C', -rj Or-.(..' N,(!,. -:t-6 i). ..f. ' , si. rli i7.!1 's-<::.r: \J ., ( Olli.., .t.'.,, ... t,?-li a ..-.-.-- \, ..r.. -(.\ (:il. \..t. 5l,t L,:j:a.-r- \r rl \i. I \s..si-:i \-rs "i ()rlc: 'ir'alo \tr. _--:f i.n\-\:r,rrI-,-.: \5sr5tJi( \r ,s n.: (ii:_::. rlL,i. r-. ' ?.: .;l , ' , r,rj i Bca. r: .., :=< r Cl',i:.'-;ll l.r -.r D,.r . i. <.:1.',11 Nu15 r,,- I ,j :r: \.:._il i. ,,.u: 1., \\,.1rnl \i: rs, ',r I I ji:'l r\' | -,-( \l,l I: :i .'?-: \, rs' -- (tt:-c, \ -r:-'. \ rr1'\.r \ -:ti.:\.r:, i,-.) Lt.,,i.'-1\(-: s'. r ,511.: ( )r ii!..:r, , t r..- ir r-,-ir. \. . .... \.i.\,.r.r.i '\ ,.- . rl"'L \l-i-, ' -,:,-.rr.i\. :,.: 1 "'_..1..,.......' ri€ivUrlRkI\-\. , t. \r . ',- lI \.l\r-,trr \r(r',-.- \., Ii,.l-,:, i.^(1"1I r -..,.- -,. O(!::-,\ \.r-Jr, \..r( .\-5: .r-r.--'C1,-c-;l al_\ I .\ j-'. . j \.,.:i. -\s ... t". \... ',- I ,.lir.-.'i\'- \ ,\' \ .'r:.r: i\-'.,17;'t.t ,r: ,:- !i rl€ \.r!!-.'.' :,. ;.'i.) -r :i:-'iS,\."-S,.,. \,r,\, rlle,\\. ia rr \-r-, l t. I.,i ;t".-\: \\ b!,\,.r.. , - rt r. l_)l) r\: ..r--.r -,-qi\1, ,r'(':\r ' Ss.. !i.J Jl..,t;: rtr, \ :aral LJ'oau.ttcr, t.-nl.a!'." {'!L' r 3.fu- r I I ,, 'rj 7l-) \i:1:o (:.:. r-r' \{.:.lr-.u.lia-.,(r.:-.1 -'tr. . ,\ . ..r. iaR, : r'lr(i . I_.)r- | \::'... ...iosc,2...i, \,' ' l{:- \.1.,. I t..r -1r r.-I -r-..' '. \., ,r' z,',!,' -', \:1 :i'l)i( ,,i a'): ia.-.r\ ,:ir \..)l'-tSur::'irs_iIi,:,1,.. t;liir, _i!,. ,r , tuil . t^ ,,ri.: \lJl \ >.. ,.r-i,- ri. \t r ii'\.|\\,,,\.:.1.,...1 -. -,i...\l--. flt,s.'!> ,., il,xtitlic,J.(.rr ili':: -.- !-. 'lil,.r.,_ \,-- ..-, a),'-jr- O- -:I '.. .1_ -la,'!.).....-rt- ,l :4t.,-, - -,: \i-t\r*$>-- i-.a_-ca -{ss t.-_-_O a.i !, -'n ,a',€.1aia!:5 C,,\ e't,-<tL5erE. u l.r.'r.t 1-'i'r:-,!-:ia ;'-s:'si?-':A,rb.A.,14. !&.a: D.:"::.S4-c: i.!:r,Scri'. Llii:0 :cc30.cno:i?s,saci ic\ Tci i'?& l.rad'LiCa Di."ea ic-c- i--JSo:o': tlH;l )c^si-0c0 ':'.er: \r'_s:r= oii::rO'-c::l !a,-:oAS!LS:a-'r \'.!'sr r \c:a: Rl:-: s3.0rc,i:i , Oi.:o- S.-nc'lill i,: s'.'a:'r'rari822 3'Io ia. -r ^*ris, i: O-:e- So:;r' t{ilss sia"i \tr''s'rOflcei Sr,3: LR-q' AssLs.a-:iNus,' OiT;erSc-o:- ?-iiiEu 3C,)3i tl,: ,s23SsaY:: c F a-'a:,i2!A.a.'c:a?z' Lr- ck!' Assl.:'ar'i \L:s i1!i83 C,it i s.-o,.. R-tL:81i !.1,e: '-a ir',r A-s!,siai'N.!s.i Of.ce:A..b..a l, '3i. I3!h:i'-: .'-'.i Nu:s ,'-a O-l-,ceI S::o J.t{ s0 .-00 '3C:CC-a-ls,s'.3, t \-:3.nq Sr-c:l-i]l82i , A',\cSl:c:. ?-Ri-: s0.i1c32! -\i(]:r (3-.i': Asi,siac: N-:srr:i N!,,s::2 Of:ca. S.:J:,1.?-! 81.C!,132! ' Ka\u,-ba -'5.kl,n:Ass,!S ):ct. :-)G:80 5ni '910 \{Ls,1... ?..r o-s, --ss:srni: \,JlS!:lC,':i:t:t:1. -ii.',. T.d.,812 -A-.... 3cir.:sll Oi re'.. :.lls;.r\d\a':_a;a D-c...:s{ss:s'ani N.!sa.o,ic.!:1:ci,.C N-.s.E's..,.t.i \lr_sc| !.io::ca N;:s.Sc_oi: riJr'1-!.r-ct':-L--So:cr R-?.iiSc;r.- llRilSo..i!:.I-i3C ooi003 ,00c80.3i0 ,sc.0cc:.'.x!- B4ridena O Aniollei N(-se ic\cc, Sc.c-- R3!iE0 1C0i'rdc Lcie.: en.ctl.i N',ise, S: ol- P.iii 80.Ct10,I g-1? ! Che!"ei:ie'.c,1 er:cl'ca Nl:sas0.030Sc-ri N{i! |-r-:.J t/:e'i5u31? a, .r.., \.1i.:!-l C-..r.1cb.ri-- :'c, r 3 ,:':ss-2 i..:l',. _ '''-'c<'' E.,.r':.i N'Jrs.3s:cl:.i N'.is. Sii o:. i\,{Sc <: i.Rts:So-o'- R-{{S.!(i:1ij{8C ,,10C9o occ, i-ro T::ntt-c'eL,.-' :e:h".!:-a':L:L. a. s.,.n :(L'.:{3lt0.cc0 ,S:l \'!a\! ). -'.!ld.,(4,s-r-s0 c:J'?l ,S 9C2'13'J iiiortE+UEMBERs OF THE COMMITTEE OI{ BT'DGEf, WHO COIAEI'ITED TO THER.EPORT Onl IHE AUPPLEMEIITARY E"PEIIDITURE ACHEDT'LE T{O.1 AITDADDEI'IDAI 3&4 FIOR FY20il223Sr.No.A.ilE TIALE CON TITUEITCY aigErtur.olHo!. OpolotPartck ldedchdrEen Krchuab.hCountv02Hon.g.ErkEyuIgn ttusMudiniDcput'chelrEanElgon Cou.aty I'1o3Hon Dr KeefaKrwanukaMember County KrbogaEastVel.,*n'iQ',04Hon NamukutaBrcndaMcmbcr DWR Kalrro "[L-.!,05 MagogoHonMosesMember Budrope West06Hon KaberukaRuupr JamcsMember County KrnlozrWesto?Hon KatahhwaDonaldMembcr Mwenge CountySouth08Hon. MutonoPatnck lrdorMember Butebo Countyil(trE-09Hon. l.okrr JohnBaptustMember MathenrkoCounty ----->il:lo AkambaHonPauIMember Bus (r CountyA11 Mqane HonMpakaMember Crty MbararaSoutht2Hon Namul.,uClssy DlomzEMember DWR Lwcngob'7iG-',13HonSsemwangaGyavuraMember Buyamba Countyt4HonKateshumbwaDrcksonMember ShecmaMumclpahty15Hon NaycbaleSvlvnMcmbcr DWR Gomba16 Alcpcr HonMosesMcmbcr Chckru County(*-t7Hon Katuslrme Member DWR BushcnvrW-\Annet MusrshalaHon Dr AtrmAsrrcs ADcaMember DWR Amolatar-{1gHon MbabazrPascalMember Buwekula County20 Osoru HonMounneMember DWR Arua Crty2lHon KankundaAmos lcbw&aMcmbcr RwamparaCountv22HonTmkasumrreBarnabasMember County BuyagaWest23Hon YcnOfipono ApolloMember TororoMunlclDahty24Hon NdamrraAtwakxrcCatheLneMemberDWR Kabale25 KabandaHonDavrdMember KasambyaCountv26 Omara HonPaulMember Otuke County27Hon NrwagabaWrlfredMembcr County NdorwaEast28Hon. NakatoMary AnnetMembcr DWR Buvende29HonNyang esoDenmsMember Safi[a-BuglveCentralCounty30Hon AcrroPaska McnyaMember DWR Pader31HonMusherureNayebareKutesa ShartsrMember Mat ogota NorthCounty32HonMaxwellPatnckAkoraEbongMember Maruzr County33Hon BayrggaMrchaet PhrhDMember Bulkwe LulumeSouthHon MuwangalovumbrMuhammadMember 34 ButambalaCountyIIIIIIIIITIII!IIIItI!35Hon NambesheJohn BaphstMember Manjlya County36Hon.SsewanyanaAtlanMemb€r MalondyeDrvrsron WestKassarda countyNorth37Hon NsambaPatnck OshabeMember3AHon NamuggaGorrethMember Mawogota CountySouth3SHon AdekeAnna EbaruMembcr DWR Sorotr40 Akol HonAnthonvMember County KlakaNorth4lHon SsemulJuIbralum NeandaMember Kra Muruclpahty42HonMbadrWrlsonGcnMbasuMembcr UPDF43Hon ProfEhlah DrckensMushcmeaMcmber Sh€ema South44Hon HerbcrtEdmund AnkoMember Soroh Clty East4SHon. OmodrngEmmanuelMember Serere CountyIIIItIIIIIItIIIIttIII