

Wednesday, 5 April 2017

Parliament met at 2.07 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

  COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. As I said yesterday, we shall be suspending the plenary tomorrow to allow the committees start their work.

Today we do have Prime Minister’s Question Time for 45 minutes. If we add the time for the Leader of the Opposition to respond, then we may take almost an hour. We shall strictly observe that.

All urgent matters that were agreed to by the Speaker will be raised towards the end of this sitting. Today we shall go as per the Order Paper. Let us get to business. I thank you.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE ON THE STANDARD GAUGE RAILWAY AND LIGHT RAILWAY TRANSIT 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that this matter came and it was due for debate. We agreed that the past Chairperson of the select committee in the Ninth Parliament should give us a brief outline of what their findings were and then we go to the general debate on the report of the committee. Please proceed and you have five minutes.

2.09
MR ROBERT KAFEERO (NRM, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

On 4 November, 2014, Parliament resolved to establish a select committee to inquire into the procurement process for the construction of the Standard Gauge Railway. 

On 11 November 2014, in accordance with Rule 179, the committee was constituted. Mr Speaker, the assignment of the committee was premised on four terms of reference.

Whereas I do not intend to present the report of the select committee, please allow me to say the following:

Term of reference No.1 which was to inquire into the procurement process for the construction of the standard Gauge Railway in Uganda: The committee did observe that cognisant of the fact that the procurement procedures were flaunted, it is unlikely that they negotiated cost of the project is competitive and that there will be value-for-money. 

Details of how the procurement processes were flaunted can be read in the report that is already uploaded onto your Ipads. 

I can also say without fear of contradiction that the decision by the Government of Uganda to negotiate the costs of the project based on the China Harbour Engineering Company (CHEC) was contrary to sound engineering practice and the final costs are likely to sharply vary from the projects costs that are currently proposed. The final costs may be much higher than those proposed by China Harbour Engineering Company.

Term of reference No.2 was to do with inquiry into the circumstances that led to the termination of the Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of Uganda and China Civil Engineering Construction Corporation (CCECC) for the rehabilitation or upgrading of the existing railway line from Malaba to Kampala.

The committee observed as follows:
Whereas the court ordered negotiations between the Government of Uganda and CCECC, the committee really doubts the manner in which these negotiations took place. 

The CCECC informed the committee that Government of Uganda provided a list of questions to them and they were not given adequate time to respond and subsequently CCECC was informed through a letter that indicated that their feasibility study was unsatisfactory hence paving way for the cancellation of the MoU between them and the Government of Uganda.

Mr Speaker, the allocation of the eastern and northern routes to CHEC was based on their offer to enhance the capacity of UPDF Engineering Brigade and to build the Tororo roads and the railway polytechnic.

The committee established that CCECC had similarly been requested to partner with the UPDF but they had not come up with a proposal hence the decision to allocate that route to CHEC.

Term of reference No.3 was to examine the contract agreement signed between the Government of Uganda and CHEC and to advise on its economic and budgetary implications and affordability. 

The committee observed that there was no subsisting contract between Government of Uganda and CHEC for the construction of the SGR at that time of the petition nor was there any contract between Government of Uganda and any other Chinese company for the construction of the SGR.

The fourth term of reference was to inquire into the conduct and propriety of Government ministers and officials involved in the process referred to above.

Our observations are very clear in the report. However, allow me to highlight the recommendations of our report. They are:

    1. The procurement of the SGR should be expedited and the necessary preparations should not be delayed any further.
    2. The implementation of the project should be in such a way that macroeconomic stability is not affected. The strategy should be devised to address the concerns that were noted by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Recommendation
3.  The cost of the eastern route of the project should be reduced in consonance with the estimates by the consultants. We had some consultants which were called Gauff engineers and the comparative cost from similar projects in the region. The cost of the northern route should be reviewed immediately and be informed by the findings from the feasibility study and the comparative cost of Standard Gauge Railway (SGR) Project in the region.
4. 	The price index to be adopted for the project should be renegotiated and the variation of price reviewed in order to limit the price escalation resulting from the cost drivers that are difficult to verify.
5. 	Government of Uganda should renegotiate the existing concession/agreement with Rift Valley Railway with the view of averting any likely litigation by the concessionaire in the event of the breach of the contract. 
6. 	Uganda should adopt Chinese class two rather than class one standards for its proposed SGR, given the cost, and be in harmony with other countries on the continent that have adopted the same design standards.
7. 	Whereas Government has assigned UPDF to partner with the contractor in the project, there must be adequate local content in the labour force so as to reduce the unemployment levels in the country.

Finally, Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that a competent consultant be procured to supervise the project and ensure that the desired quality is achieved for the SGR network in Uganda. The Ministry of Works and Transparent as the user ministry through its contracts committee should identify a competent consultant to spearhead the process. This should be done expeditiously to enable the project to proceed. Mr Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Ssekitoleko for this process because it now opens up our debate on the report of the committee. Honourable members, I propose the question on this motion for adoption of the report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the Standard Gauge Railway and Light Railway transit. I already proposed the question for the debate and the debate should now start.

2.21
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for doing a wonderful work. I agree with the recommendation No.7  where we talk about local content and giving our children employment. This is an area where we should focus most, especially where the railway line is passing. You find that in some places, people come from different areas to work yet this is simple casual labour which does not require a lot of skills and we make our people to miss out on the job. I, therefore, would like to emphasise that we should employ our local people.

One of the things that the committee could have left out is expediting compensation of people in the affected areas, this has been very slow and it is something that should be considered. People whose land or property has been destroyed by the project should be given their compensation so that we can start and move smoothly without any interference from the population. That is all I would like to add on. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.23
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to take off time to thank the committee for the seriousness attached to the Standard Gauge Railway and the comprehensive report both in quality and content.

Mr Speaker, it is indeed my prayer, wishes and aspirations that these comparisons between the Standard Gauge Railway of Uganda and Ethiopia can salvage the project of Standard Gauge Railway of Uganda. I have looked at the planning implementation and post construction management with particular focus on the right of way, but there are glaring findings, especially in relation to cost that are involved in the Ugandan project.

If I may draw your attention to the cost, in Ethiopia we are told they are spending about $5m per truck kilometre while in Uganda we are spending approximately $8.42m per truck kilometre. 

Mr Speaker, this is a huge difference, but what I would like to know is the land tenure system which is different because in Ethiopia land belongs to Government while in Uganda land belongs to the people. Therefore, I would like to know from the committee whether the difference in land tenure system is the reason for the high cost that is involved per truck kilometre because compensation on land is a huge investment as far as Uganda is concerned.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I was a bit taken back to learn that we had earlier on planned to have in place class one railway, now that we are constructing class two, shall we substitute class two for class one to achieve our vision 2040? I think this brings in a lot of surprise - you plan for one thing and then you go ahead to implement another. 

Also interesting to note is that - what is the common standard which is modern, fast and reliable as agreed by the protocol; we might be breaching the protocol if class one is what was planned. What is the common standard now that we are going to do a class two railway?

Lastly, Mr Speaker, the zero experience graduate policy that is found in Ethiopia gives opportunity for growth and development for workers. I think this is a policy that Uganda should adopt immediately because we have many fresh graduates out there without hands-on experience, but this should start now so that we can recruit as many people as possible –(Interruption)

MR NOAH MUTEBI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Is it procedurally right to discuss this report in the absence of the Minister for Transport and Works?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, this is a report of the committee of Parliament, we will proceed and finish it today with or without the minister.

2.26
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There are a number of issues which I would like the chair then, hon. Ssekitoleko to clarify. He observed in their report that the procurement procedures were flouted and I did not hear clearly the recommendation that followed that; if the procurement procedures were flouted, what next? Is it that you observed and left it at that stage? The fundamental question is: Why should other contracts go through the required procurement procedures and other contracts do not? And particularly for this Standard Gauge Railway, it was handled in a casual manner. The question is: Why was it handled in a casual manner and not subjected to the required procurement procedures as established by the laws of Uganda?

Secondly, the feasibility study did not give very reasonable data because even the Chinese complained about it. Now, what did that imply? It implies that the BOQs arrived at would need to be satisfactory because the basis on which the BOQs are calculated would be premised on a fair and competitive feasibility study. That could be accounting for what hon. Okello mentioned - that the rates for our Standard Gauge Railway are quite higher than the ones of Kenya and Ethiopia; actually that is where the problem started. These guys handled the study in a manner that is not professional and ethical, which could not give reasonable data that could guide the contractor to give a clear picture of what they would do on the works of the Standard Gauge Railway.

Mr Speaker, the other aspect is on the Rift Valley Railways, which the committee of hon. Ssekitoleko recommended to receive the contract; is it the one which you also recommended - (Interjection) - read you report properly. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, there is a problem with Rift Valley Railways because even when they have been in operation for quite a good number of year, you still see that they have not managed our network well. It would be unfair for a company, which has failed on a small thing to be given a project which it cannot handle even in the next 100 years –(Member timed out.)

2.30
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I represent “Kilometre Zero” as far as the Standard Gauge Railway is concerned because it is supposed to enter the country through my constituency. I also want to appreciate the two committees for the reports they have given and the variation in costs that they have highlighted. It is actually in our interest, as a country, to ensure that we get the best deal as far as construction and cost of the Standard Gauge Railway is concerned.

However, Mr Speaker, I want to raise a few other issues since I have told you that the Standard Gauge Railway starts from my constituency.

Acquisition of the right of way started from my constituency and it has gone on well; compensation has moved well despite a few hiccups here and there. At “Kilometre Zero”, there are about three junctions that have been put in place. That has to be taken into consideration when we proceed with the project.

Furthermore, for the benefit of the rest of the areas where the Standard Gauge Railway is going to pass, sensitisation of the beneficiaries is very important. People in my constituency were paid for 60 metres but when they were sensitised at the beginning of it all, it was promised that they would be paid for 120 metres, meaning the width was going to be 60 metres on either side from the middle of the railway. Unfortunately, when the compensating team came, they paid them for only 60 metres. These people misused the resources and this has led to a lot of problems because people are waiting for the other 60 metres to be paid for. 

Certain people misused it so much that they would buy beer and empty it in basins to wash their motorcycles; they thought that more money was coming. So it is on that note that I want to ask the rest of the areas where the railway is going to pass to take keen interest and have your people sensitised if they are to realise benefits from these resources.

As far as local content is concerned, especially the workmanship, most of our institutions, according to the Chinese requirements, are not certified. So we need most of our institutions to get certification in order for them to qualify to get employment when this project starts. This has been with the energy sector where most of them are told that they do not have accredited certificates. So as we prepare for the works that will come with the project - we may have challenges, however, we need to prepare as a country to ensure that our institutions are accredited. 

2.33
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join the rest to thank the chairman of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure for the report he presented to us sometime back. How I wished we had debated that report at that time because the issues that the chairman raised were touching Ugandans. When you look at the cost compared to what was quoted in Ethiopia, it leads to a lot of questions.

Mr Speaker, railway transport is the cheapest in the world and China has got the largest number of kilometres of rail transport as well as the technical knowledge of construction. So when we see these companies contradicting each other – CCCC like hon. Kafeero is talking about, going to construct a railway school and then pulling out and then they are passing it over – he should have given us the figures so that we know how much CCC had – at least a cheque quoted so that we can know the difference.

Now, when you look at the figures per kilometre – Ethiopia, $5.2 million compared to Uganda’s $8.4 million. This comes out of greed by our people; this is corruption of the highest order. If our neighbours are constructing one kilometre of the railway at $5 million, how does this country accept the Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development to pay $8.4 million? This is daylight robbery done in this country. And this is what has caused this country development challenges. If we fought corruption –(Interjections)– yes, you talk about corruption every year and in every speech like the State of the Nation Address and during the Budget speech – the President promises that he is going to fight corruption, but corruption has never ended. Even where it is glaring - you cannot do one kilometre for $8.4 million dollars when other countries are doing it at $5 million. Why do you people just close your eyes and pay $8.4 million. That is why we are suffering in this country. Otherwise this country would have developed a lot more; we would be very far away – the problem is that you condone corruption. People steal left and right and you accept to pay out that money and we still end up with shoddy work. 

So, the Standard Gauge Railway is quite important in this country; we want it to be re-visited so that we look at the neighbouring countries – this committee did go around doing benchmarking and when they looked – the chairman’s report was very good. As an engineer, the chairman of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure raised concerns to the effect that this was a very bad contract. We cannot accept to pay out all this money when we know that they are cheating this country. So the Standard Gauge Railway should be re-visited and the cost should be told to us – what hon. Kafeero is talking about – (Member timed out.)

2.37
MS VERONICA ISALA (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and the committee for a very good report and recommendations. I just want to join the speakers before me who talked about the anomalies in this contract. This is a very important project for our development and the anomalies include the absence of a contract between the parties; anomalies to which we are now going to have to review, reduce and renegotiate. It renders the whole project irrelevant. 

What do we do to people of this nature because the committee does not clearly recommend what we should do? I suggest that some sanctions and punishments be remitted to this party. This is because both the Government of Uganda and the contractors, who actually went below the table, decided things that are against the people of Uganda. I thank you.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter emanating from the motion which was moved in respect to what we are debating. On 3 December 2014, the movers of this motion were hon. Theodore Ssekikubo, hon. Abdu Katuntu, hon. Wilfred Niwagaba, hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire and hon. Paul Mwiru. 

Mr Speaker, these were their prayers and Parliament actually adopted- 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we are not debating that report. We are debating the report on the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. I made a ruling here and you were probably not there. The work of the select committee was not saved by this Parliament. That is not what we are examining. We are examining the report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. I have brought that forward by asking the chairperson, who by good luck survived and came back to this Parliament, to brief Parliament on what happened in that select committee. 

2.40
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good report. The Standard Gauge Railway is encroaching too much on my land. Recently, when they did the survey, they insisted that all of us be present, despite our agents. I do not know how far some people will be able to be paid. 

Secondly, the compensation that raised the cost is a double compensation. Some of the land is shared between UNRA, which is a road reserve, and ERA. I am sure all these are Government departments, which could sit and see how to reduce the cost of compensation because of the land that is shared between the two. 

Our Mukono-Katosi Road is stuck as we speak today due to compensation. One side says it should be for the Standard Gauge Railway while the other side is for UNRA and now the entire project of Katosi is completely stuck from Kyetume to Nakisunga. 

It is, therefore, my prayer that since all the three are Government institutions; there is a way they can come together. I thank you.

2.42
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not know whether I should thank the committee or condemn it because we started waiting for this report before the Ninth Parliament expired. Along the way, there were many allegations, which were levelled against the committee leadership and members. I am happy that I see some of them in this House and I think this is the right moment for us to examine this report to its merits.

If at all those allegations are true, this House should clean up those members. When we are trying to do work of this nature and allegations of bribery come up, then it waters down the spirit of the prayers of the movers of such motions. We were told when the committee was in China undertaking the investigations- 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we are debating the report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. That is the report of hon. Sabiiti. He is right there, so please let us not go back to what we do not have capacity to debate.  

MR ATIKU: Mr Speaker, when hon. Ssekitoleko was presenting the brief, he said that we should refer to the main report; it is uploaded on our IPads and that is what I have been looking at. I am intermarrying- 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: From the Chair, I am now guiding you. In order for you to be relevant, please let us discuss the report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. I made a ruling on that work which has been uploaded and it was not saved. This Parliament is a different Parliament but you are saying actions should be taken against the Members of the committee, and yet some of them are not even Members of Parliament anymore. Please be relevant to the debate.

MR ATIKU: Mr Speaker, I am now more confused and I think I will stop here because I do not see how I can marry the two and the relevance of the chairperson of the select committee presenting briefs to Parliament; he is talking about the issues that were raised by the petitioners. I just want to submit.

2.45
MR HATWIB KATOTO (NRM, Katerera County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In my opinion, the report is lacking because you told us that you opted from first class to second class. Therefore, why should we go for second class when there is first class? 

You talked of China Communications Construction Company (CCCC) and CEC however, you have not explained the background of those companies. Where have they ever constructed any successful Standard Gauge Railway? 

Another thing, you went to China and saw the speed trains, but the report does not explained to Members in detail how that will be achieved here; this report is only a brief. 

Mr Speaker, I would request that we regard this report as lacking and wanting. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Again, honourable members, the summary that is given by hon. Ssekitoleko was for information about some work that happened in the Ninth Parliament that was not saved by this House. 

However, it is the same subject matter, we asked him to give a summary of what happened when the select committee did that. The report we are debating was presented by hon. Sabiiti, who is the Chairman of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. That is the report we are using and there is no contradiction between the two reports because I have read both. Please, let us debate the report of the committee. 

The select committee report was in relation to procurement. The second report that is now presented by the committee is in relation to both procurement.

 The second report that is now presented by the committee is in relation to both procurement and the whole process up to what is going on now. 

MR MACHO: Mr Speaker, I do not know whether we are proceeding well on this very important matter in absence of any minister from that docket. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That matter was already raised.

2.47
MR ANHTONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Mr Speaker, when I read the report of the committee raising the concerns especially in the confusion that comes from the Government officials; they are aware that we have PPDA that guides our procurement, this puts our country in a wanting situation.
 
People who are given responsibility to make sure that the laws that are in place are put into action are not doing their work. 

Why should somebody try to bypass a process that is in place which is totally known to them? What punishment should be given to such people who try to bypass the real procedure to sign wrong memorandums in the process of procurement?

Mr Speaker, it has come to our attention that our counterparts in other countries have done their work while we are lagging behind. That means the process that should have gone smoothly is not taking place in the right manner. I, therefore, think that Parliament should make sure that people who delay our processes are punished. Thank you.

2.49
MR HILLARY LOKWANG (NRM, Ik County, Kaabong): Thank you Mr Speaker. A few weeks ago, I was watching and listening to a press conference in State House Nairobi where a spokesperson said that they had already dispatched a team of 25 students to Beijing to study a degree course on standard gauge railway.

I do not know whether our country is also in position to do the same so that we hire our own people as engineers and supervisors. Thank you.

2.51
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am raising concerns and observation on recommendation No.3, much as we are discussing the costs and the variations. 

At one time when we were here debating the construction of roads, we categorically stated that all roads and infrastructure network should incorporate places of convenience.

I would like to be assured that it will not affect the establishment of places of convenience along this highway because it is a necessity. As you travel on the Bombo-Arua Road, you get inconvenienced for lack of restrooms. 

Secondly, of recent, under the local content -(Interruption)

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you Mr Speaker, I would also like to thank the holder of the Floor for yielding. A train already has places of convenience and it does not make stop overs for people to ease themselves; hon. Bintu, I do not know what you are trying to say. (Laughter)

MS BINTU: Mr Speaker, I very well know that the railway lines have railway stations and they must have places of convenience; that is why I am raising this matter.

Mr Speaker, the second issue I would like to talk about concerns compliance with environmental impact. The variations might affect those other issues that are affecting our communities. 

As we discuss the cost in reduction of these other areas, I hope that we are not going to touch the component of planting trees along the railway lines. 

Lastly, most of the local companies which are contracted to upgrade roads have not taken keen interest in making sure that gender is incorporated into their plans. 

They recruit girls only to flag off the road construction and yet women have got the capacity to be in senior positions. As we discuss this report I hope that this time around, we shall have women engineers and administrators recruited in senior positions. This is my prayer as we discuss this report. Thank you, very much. 

2.54
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. However, there is an indication that there was some fraud during procurement, therefore, it should be revisited. 

Lastly, they only talked about costs in Ethiopia; that cost was $5 million. In Uganda it is $ 8.4 million but they never talked about costs in the whole region-(Interruption) 


MR KAFEERO: Thank you, honourable member for giving way. I would like to clarify on the issue of costs. In the report of the Committee on physical infrastructure, you will see the figure for US$ 8.4 per track kilometre.

There is a difference between track kilometres and route kilometres. When you compare Ethiopia with their track kilometres - the figure of 273 kilometres for Uganda in the table is in route kilometres.

If you want to compare length with length, the figure for track length for Uganda should be 338 so when you divide 2.3 by 338, it will be lower, almost like Kenya 6.8; but I am even aware that for Uganda, 2.3 should be Shs 2 billion based on the figures that the minister was supposed to present. However, the minister is not here. I thought I should give you that information, thank you. 

MR LUTTAMAGUZI: Thank you for the information and the jargons used. I pray that the whole project be revisited because it is full of fraud. Thank you. 

2.57
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This project is one of the things we have debated here many times and the issue of the amount of money uninvolved was also the reason there was a motion in the previous Parliament. From what I understand, until Government has presented a signed contract for us to be sure that we are speaking about something that has happened, it is going to be very difficult for us in Parliament to be able to discuss a project whose content has not been supplied.

Last time, a delegation of Government went to Tanzania because Tanzania has sourced funding for their Standard Gauge Railway from Europe. They think that is a cheaper option, yet Uganda, Rwanda and Kenya sourced their funding from China. We even seemed to have made commitments when the heads of states met in Kenya to discuss the Northern Corridor. 

At one stage it looked like a matter that had been closed, but when you have Government visiting Tanzania to make comparisons, probably Government now needs to make us understand whether they want to revisit that commitment which they made when the heads of states met in Kenya and now they want to take the Tanzanian route.

Most importantly, Mr Speaker, there seems to have been a shift because at the beginning, we were doing a pipeline thorough Kenya, but now we are doing it through Tanzania. My understanding – and until advised by Government – is that we are also developing an alternative route coming from Tanzania through Lake Victoria to the proposed Bukasa Port. 

I have been asking this question and I think the Government can help me and Parliament – does the volume of traffic/trade coming from Uganda and through Uganda to other countries warrant this country to have this route which is extremely expensive? Tanzania is going to construct a railway line from the sea to Lake Victoria and it is going to cost a lot of money. Do we still need another very expensive route from Kenya? What is the cost-benefit analysis that Government has done for us to support one option –(Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, the acting Leader of the Opposition, for giving way. Mr Speaker, it surprises me. I have visited some of the biggest ports in the world such as Hong Kong, Oostende, Vancouver and Liverpool, but when I look at this route which they are proposing to build in Bukasa and I look at the cargo that will come through Mwanza to Bukasa, where is this going? Where is the cargo volume? If we are talking of Standard Gauge Railway; that is the cheapest that we are going to build. Why should Government spend money and displace over 10,000 families who live in Bukasa that they are going to put up a port? Where is the cargo going –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose on information.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Yes, I am giving information. Really, there is no need for this port to be built in Bukasa because there is no cargo that will go through this port to these countries around this region.

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, Kenya is already having problems. The President of Kenya directed that 80 per cent of the cargo from Mombasa must be transported by railway for it to be viable. Mind you, this cargo is private. Companies are saying we procured trucks long ago and you cannot now give an order that starting this August we must start transporting cargo on the railway. Therefore, Government may need to reassess the cost.

I can understand the obsession of the Africans with Chinese money that comes without conditions. However, we need Government to come and give this Parliament an assurance that they have studied the volume of traffic and goods that come into Uganda. This is because we are going to spend nearly $7 billion, which is more than a quarter of this country’s GDP. If we commit that amount of money on construction of the Standard Gauge Railway and do not satisfy it with cargo from where it is coming from - part of the cargo is not yours. 

The last time I visited Rwanda, they were also talking about a route from Tanzania. You are now looking at the northern route. They may choose to transport their cargo through Tanzania. You do not want this to turn out to be a white elephant. 

Mr Speaker, if the decisions have not been made, then Government must come here and tell Parliament that they have studied this project closely and are satisfied with the outcomes. I can see obsession here, yet we also need the Standard Gauge Railway. It has now become the in-thing for all the African leaders, including those who are transporting nothing. If you look at our balance of trade, we are actually exporting nothing and that is why the President said we are a supermarket. 

Do you want to construct a railway line that is going to be bringing cargo from one direction and you export nothing. At the end of the day, you may regret the cost and that is what Government must come and explain to Parliament. There has been a delegation of this Government to Tanzania to discuss the alternative route from the sea to Lake Victoria and to Uganda. We are also at the same time pursuing the same project for which we made undertakings under the so-called coalition of the willing when we were in Nairobi. 

Can we at this stage be updated? Are you pursuing both projects? Are you pursuing one? Are you looking for funding only from China or you also want to look for funding from Europe like Tanzania has done? If so, at what stage do you want to inform the country on the progress of each of those options that are available? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. If the Government is going to say something, this would be the time. If not, I will ask the committee chairperson to wind up the debate and we conclude this matter.

3.04
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, I am sorry I came during the latter part of the discussion. I found my brother, Ssemujju, holding the Floor. However, in response to his comments, we are not talking of alternative routes, but additional routes. Uganda is a land-locked country and must as much as possible guarantee its access to the sea. It has been a long-standing Government policy to develop a route through Mombasa and Kenya as well as develop a route through Tanzania. 

This is both convenient and it also increases flexibility for Ugandan trade to expand. Therefore, it is not a question of alternative, but a question of additional opportunities and routes in order to help promote the business between Uganda and other countries.

3.06
THE CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Denis Sabiiti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable Members of Parliament, whether it is class one or class two, the Government has already signed the contract. This contract specifies the type of product or railway we are getting. The main factors that determine the types of class are maximum speed, annual tonnage and design life of the railway. All these ones will determine all the other small parameters that are used to design the railway. 

As Members of the committee, our point of contention as Members of the committee is that some of these parameters can be looked at and the contract is renegotiated. Therefore, if we allow this recommendation to pass, all those items will be taken care of. If the Government accepts to renegotiate the contract, all those elements will be taken care of –(Interjection)– the issues of class, among others, it is just an issue of semantics, but they are defined – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, let the chairperson wind up.

MR SABIITI: Regarding capacity building, most countries that have taken this project commence capacity building three years before construction. We are thinking of constructing when actually we have not made any minimum steps towards capacity building. This is quite important and this should have probably begun before the implementation of the project.

Members have talked about the costs and land. The costs which you have quoted from the contracts do not include land compensation. So, whether it is in Ethiopia where land is owned by Government or whether it is here, that issue does not actually affect the analysis. Regarding the length, we used the kilometres quoted in the contract but there are other distances which come about because of looping and the crossings and probably some extensions. 

However, even in Ethiopia, those extensions were not looked at; the loops were not looked at. We simply got a flat comparative figure to give us a picture on whether we are on the right track or not. It may not be definitive but definitely it gives us a direction or a picture on what decision to make - (Interjection) –  our total length is 273 kilometres from Malaba to Kampala, where Government has already signed a contract-  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a preliminary debate on this matter and we have had these discussions. Let the chairperson wind up so that we can go to Prime Minister’s question time and deal with other businesses.

MR SABIITI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the issue of policy and legal framework, I think in Uganda we have as of now not made a step in order to guide the right investment in the Standard Gauge Railway. I would like to plead with the Members of this House to applaud that recommendation on the policy and legal framework so that Government embarks on it such that the activities in the Standard Gauge Railway are streamlined.

Institution framework, particularly for the current Standard Gauge Railway, is also a bit of a problem. In most of the countries that we visited, you will find that the railway institution is the one spearheading the Standard Gauge Railway development. However, in Uganda, we set up a separate unit other than Uganda Railways Corporation to spearhead the Standard Gauge Railway. We are pleading that Government revisits that and mandates Uganda Railway Corporation to spearhead the Standard Gauge Railway because that is the normal practice and that is also where most of the expertise are.

Mr Speaker, the local content is quite serious because we are looking at empowering industries that are engaged in cement and   production of steel to produce them at a reasonable cost yet we have already signed the contract at a certain specified price which did not take the local content into account.  We, therefore, think that if we revisit this contract, a clause to cater for local content can be brought into the contract.

Mr Speaker, other issues that were raised in the report are issues to empower Uganda National Bureau of Standards and material laboratories for Ministry of Works and Transport to be capable to test the materials so that we do not depend on the contractor declaring that this material is not fit for our construction.

Mr Speaker, I am still pleading with you that the report be adopted as it is, renegotiations take place -(Interjection)-  I think I have summarised all the issues in the report. I beg to submit.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When the chairperson presented last time, the issues he raised now seem to be quite different. He was very emphatic last time and he was very concerned that the figures were not correct and that the contract was not good. Now, he is asking Members to adopt the report when last time he raised a number of issues. Is he in order, Mr Speaker, to convince the Members to adopt the report when he raised very important issues last time?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thought that was the essence of concluding this matter. The chairperson both then and even now, has stated the same concerns and his recommendations are that if these contracts are renegotiated, all these issues would be handled. That is what he is asking for and it is really natural for a chairperson to ask for Members to adopt his report. How would you put a Member on a point of order when he is concurring with his report? Can I put the question to this report? 

Honourable members, I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the Standard Gauge Railway and Light Railway Transit be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation of 54 students and two teachers from Katikamu Secondary School. They are represented by hon. Lillian Nakate and hon. Edward Ssembatya, Member of Parliament for Katikamu County South. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. (Applause)

We also have a delegation of women who formally practiced female genital mutilation. They are represented by hon. Eveline Chemutai, District Woman Representative of Bukwo District. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. Honourable members, it is now Prime Minister’s Question Time  

3.16
MR FRED BASEKE (NRM, Ntenjero South, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Uganda communication Commission in February 2017, banned operations of outdoor community broadcasters, locally known as “Ebizindaalo”. Given the role played by these community radios in rural areas, especially in mobilising communities for Government programmes, education and informing communities, I would like to know why they were banned and when the ban will be lifted. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the only idea that I can straight away come to is that there has been a lot of noise pollution. The “wanainchi” get disturbed by various sources of information, especially at awkward hours especially at night. I will need to cross-check to see if this was then very reason. I will, therefore, take up the matter and then I will be very definitively informed, on why the decision was taken and the rationale behind it. 

3.18
MR CHARLES ILUKOR (NRM, Kumi County, Kumi): Hon. Prime Minister, for the last two weeks, the newspapers have been reporting about two economic hit-men in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, who were nabbed soliciting a hefty bribe from an investor but no statement has been made to this country about that. We are struggling to enter the middle income status and yet we have such people in various ministries, discouraging investors from coming to this country.

Mr Prime Minister, can you tell us what is going on? Is it true that two people were nabbed receiving a bribe and if so, are you in charge, anyway? Thank you. (Laughter)

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is true that a couple of officers under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development are being investigated by the police for extorting bribe. 

Secondly, that is clear evidence that indeed Government is in charge. (Laughter)

3.19
MR HERBERT KINOBERE (Independent, Kibuku County, Kibuku): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Prime Minister, let me just give you a background –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just state the question.

MR KINOBERE: In 2015, Government delivered hospital beds to over 44 health centre IVs, including Kibuku that I represent. Recently, I was going through the records and I wondered why the patients in Kibuku are sleeping on the floor. When I consulted the DHO, I was told that on the 5 August 2015, the Minister of Health issued instructions to withdraw all those beds because of the poor quality.

To date, I wonder whether the money is still with the Ministry of Health and they are procuring the new beds or if the money is still with the contractors. I need clarification on where the money is and if it is not there, is there a possibility of getting back the new poor quality beds? I prefer that they bring back the poor quality beds other than the patients sleeping on the floor. That is my concern, Mr Prime minister.  

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is clear from the question that Government has good intentions of ensuring that health centres provided with quality beds, but it appears that there was problem with the quality of beds and the Ministry of Health and Government have taken measures. I will ask the Minister for Health to come and update this august House on steps being taken to take the corrective measures.

3.21
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In June 2007, the President directed that the former buildings of the African Trade Development Fund be given to Uganda National Chamber of Commerce and Industries, especially the local chapter.

In Lira, there are two such buildings that were given to the local chapter. The President further directed that the Privitisation Unit of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, should ensure that those buildings are not sold and those that are already sold, corrective measures should be taken. 

Recently, Plot 85 Oyam Road in Lira that belongs to the traders was sold off. I would like to know from you, hon. Prime Minister, what corrective measures you shall take to ensure that the buildings are given back to the Uganda National Chamber of Commerce, especially the Lira local chapter? 

I am also informed that this is happening elsewhere in the country. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I am aware that in different parts of the country, the Chamber was given these buildings and His Excellency sent out a Presidential directive stopping the sale of these buildings. If action has been taken to sell these building contrary to Government policy, Government will take appropriate measures to correct the situation. We will find out and if anything wrong has been done, it will be corrected.

3.23
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi West, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Prime Minister, on the 23 January 2017, wrote to the Minister of Energy and Minerals, hon. Irene Muloni, about the cost of variation for electricity connection to the national grid. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to remind the Prime Minister that he promised this House that the concerned minister was to bring a report to this Parliament. We have been promised many other reports to be brought here on the Floor of Parliament in vain.  Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in the case of such ministers who do not do as you have directed, what happens?

It is a cost to the country and – you can imagine, a lot of money is being asked from the people and yet the responsible ministries and ministers are silent. Is it not a means of frustrating Government projects? What is your view on this matter? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, hon. Kaberuka is right. He raised this matter in this House and the Minister for Energy has actually submitted a report to my office, explaining the rates in the different parts of the country and I have asked her to come and make a statement in the House. She will be making a statement in this House within next week, so that honourable members can be informed and in turn, they will be able to explain it to the “wanainchi.” However, there is a clear policy, a statement is in place and the minister is coming to this House.

3.25
MR ANTHONY SSEMULI (NRM, Mubende Municipality, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, recently, Uganda experienced a long dry spell. As we talk, there is an outcry from the farmers. There is a worm called the army worm that has attacked most of the maize plantations.

I would like to know what intervention has the Government got within this short period of time. We may find ourselves in a certain situation which we have been in, where the production of cereals is going to be poor again. Farmers are, therefore, calling upon Government for intervention. What kind of intervention does the Government have?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, this is a very legitimate point that has been raised. It is true, the country has been attacked by this army worm and I must say that my garden of maize has been almost wiped out. 

However, what I know is that Government, through the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has procured some drugs though not enough but Government has also availed Shs 2.5 billion for disbursement to help supplement what is available on the market. 

The problem that I see is that this worm appears to be illusive and partially resistant to some of the common pesticides. However, National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO), Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, the Office the Prime Minister and other Government agencies have formed a team to thoroughly follow up this menace and see how best they can assist the farmers to save their maize crop.

3.27
MS LILLY ADONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the early 1990s, Government took a decision to liberalise the economy and subsequently, most of the public enterprises like Uganda Railways Corporation, Uganda Electricity Board, et cetera, were privatised in the interest of improving services. However, we seem to have gotten a raw deal with some of those enterprises, given the level of poor services we still have. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, would you like to tell this Parliament if Government is about to revisit or re-think the liberalisation policy?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the liberalisation policy was right in principle, and it indeed helped the economy to grow. However, it is also true that there have been some challenges because Government has been establishing parastatals. 

We think that this is a line that needs to be revisited so that we can give more support to the liberalisation policy and to Government to focus on strategic investments where ordinary citizens may not be able to have the requisite investment capital, which is critical for the growth of the economy. Therefore, Government is closely monitoring the implementation and workings of this liberalisation policy.

3.29
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, PWD Representative, Central): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mine is a simple but also very serious question. Once upon a time, during the days of the Ninth Parliament, we had a minister responsible for disability and elderly affairs. We, elderly persons and people with disabilities, accomplished a lot through this minister.

Unfortunately, since the commencement of the current Parliament, we do not have a minister responsible for disability and elderly affairs. This means we have missed out on many opportunities. Why have we been completely forgotten? I would like the Prime Minister to inform Parliament and this country that this Government is no longer committed to the cause of the people with disabilities and elderly persons. 

I would like the Prime Minister to inform this Parliament why you failed to appoint a minister for disability and the elderly when you appointed the ministers. I can hear my colleague say that this question is for someone who is not in this august House. However, Mr Speaker, the link between that someone and this Parliament is the work of the Prime Minister. 

Therefore, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, kindly answer this question and tell the people of this country with disabilities and the elderly, because they are eager to know, why you have failed to appoint a minister for people with disabilities and the elderly and when you will appoint the minister. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, there is no doubt about the commitment of the Movement Government to the cause of people with disabilities.

Secondly, there has been a lot of progress, especially in terms of constitutional and legislative measures, to ensure that the rights of the people with disabilities are indeed respected and entrenched. In his organisation of government, definitely His Excellency the President may create departments and ministries and when he sees it expedient and necessary, I am sure he will put into consideration the request that has been raised by the honourable member.

3.32
MS ROSEMARY TUSIIME (NRM, Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in 2014/2015, the Government registered Ugandans for national identity cards. The national identity cards were received by some people but some people have not received theirs to date. Those who did not receive their identity cards were requested to get them from the district, which is very inconvenient for them.

Today you need a national identity card for every transaction that you carry out and it is the right of every Ugandan to have a national identity card. Can’t Government provide another period for people to be able to get their national identity cards? Also, can Government take those identity cards to the subcounties because it is convenient for the people of this country? I thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the issuance of national identity cards is really a continuous process. Secondly, there may be problems in taking them deep into the countryside like parishes and the like because of the costs.

However, there is a programme on issuing cards, which I know is going on. We could request the honourable Minister of Internal Affairs, who is in the vicinity, to brief this august House at an appropriate time on the progress and the success of the national identity card project. This has been one of the most important achievements that the country has made - knowing that our citizens have their own identity cards.

3.34
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, can you explain to the citizens of Uganda whether it is lawful for Government to stop or criminalise anybody or organisation that may decide to provide relief like food, clothes, water, and drugs to poverty affected communities like it happened this morning in Katakwi?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I will need to be informed by my brother about what has happened in Katakwi. Suffice it to say that the principles are very clear; if you are to give out relief, do it in accordance with the laws of the land. If you do so, there will be no problem. If there is a problem, it will be handled by Government.

3.36
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to know from the Prime Minister why Government has failed to capitalise Uganda Development Bank (UDB). I attribute the misbehaviour of the economy mainly to that problem. If Government had capitalised UDB, maybe the business sector would behave properly. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the capitalisation of UDB is a national requirement. This Government is, therefore, going to make sure that in the coming budget, there will be money to capitalise UDB and on an incremental basis, more and more money will be put in the people’s bank. 

3.37
MS CHRISTINE ACHEN (NRM, Woman Representative, Alebtong): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we are all aware that the resettlement of the Karimojong in Lango subregion has cost us a lot, especially in Alebtong and Otuke districts. Is there a way that the Government can help the people of Alebtong and Otuke, because our people are now running short of food and our cows have even been stolen by these friends of ours?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I believe that friends should be able to meet and ensure that the problems that are between the two communities are amicably sorted out.

However, I must tell you that under the chairmanship of hon. Byabagambi, the Minister for Karamoja Affairs, there have been discussions among the leaders from Karamoja and from Lango region. It is true that not everything may have been fulfilled, but Government will endeavour to ensure that there is peace and stability in the region. 

I also think that with the rains beginning to come, our friends from Karamoja may begin to go back to their respective places. That will help in sorting out part of the problem.

3.39
MS HOPE MUKISA (NRM, Woman Representative, Namayingo): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. We are all aware that the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE) recovered money for compensation of the people who were affected along the Namayingo-Musita-Majanji Highway. However, as I speak, these people have not yet been compensated. They are asking us questions as leaders but we do not have answers to give them. 

Mr Speaker, I would like the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to explain to these people what is causing delays in their compensation and when they will be compensated. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is true that there are a number of payments for compensation that should be made by Government which are delayed because of resource constraints. Government is doing whatever is possible to mobilise resources so that those obligations can be met. 

3.40
MS OLIVER KATWESIGYE (NRM, Woman Representative, Buhweju): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in 2007 Uganda introduced legislation banning the use of lightweight polythene commonly known as kaveera. However, up to today, Uganda has failed to enforce the law. What do you have to say about that?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I am fully aware that kaveera of the thickness of 50 microns and below were banned and I know that the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) has been rigorously enforcing this. If there are failures, then NEMA will be called to order so that they quickly implement their mandate. However, as far as Government is concerned, there is unanimity on banning of kaveera that is 50 microns and below in thickness. 

3.42
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in 2014 Cabinet resolved, and this was under Minute 114(CT2014), to cancel all land titles issued in wetlands and decided to take a decision to restore all the wetlands that were affected. We would like to know the status of the cancellation and restoration of the wetlands. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the honourable member is absolutely right; Government took that decision and implementation is going on. In the course of the implementation, however, certain logistical and other issues have come up and the Government committee that is handling this with NEMA are reviewing these issues. However, there is no equivocation on the question of cancelling the titles that are in wetlands.

3.43
MS ALUM SANTA (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Can the Prime Minister tell this House when Government is going to provide drugs for diabetic and hypertensive patients in all hospitals in Uganda? The number of patients is increasing and in some hospitals, the patients are told that the drugs are over and this has gone on for some time. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Government endeavours to supply drugs to patients but it is true that sometimes there may be shortage in supply of drugs. Nevertheless, Government will endeavour to continue doing whatever it can to ensure that health centres, hospitals and other facilities are adequately provided with essential drugs.

3.44
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In 2011 and 2016 respectively, His Excellency Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni promised the people of Maliba Subcounty and Kyabarungira Subcounty respectively, that Government would take over their community school - Maliba Secondary School and Kibanzanga High School - as Government aided schools. 

The Prime Minister has deliberately defied the promise that was made by the President. I would like the Prime Minister to explain why he has defied the President and yet he is the commander-in-chief. (Laughter)

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I must thank hon. Nzoghu for his enthusiasm to see presidential directives implemented. This is very welcome indeed and please continue.

Secondly, it is true that the presidential directive on taking over community schools so that they are supported to become Government-aided schools is a phased process. Therefore, the time for Maliba and a few other areas in Kasese will come soon.

3.46
MS FLORENCE WAMALA (NRM, Woman Representative, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, most existing Government schools, especially those located upcountry, are characterised by inadequate teaching staff, meagre school infrastructure such as libraries, laboratories, kitchens, sickbays, restrooms and others. As a consequence, pupils and students are subject to non-conducive learning environments, disadvantaging them from performing better in comparison to their counterparts in the urban centres. 

The construction of new schools without ensuring functionality of existing Government schools in terms of infrastructure, equipment and staff would be counterproductive. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, how will Government ensure enhanced quality of education through construction of new schools without ensuring full functionality of the already existing Government schools? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, our sister has raised an important point. It is true that there has been a lot of focus by all of us on access to education. It is also true that that access to education in some areas has not been accompanied by quality, and that is why now Government is focusing on improving quality of education. 

Definitely, the schools in rural areas will be beneficiaries because we know that is where the problem is. Schools in urban areas tend to have more support from parents and other groups. I agree that schools in rural areas need more energised support by all of us in Government.

3.49
MR GIDEON ONYANGO (Independent, Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the east, in particular Busia and Tororo, there is a breed of cassava that is costing many people their lives. I would like to know whether Government is doing something about it because scores of people are have lost their lives as a result of this cassava. It is actually poisonous cassava.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I am aware about what the honourable member is talking about. It is clear that it is causing problems and if it is toxic, it should be dealt with. However, we need the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to give us a little more expert advice on how the wanainchi should go about it. In a way, as Government, through the ministry, we are going to aggressively follow up the matter so that it can be corrected. 

3.51
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the last few weeks, we have been reading in the newspapers that there are peace talks going to take place between the Government of Uganda and Dr Kiiza Besigye and are being negotiated by Sweden. I would like the Prime Minister to inform the House whether this process is ongoing or not.

DR RUGUNDA: I am aware that for quite some time, a number of groups have been talking to Government and the Opposition about issues of dialogue. To the best of my knowledge, nothing concrete or specific has emerged out of that. 

Suffice it to say that it is an open policy of Government to talk to Ugandans and non-Ugandans, especially when it can help the country to promote peace and stability and consolidate development.

3.51
MR REAGAN OKUMU (Independent, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is an advert running on radio and television stations urging Ugandans to take their vehicles to Kawanda for inspection.  However, I found this extremely odd. I wonder how people in Kisoro, Koboko, Kaabong and all those areas at the extreme ends of the country, who may not even afford to fuel their vehicles to full tank, will have the opportunity to drive all the way to Kawanda to inspect their vehicles at a cost and drive back to their homes. How feasible is this?

I find it wanting, Mr Prime Minister, that Ugandans should be subjected to that kind of situation where there is only one centre located in the centre of Uganda to inspect vehicles and the deadline is June. I would like to find out whether Government – because it is a Government programme arranged by the Ministry of Works and Transport - has a schedule to roll out this inspection to the countryside so as to allow our people there have their vehicles inspected in their respective areas. Remember that some of those vehicles do not even come to Kampala.

Secondly, if these citizens take their vehicles for inspection at a fee and they are asked to take their vehicles for repair before returning them for a second inspection, they should not be asked to pay a second fee because they would have already paid the fees.

May you inform the country and alert our people not to panic, and tell them that the Kawanda deadline of June will not affect them because Government will roll out this programme in the countryside. I thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the inspection centres will be countrywide and this will be done to ensure that the wanainchi are not inconvenienced. There will not be one centre but many centres countrywide to make the whole process people-friendly.

3.54
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

Mr Prime Minister, this Government has set a target of achieving a middle-level income status by 2020. Considering the current performance of the economy in areas like agriculture, land and water which are not doing well, trade balances are unfavourable, tax collection is not performing well, are we on course in attaining a middle income status by 2020? If we are not, what is the new target period that Government has set?  

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the honourable member has raised issues that are challenging the route to reaching a middle-income status by 2020. Nevertheless, that is still the target and we are endeavouring to overcome the challenges and meet the target. (Laughter)

3.56
MS SUSAN AMERO (NRM, Woman Representative, Amuria): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask the Prime Minister why this Government is engaging itself in so many regional projects and yet we are not able to keep up with the time factor like the other states. A point in question here is the Kenya-Malaba-Uganda Bridge which is breaking down and yet it carries heavy traffic. What is Government doing as it spreads wide but thin?

DR RUGUNDA: The point is well taken. We would like to cover as many critical infrastructural projects as possible but definitely, without compromising the quality that we are delivering. Therefore, the point is noted and we will endeavour to ensure that what we do is of quality and meets the expectations of the wanainchi. 

3.57
MR ROBERT CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, tourism continues to be the leading foreign exchange earner for the Ugandan economy. Its contribution to the GDP increased to Shs 7.3 trillion in 2015 from Shs 6.3 trillion in 2014, representing a 14 per cent growth. In Berlin, I saw a small country like Botswana marketing itself properly. 

Tourism is the second priority development area in the National Development Plan. However, its budget as per the National Budget Framework Paper of 2017/18 has dropped by Shs 2 billion, from Shs 186.17 billion in financial year 2016/2017 to Shs 184.137 billion, which is a 0.4 per cent share of the national budget. Is this move in line with strengthening Uganda’s competitiveness for sustainable wealth creation, employment and inclusive growth?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I agree with the honourable member that tourism is a very important sector with a substantial number of low hanging fruits for us to harvest. 

Secondly, investment in tourism sometimes comes indirectly in many ways. Investment in infrastructure, which is heavy investment that we are putting in, is in effect investment in tourism. Therefore, while the point is well taken, it is true that investment in other sectors is helping to bolster and promote tourism.

3.59
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Mr Speaker, I would like the Prime Minister to tell Ugandans who are in the business sector whether there is a crisis within the operations of Uganda Revenue Authority? At the moment, many containers and cargo of people are piled at the Busia border and at the internal container depot in Jinja because of the new system that has been put in place called the data processing centre. 

As a result, cargo is sitting for more than 30 days, making the business community pay a lot of money for demurrage and yet most of these people have borrowed this money from banks with a lot of interest. There is a lot of outcry in the business community and among clearing agents. This has negatively affected the quick delivery of goods to the market. I, therefore, would like to know from the Prime Minister whether there is a crisis in Uganda Revenue Authority.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, to the best of my knowledge, there is no crisis at all. However, if the information by the honourable member is as he has reported, we will straight away take it up with Uganda Revenue Authority so that necessary corrective measures are taken. We cannot afford the luxury of obstructing the flow of cargo because that is really obstructing income for the country.

4.01
MR ERIC MUSANA (NRM, Buyaga County East, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, at the beginning of this financial year, His Excellency the President launched a programme of Buy Uganda Build Uganda (BUBU) as a way of enhancing the economy. I would like to know how far this strategy has gone.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, as colleagues know, Uganda has a trading imbalance because we are importing so much and exporting less. The policy of BUBU will help to promote local content, manufacturing and production. The policy has so far generated enthusiasm and support and we believe it will contribute positively to Uganda’s economy.

4.02
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Mr Speaker, I would like to know from the Prime Minister what the Government has in store in regard to the programme of helping the senior citizens of this country under the social protection programme. This programme was started almost seven years ago and piloted in 20 districts. However, up to now, the programme has not been rolled out to other districts. 

Even in the districts where the programme has been rolled out, not all senior citizens are benefiting from this important programme. Furthermore, for those who are benefiting from the programme, small as the amount is, it is being taxed. May I know from the Prime Minister when the Government of Uganda intends to serve all the senior citizens of this country using the social protection programme?

Mr Speaker, Ugandans have anxiously waited to have their local leaders elected - the LCIs. The Electoral Commission complained about the lack of an enabling law, which this Parliament expeditiously handled. Government informed us that elections were to be held before March. However, we are reading from newspapers, and we would not like to speculate, that the Minister of Finance was quoted as having said that the money that was meant for elections was used to buy food for Ugandans. May I find out from the Prime Minister when the Government intends to carry out these elections so that we can have legitimate leaders at all levels?

Mr Speaker, there have been contradictions with accreditation, registration and recognition of the nurses’ bachelor’s degree over the years. This issue remains unresolved to date. The National Council for Higher Education and the Nurses and Midwifery Council are all at the centre of this controversy. This has disadvantaged many nurses and yet this course is still being offered at the universities. 

May we know from the Prime Minister what the Government’s plan is in regard to this course, which is offered at both our public and private universities? May we further be told whether Government does not recognise it, or they whether want our people to pursue the course? It is being offered at our universities; so what is the fate of the Ugandans who have lost their money or taken it upon themselves to acquire such a degree?

Almost related to this, Mr Speaker, is the issue of governance and leadership challenges that face many of our universities. There have been several calls for policy intervention to help streamline operations of the university sector holistically as opposed to the ad hoc interventions in specific instances, maybe like when there is a strike by both the students and lecturers. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, will you inform the House whether Government has come up with any policy proposals to address the governance and administrative challenges that have faced universities in Uganda?

Finally, Mr Speaker, since the death of AIGP Felix Kaweesi on 17th March, and even during the attacks of Kasese, many people may also know that even in the countryside, many people have been arrested and kept in prisons beyond the 48-hour provision of our Constitution. May I find out from the Prime Minister whether Government has taken a defiant approach to do away with the constitutional provision of 48 hours? Are you in defiance, hon. Prime Minister, of the laws of the land? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I think the procedure that you are adopting, Leader of the Opposition, was not anticipated because this makes us to go beyond the timeframe of the rules. The rules say, “The Leader of the Opposition shall have a right to comment or reply on the issues that have been discussed.” However, you are now bringing in new questions, which are extending the time. I think we need to regulate this properly so that we can proceed in accordance with the rules.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, with regard to the Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment (SAGE), we support SAGE but it is true that the counterpart funding required so that the programme can roll out to other districts has not been available. That is the only reason why we have not rolled it out. However, it is a programme that Government fully supports.

Secondly, on the question of elections, yes, we have talked about it and we want elections, but it is true that elections have been delayed contrary to what we had anticipated in Government. There are plans to definitely have elections and these elections will definitely take place this year. However, let me not go to specific calendar days because I do not have adequate authority on the basis of which to say such a thing, because there are still consultations going on over this matter to mobilise adequate resources in order to deliver a good local council election.

Thirdly, on the question of the nurses’ course, it is true that there has been a bit of inadequate coordination in some universities with regard to some courses. The National Council for Higher Education and the ministries concerned, especially the ministries of health and education, are putting their houses in order to make sure that the courses people take are properly authorised. 

The leadership challenges of universities: Yes, there have been some challenges but a new revised law to handle the universities will be able to sort that out.

Finally, has Government been recruited into defiance? Obviously not, and let me take this opportunity to say that anybody who may be lending some support to a defiance policy is acting contrary to the law and they should follow the law.

On the question of constitutional limits for people being brought to face the law, there is no intention at all to defy the Constitution. The Minister of Internal Affairs or the Attorney-General will be able to make a statement on that matter at an appropriate time. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for this time. 

Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation of the Dream Achievers Association. They are represented by hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju of Kira Municipality and hon. Rosemary Seninde, Woman Member of Parliament for Wakiso. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. (Applause)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ANTI-TERRORISM (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017

4.12
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. (Rtd) Jeje Odongo): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Anti-Terrorism (Amendment) Bill, 2017” be read the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for the second reading of the Bill entitled, “The Anti-Terrorism (Amendment) Bill, 2017.” I put the question – I was now going to rush this process, but is there secondment to this motion? Is the motion seconded? Yes, it is seconded by the honourable members for Ibanda, Ngora District, Kumi Municipality, Kumi County and Kibuku District. Would you like to speak to your motion?

GEN. (RTD) ODONGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This Bill is occasioned by what I would like to refer to as a paradigm shift in the perpetration of terrorism. The paradigm shift is identifiable in three significant areas:
1. 	In the perpetration of terrorism and in the Islam fraternity, women have been held in a very high esteem. As a result, we have not quite seen women as participants in terrorism. However, of recent, women have become part and parcel of terrorism, particularly if you notice what is happening in Nigeria with Boko Haram. So this is a new development in the perpetration of terrorism.

2. 	Terrorism, for quite some time, has been perpetrated by groups and when they act, often they make demands. There has now been a shift where it is no longer entirely groups that perpetrate terrorism; individuals do perpetrate terrorism, and when they do, after they act there are no demands thereafter. 

Now, these changes have required the United Nations to take cognisance of this and they have issued recommendations on how to handle these changes. Uganda, therefore, in compliance with these recommendations, is moving this amendment Bill first, to be able to define terrorism and to deal with terrorism financing; two, to put in place measures to strengthen and improve the counterterrorism legislative framework for Uganda to enable us, as I mentioned earlier, comply with the international obligations for Uganda.

In this respect, therefore, the Bill is intended to define terrorism and to define acts of terrorism, which will include revised aspects envisaged by the United Nations Convention against terrorism and for related purposes.

Secondly, the Bill is intended to amend what we already have in the Anti-Terrorism Act, 2002 in order to be able to put in place a suite of measures, which are specifically designed to strengthen and improve our terrorism legislative framework in order to enable us comply with our international obligations. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, when this Bill was presented to this House for the first time, it was sent to a committee. The motion has now been moved, so I ask the Chairperson of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to report. 

4.17
COL FELIX KULAYIGYE (UPDF Representative): Mr Speaker, I am standing in for the chairperson of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. This is a report of the sectoral Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the Anti-Terrorism (Amendment) Bill, 2017. 

Introduction

Mr Speaker, the Anti-Terrorism (Amendment) Bill, 2017 was read for the first time in this House on Thursday, 2 February 2017 by the Minister of Internal Affairs. It was referred to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, as you have rightly said, in accordance with rules 117 and 118 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda and Article 90 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995. 

Rule 208 requires me to bring the minutes of the proceedings of the committee together with the report of the committee. Since I intend to rely on these documents, I pray that I be allowed to lay them on the Table after the presentation of the report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed. 

COL KULAYIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you also relying on the minutes? Proceed, chairperson. 

COL KULAYIGYE: The anti-terrorism law has thus far been amended twice - in 2015 and 2016. This amendment, if approved by the House, will be the third. The 2015 amendment was aimed at harmonising the definition of “funds” with that contained in the International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism, 1999; and to amend the definition of “terrorism” and “acts of terrorism” to include the international aspects envisaged by the convention. 

The 2016 amendment sought to further amend the definitions of “terrorism” and “acts of terrorism” to include the revised international aspects envisaged by the United Nations Convention against terrorism. This current Bill, Mr Speaker, which constitutes the third time of amendment, seeks to amend the Anti-Terrorism Act, 2002 to include the revised international aspects envisaged by the International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism and other related purposes. 

Mr Speaker, Uganda has since October 2013 been under the targeted review process of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) International Cooperation Review Group (ICRG), which is mandated to examine the most significant of Uganda’s anti-money laundering and counter-terrorism financing deficiencies that pose a risk to the international financing system, and to identify actions to be taken to address those deficiencies. 

Object of the Bill

The objects of the Bill are:
1. 	To provide an interpretation and reference to the term “suspected terrorist”.

2. 	To criminalise the act referenced in the annex to the Terrorism Financing Convention, 1999, regardless of the perpetrator’s specific intent, by expanding the scope of the term “terrorism” to include, “any act which constitutes an offence within the scope of and as defined in the annex to the Terrorism Financing Convention”.

3. 	To further amend the definitions of “terrorism” and “acts of terrorism” to include the revised international aspects envisaged by the United Nations Convention against terrorism. 

4. 	To further amend the anti-terrorism law to provide for the revised suite of measures, which are specifically designed to strengthen and improve Uganda’s counter-terrorism legislative framework to comply with Uganda’s international obligations and respond to terrorism threats.    

Methodology

The committee undertook to as much as possible proceed in a manner, which gave an opportunity to various stakeholders interested in this legislation to have an input in the process of consideration of the Bill. More specifically, the committee interacted with and received memoranda from –

    a) The Ministry of Internal Affairs;
    b) Bank of Uganda;
    c) The Uganda Police Force;
    d) The Financial Intelligence Authority.

The committee also studied and analysed- 

a) 	The Anti-Terrorism Act of 2002;
b) 	The Mutual Evaluation Report of the Republic of Uganda on Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing Measures, 2016 by the Eastern and Southern Africa Anti-Money Laundering Group; 
c) 	The United Kingdom Anti-Terrorism Act; 
d) 	The International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism, 1999;
e) 	The UN Security Council resolutions 1267/1373;
f) 	The UN Security Council resolution 2178.

Issues Raised By the Stakeholders

All stakeholders that the committee interacted with supported the enactment of the Bill into law. They all appreciated the urgency of the need to comply with the FATF recommendations in order to facilitate the country in its efforts geared towards being moved from the grey list of the FATF compliance document.  

That notwithstanding, in the process of interaction with the Uganda Police Force, they argued that the amendments proposed to section 7 of the principal Act in clause 2 of the Bill as (1) (a) (b) is already catered for in the section 7 (z) of the Anti-Terrorism Act. They interpreted it to be a redundant proposal and as a consequence, recommended its deletion. 

However, other stakeholders, namely Bank of Uganda and the Financial Intelligence Authority, argued that the proposal put forward in clause 2 of the Bill as (1) (a) (b) is targeting a person who commits an act of terrorism for other purposes other than for the purposes contained in section 7 (2) of the Anti-Terrorism Act; that is to say, a person who commits an act of terrorism for purposes other than influencing the Government or intimidating the public or a section of the public for a political, religious, social or economic aim. This proposal intends to expand on the intention or mens rea required to prove the offence of terrorism. 

The committee, in this regard, analysed both assertions and was persuaded by the argument made by both Bank of Uganda and the Financial Intelligence Authority in support of the provision.

Analysis of the Bill

The amendment proposed to section 2 of the principal Act in clause 1 of the Bill seeks to introduce the definition of “suspected terrorists” in the principal Act. In this regard, the committee notes that the power to designate a person as a suspected terrorist rests in the hands of the minister responsible for internal affairs by virtue of regulation 7 of the Anti-Terrorism Regulations, 2016. These regulations were made pursuant to section 32A of the Anti-Terrorism Act, 2002 for the better carrying out of the purposes and provisions of the Act. It is, therefore, important that the concept of “suspected terrorist” is embedded in the principal Act. 

The amendment proposed to section 7 of the principal Act in clause 2 of the Bill as (1) (a) seeks to introduce an element of terrorist activity being perpetrated within or outside Uganda in response to the global nature of terrorism. In this regard, the committee notes that the United Nations Security Council regularly supplements the International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism through protocols, agreements and treaties mainly hosted in the annex to the convention. 

The committee, therefore, supports this proposal on the strong basis that the UN Security Council resolutions 1373 of 2000 and 2178 of 2014 respectively, call on individual states to prevent and suppress the financing of terrorism and disrupt any financing of activities linked to foreign terrorist fighters and foreign terrorist fighters’ travel.

The amendment proposed in clause 3 of the Bill as (1) (a) seeks to curb collection of funds and ultimately financing of a suspected terrorist or terrorist organisation, collecting and providing funds to facilitate a person to travel outside Uganda for terrorism related activities, or ultimately carrying out terrorist acts. In this regard, the committee notes that the provision as it currently stands only covers an individual terrorist and terrorist organisations and does not cover a suspected terrorist.

The committee further takes cognisance of the fact that terrorist financing may involve funds raised from legitimate sources such as personal donations and profits from businesses and charitable organisations, as well as from criminal sources such as drug dealing, smuggling of arms and other goods, fraud, kidnapping and extortion.

Mr Speaker, in support of this proposal, the committee notes that terrorists use technics like those of money launderers to evade authorities’ attention and to protect the identity of their sponsors and the ultimate beneficiaries of the fund. 

The committee also notes that the proposed subsection (1) introduces the element of a person being in the knowledge that such funds are to be used for terrorist related activities. It is, therefore, important to criminalise the activities of the benefactors of a suspected terrorist or terrorist organisation because without money, terrorists cannot operate, recruit or purchase weapons, equipment, supplies or services. On those premises, the committee finds any proposal such as this, which is aimed at criminalising any form of financing, highly desirable.

General Observations

1. On 30 January 2014, Uganda made a high-level commitment to work with the FATF and the ESAAMLG to address the strategic AML/CFT deficiencies by December 2014. Unfortunately, this timeline was never met.

2. 	Uganda’s AML/CFT regime is relatively young. The AMLA was only enacted in 2013 while the amendments to the Anti-Terrorism Act to criminalise the offence of terrorist financing among other things, was enacted in June 2015. Regulations to implement some of the provisions of the amended law such as the UN Security Council resolutions 1267/1373 are not yet in place. 


3. 	The last mutual evaluation report relating to the implementation of anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist financing standards in Uganda was undertaken by the Financial Action Task Force in 2016.

	According to that evaluation, Uganda was deemed compliant for four FATF recommendations, largely compliant for one, partially compliant for 14 and non-compliant for 21 of the 40 FATF recommendations.

4. 	The UN Security Council resolutions 1267/1373 and 2178 are all aimed at choking the funding of terrorist activities and groups at a global level, most especially by requiring all countries to criminalise the financing and travel of individuals who travel to a state other than their state of residence or nationality for the purpose of perpetrating, planning, or preparing of, or participating in, terrorist acts or the providing or receiving of terrorist training. 


5. 	In light of observations 1, 2 and 3 above, it is disheartening that the Ministry of Internal Affairs continues to bring piecemeal amendments to the Anti-Terrorism Act instead of a wholesome or comprehensive law that will address all the 40 recommendations. As earlier noted, this is the third amendment in three years.
 
Mr Speaker, for over three years, the Ministry of Internal Affairs has held this House at ransom and indeed, threatened that sanctions stand to be visited on this nation for non-compliance but has done little to comply. 

General Recommendation 

As a committee, we decry this conduct by the relevant stakeholders and, therefore, urge this House to unanimously resolve not to accept any piecemeal amendments after this one, unless and until a comprehensive amendment is brought to address all the 40 recommendations and other gaps in the current Anti-Terrorism Act. 

In conclusion, as a committee we have been assured that by passing this Bill, Uganda will be majorly compliant with the strategic FATF recommendations, the International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism, 1999, and the United Nations Regime on the Suppression of Terrorist Financing. As such, the committee begs that you support this report and its recommendations so that they are passed into law. I beg to move. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I will now propose the motion for your debate. The motion is that the Anti-Terrorism Bill, 2017 be read the second time. This motion debates the principle of this Bill and not its details. If the principle is okay, we go and deal with the amendments. If not, we debate and take a decision whether it should pass this stage or not. Debate starts now. 

4.33
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee and the members for coming up with this information regarding the amendments to the Bill. 

I would like to thank the members of this committee for being bold and telling the House that this is going to be the third time the Bill is being amended.
When you go to point No.5 under the general observations, the members observed that it is disheartening that the Ministry of Internal Affairs continues to bring piecemeal amendments to the Anti-Terrorism Act instead of a comprehensive law that will address all the 40 recommendations. 

If we are to do justice to this country and not waste tax payers’ money, and indeed if we are interested in combating terrorism and also being compliant with internationally accepted principles of handling terror suspects, I pray that this Parliament finds it within its powers to send the committee back to complete all the 40 amendments and include them in the Bill and then we discuss them comprehensively. We will then know that we have a law that is comprehensive, which will stand the test of time and will not come back after two or three days. 

While presenting the report of the committee, the honourable colleague was also at pains, and this is also reflected in the general recommendations of the report. The members said, “As a committee, we decry this conduct by the relevant stakeholders and, therefore, urge this House to unanimously resolve not to accept any piecemeal amendments after this one.”

I would say that bringing laws in piecemeal wastes time. I was one of the Members of Parliament who sat here and in one day we passed a law regarding cultural leaders. I see no problem in sitting here another day to handle this law and ensure that we pass it after it is done comprehensively. 


Mr Speaker, I pray that my colleagues support the fact that the committee should go back and handle the 40 amendments and bring them back on Friday or Monday or Tuesday so that we pass a law knowing it is going to really be a law that is comprehensive and will stand the test of time. Otherwise, we will be handling the law in piecemeal if we say we are amending this and then tomorrow we shall amend another one. (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is only one issue, which we need to decide on: why the piecemeal amendments? There is nothing wrong with the principles of the Bill. Everybody knows international terrorism is a problem that we need to address. However, why are we bringing the law to make piecemeal amendments? That is the issue. If we can resolve that, we shall go to the next stage. Yes, do you stand as a minister or as Member for Ibanda?

4.37
MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI (NRM, Ibanda County South, Ibanda): I stand as a Member of Parliament from Ibanda. Mr Speaker, this is the iPhone 7 and as I talk now, the iPhone 8 is coming out. This means that the rate at which technology is changing is very complex. There is nobody that can predict that even tomorrow, we shall not come back here to legislate against coming here with phones because tomorrow these phones can be a source of terrorism. 

The minister was very clear in his opening remarks. He said that we are compelled to bring these laws for amendment here and there because terrorism is not static; it changes on a daily basis. Yesterday, what was not considered to be a method of terrorism is a method today. He went on to elaborate them one by one. Yesterday, we witnessed a terrorist attack on a metro in Moscow, Russia, using improvised devices being coordinated by phones. This is how far technology has gone. There is nobody who is going to anticipate this and say, “Let me bring a holistic law on terrorism that stands the test of time”. That is not going to be there. 

Therefore, honourable members, I appeal to you that given the rate at which terrorism is changing, we must cope with it by also changing the laws. I appeal that we continue with the motion and pass the Bill. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.40
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County East, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Before this Parliament went on recess, we passed a law here on anti-money laundering. The object of the Anti-Money Laundering Act was to conform to the requirements of the FATF. Ideally, we would have passed the Anti-Money Laundering Bill together with the Anti-Terrorism Bill because the objects are more or less the same. Even the Anti-Terrorism Act was evaluated and found wanting in regard to conformity with the FATF requirements.

Mr Speaker, the issue here is very clear; we must make a law that conforms to the requirements of FATF. Short of that, we are “piecemealing” in our process of making decisions. Therefore, I would pray that the minister and the committee have mercy on this Parliament; since the Bill is already with them, they should ask for more time and do justice to the Bill -(Interruption)

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, let us be consistent. In the last Parliament, we had a commitment. It is good that hon. Baba is now a Member of Parliament –(Interjections)- He was an ex officio Member then but he is now a full Member of Parliament. 

When we had this debate, hon. Baba and the late Minister of Internal Affairs, Gen. Aronda, made a commitment to bring a comprehensive amendment to the Anti-Terrorism Act. If we do not do so, there are some principles in the Act that will require us to come back here every day and amend this Act. 

As hon. Byabagambi said, terrorism is changing face every day. However, globally, the UN convention has established some standards on what this law should be and ours falls short. These gaps are identified and they are 41. The question, therefore, is: why don’t we go back and comprehensively address the 41 areas at once and be at par? After that, small issues may come in but they will not be fundamental issues of the nature that requires very elaborate debate. You can even frame a law in such a way that those changes can be comprehensively addressed through regulations once the fundamentals are addressed. 

We had reached an understanding that this law will be comprehensively amended. That has not been done and we are going to be -(Interjections)- I am raising a point of information. In order to support your point of view, this was agreed and if we are to go back to the Hansard, you will find this commitment –(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, the Member holding the Floor stood up on information but he is now giving a submission and yet he is a member of the committee. Is it procedurally right?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When you are a member of a committee and issues that you have discussed come up and you get the opportunity to inform the House, it would be procedurally correct, unless he is beginning to debate.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform my colleague that there was even a tentative agreement and it is recorded in the Hansard of this Parliament. In order not to waste a lot of our precious time, let the committee go back and within the shortest time possible, do the necessary job. There is even a commitment from the committee to do the needful.

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Speaker, it is in the interest of Government and this House that we amend this law once and for all. I would pray that the committee and the minister go back, consider all the requirements by FATF and come back to this House when they have a comprehensive law, which we can ably debate and come out with conclusions that stand the test of time. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true that Government made a commitment to bring a comprehensive amendment to the Anti-Terrorism Act. They did so not because of pressure from elsewhere but because it is good for our security that we come with a very comprehensive amendment to deal with terrorism as it manifests itself these days. 

However, let us take note of what hon. Musasizi has said. We are a member of international conventions to which there are timelines and deadlines which as a country, we have to fulfil. This FATF membership requires us to meet some deadlines and timelines and our obligations in fighting terrorism. That is why the minister is bringing these piecemeal amendments. 

This is the third time and it is because we have to meet deadlines. Otherwise, as a country, we can be blacklisted and we may have no access to international financial institutions. Even dealing with the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) will become impossible if we do not meet some of these obligations.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, let us give the minister this opportunity to pass this one so that we can meet the deadline; I hope he will mention it specifically. He can then come later with a comprehensive review of all the amendments for the benefit of our country. (Applause)

4.48
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju Nganda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  The report of the committee is that there are 40 recommendations that we are supposed to comply with and we have only complied with 14. The committee says they need time probably - that is how I understand this – to deal with the rest of the recommendations of FATF. The minister is bringing a law to comply partially with the ones that they have identified.

Mr Speaker, we raised these issues – I was a member of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs - when we were meeting hon. Baba and the late Gen. Aronda. At that time, they blackmailed us, and I am happy that Col Kulayigye told this Parliament that they are usually in the business of ransoming this Parliament. That is what he said when he was presenting the report. He is also, as a member of UPDF, tired of Government ransoming this Parliament.

What we are doing now is to allow them to do exactly what Col Kulayigye is very angry about – allowing them to continue ransoming us. They did it! I remember when we went to consider that proposal in Entebbe, they said if we did not adopt that definition, Uganda was going to be removed from the international financial systems and we would not be able to send money by the next week. We came here very quickly but we had told them, “Why don’t we deal with all the recommendations at once”. 


As Col Kulayigye rightly pointed out, they came here and ransomed us and we passed that. However, they made an undertaking that they would bring a comprehensive Bill after evaluating the performance of this particular law and the changing nature of terrorism. 

Terrorism is changing and I am glad the person who was presenting the report is a soldier. If you read a book called, “Uganda’s Revolution, 1979–1968: How I saw it” by Maj Gen. Kutesa, he will tell you that when they were carrying out terrorism, he planted a bomb at a fuel depot in Industrial Area and he wanted to bomb an aircraft carrying passengers.(Laughter)

MR AJEDRA: Thank you for giving way, honourable colleague. Mr Speaker, I think the senior minister has made a justification as to why this Bill has to be considered now and not later. 

The information that I would like to give to this House is that Uganda is coming under review in May. As we speak, Uganda is grey-listed and if we do not consider these amendments before May, we may be blacklisted. 

I have a report of the last review which was done in Paris and they required us to make three amendments to certain laws - the Insurance (Amendment) Bill, the Anti-Money Laundering Bill and the Anti-Terrorism Bill. Those are the three requirements. If we delay the amendments that have been brought by the minister, I can assure you that in May, Uganda will be blacklisted. Thank you.

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Mr Speaker, this is very good information. What we need is that – [Maj Gen. Kutesa: “I have been quoted by you”] – Mr Speaker, I am not quoting Pecos Kutesa. I am quoting a book entitled “Uganda’s Revolution, 1989-1986: How I saw it”, authored by Pecos Kutesa. I am not quoting Kutesa the Member of Parliament here. (Laughter)

I am glad one of the ministers has actually said exactly what they said at that time – that if we do not pass this one amendment, we are in trouble. When we went for a retreat with that ministry, what we discovered was that they had not done enough research. They brought here a definition of terrorism according to how they understood it, yet the definition of terrorism according to the UN had changed and that is why we were being blacklisted. They are now making us do their work. 

Mr Speaker, the law we passed was on the definition of terrorism and now we are passing another law on the definition of terrorism. I suspect hon. Byabagambi has not read the report of the committee. We are not saying we should not pass the law.  What we are saying is: can we deal with all the issues that have been raised? You have been implementing this law; do an evaluation and research. You cannot be seen asking Parliament - Let me use the word Col Kulayigye used - You cannot be ransoming Parliament every day. You needed to have read the expression on his face when he was saying this.

COL KULAYIGYE: Mr Speaker, I wish to correct hon. Ssemujju Nganda. The words I mentioned are words in the report and the report is not by Kulayigye. It is by the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. So, please, stop misinforming the House. Thank you. (Laughter)

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Mr Speaker, hon. Kulayigye not only signed this report but he was also very enthusiastic that he even came up to read it. There are other members of the committee. He believes in it and he even signed it; that is why I am using his name. He is the one who has presented the report. Maybe he did not also know that the report he was presenting was actually a report that says they are fed up of ransoming Parliament.

Mr Speaker, I would like to plead with Government; they have brought two amendments and this is the third one in two years. Except if they are making a commitment to Parliament that in their own evaluation, they will not come here this year or later this year to bring another amendment. It is not only definition and terrorism financing that needs to be evaluated.

The whole performance of that loan - last time, we had a problem with the minister, when they brought the amendment as recommended on the definition, they also slotted there something; the minister was asking for more powers but that one was not because we were blacklisted. 

Each amendment they bring, they also slot in something. They will tell you here, “Please, you pass it. If you do not, we are coming under the review aspect.” Who is going to review if the honourable minister has the powers to declare people terrorist suspects? When did he adopt that as part of the package? Therefore, I would like to plead with you that this is your law. Please, just go and do enough research; identify all the gaps. The committee is willing – if the Chairperson is not available, col Kulayigye is available - to bring a report on the Bill, with all the gaps addressed properly.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issues being raised are actually serious matters. The time we are spending on the debate now we should be handling other business. I have two other Bills pending.

This matter was brought to the House. The Business Committee of the House approved it after it was read for the first time and it was sent to committee. The committee has examined it. We have spent quality parliamentary time including the last one hour on this matter. We have been debating and yet, we would be voting now and finish and make this condition that no more of this should be brought ever again, until we have this comprehensive thing.

We are quoting the 41 recommendations that the committee – the committee cannot handle something that is not before it. They have an idea about it but it is not before them. They cannot bring it here. We have already spent parliamentary time; people’s time with this Bill of one clause or two clauses. This is hardly the thing at the tail end to say that go back with it, yet we have spent time on it. 

That is my attitude to this. Unless there is a significant problem about the content of the Bill, then let us go and discuss the content which has the problem. Alternatively, we should have rejected it before it even entered Parliament.  We have spent days and weeks doing it; it is already a month since we began doing this thing. 

It would not make sense that now we throw it back. From a presiding officer’s perspective, it would not be a good way to proceed with a matter that Parliament has already examined and it is about to conclude. That will be my opinion but if you have problems with the details that are on the Bill, we discuss those details and take them out; whatever we need to take out and then pass what can be passed. 

5.00
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Mr Speaker, on page 9 of the report of the committee, they are saying that over three years, the Minister of Internal Affairs has held this House at ransom and threatened this House that sanctions stand to be meted out to this nation for non-compliance.

However, he has done little to comply. The issue is about compliance, Mr Speaker. If the committee, in its own wisdom, realised that even by passing this one amendment or two or three, we are not complying, are we doing any justice to the Ugandans? Are we being fair to this country that we can sit here and pass a law that will still be below the standard of compliance? That is why we are praying, Mr Speaker. This House still has up to June to be deemed late in as far as the urgency that the minister is talking about is concerned, and we all agree that we must handle terrorism in totality.

No terrorist should be accommodated in this country but we also would like to follow the accepted procedures and laws. I would still pray that the presiding Speaker finds it within his powers to request that the minister concedes to taking back the Bill. 
It does not matter even if they do it tomorrow. Let us not base ourselves on the fact that the committee did not propose the amendments. They would not have mentioned it in their report. The fact that they have mentioned it is enough justification that they see that there is a problem there. May I, therefore, request the judge who is the presiding Speaker, to find it within his powers to grant us more time to look at this Bill and then make an input to ensure that it is a good law? (Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The request has been made to the presiding Speaker and there is only one. (Laughter) I think the answer can be got from that only one Speaker. You know, there is a story we always share about interventions. There was this man that was running along the sea on a beach and lots of fish had been washed on the shore.

He would run and pick one fish and throw it back in the lake. He would then pick another and throw it in the lake and then others came and told him, “You are wasting time. There are so many of them. What do you think you can do with that one by one intervention?”
The man held the fish in his hands and said there were so many but he would save the life of this one and throw it back in the lake. So, this matter is already before us, there are many others that we can handle – I am now telling you the reason I am proposing what I have proposed to you as a House. It is your decision not mine, I am just making a proposal.

This fish is here in our hands; we could deal with it and wait for others to come because we have already spent time doing it. Unless there is a problem with it, a problem we can cure. (Applause) Let me have the Member from Busongora, West Budama South and then have the Prime Minister.

5.04
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This Bill should and must be in the interest of all of us as Ugandans. In the Ninth Parliament, the committee made some recommendations and particularly, with clause 3. The committee suggested that clauses 2 and 3 be deleted. 

I would like you to give me time to refer to that. This is what it entailed, “In accordance with section 32(a) of the Act, the minister may declare an individual as a terrorist, where the person has been convicted of an offence under the Act”. Clause 32(b) is “a suspected terrorist where the minister has reasonable grounds to suspect that the person is committing or has committed or has attempted to commit an act of terrorism.”

It further reads that,
(ii) 	“An individual is a member of a terrorist organisation.
(iv)	An individual has participated in the financing, planning and facilitating, preparing and perpetrating acts or activities in conjunction with, under the name of, or on behalf of the support of Al-Qaida.
(v) 	The suspect or individual is supplying or selling or transferring arms or related material.” 

However, specifically with 2 and 3, Mr Speaker, I am reading from the legislation, which was generated from the Act, which was passed then: “(2)For purposes of sub-regulation (1) that any person or foreign state or international organisation may, in writing, request the minister through the Minister responsible for Foreign Affairs to declare a person as a terrorist of a suspected terrorist.

(3) Where the minister declares a person as a terrorist or suspected terrorist, the minister may through the Minister responsible for Foreign Affairs in accordance with the diplomatic protocols and procedures set out in regulation 4, request the United Nations to declare the terrorist or suspected terrorist in accordance with United Nation’s Council resolutions relating to terrorism.”

Mr Speaker, why am I reading this? That even when the committee had recommended that the clauses 2 and 3 be deleted and Parliament adopted that, the minister went ahead to have these regulations in 2016 and included what Parliament had recommended for deletion.

This is caused by piece meal amendments; they want every time to bring in issues which Parliament has not passed, Mr Speaker. Let the honourable minister of Internal Affairs be clear to this House and tell us why provisions were included in the regulations yet Parliament had not passed them.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, the issue which rises out of this is when ministers make regulations, why do they make them private and personal to them? If the regulations that are supposed to be made by the ministers are made and brought here for Members to understand and review them, then it would help to bridge some of these gaps.

Therefore, I believe that we have the whole month of April and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has said that Uganda is likely to face several sanctions in May. The Leader of the Opposition rightly put it that the Cultural/ Traditional Leaders Act was passed in one day. There is no mistake in asking the committee to go back and consider all these 40 proposed amendments so that we handle them at ago and we know that this time, we shall even have the audacity to follow up the minister with the regulations that he is going to promulgate thereafter.

Mr Speaker, what I am seeing, the minister wants to come and legitimise the wrong regulations that he passed without the proposal and recommendations by Parliament, yet, it recommended the deletion of clauses 2 and 3, which the minister included in the regulations. What is the import of that?

5.11
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is the only House that I know in Uganda called “Parliament” where laws are made. I am surprised this evening that we are shying away from our role. That we are saying do not bring one piece meal at a time; bring it all so that we legislate at ago.

You gave a very instructive guidance of the man with the fish. I wish we had spent all this time debating the real subject matter whether it is a bad or good law. However, for us to say first go and work on it; they have brought you a snack and now because you have seen a need for food you say, “I want the main course” and you do not want to eat this snack. 

In this matter here, it should not be our pre-occupation to tell Government which law to bring. Our role is to legislate on matters that they have brought and when we serve a little, it is better than no serving at all - (Interruption)

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Mr Speaker, I thank hon. Oboth for giving way. The performance of the institution of Parliament is measured on the reports and Bills it passes. In the public domain, we have been blackmailed that this institution wastes a lot of time in addition to the other public who say Parliament does not do any work and we are rubber stamping. 

This is the time for us as an institution to do our roles and measure up to the time we have at our disposal. If the committee has done its job, it is not we the Members of Parliament to discredit the work it has done. Either we reject it in the Committee Stage as the Bill is or we send back and say what the committee has done or the law we are going to pass is bad and we reject its provisions and we pass the law. 

MR OBOTH: Thank you, hon. Kakooza. Mr Speaker, we can never make laws and then, get afraid of amending them anytime. In fact, that is why there is no law; any law that prohibits an amendment is bad law from the methodological point of view. The theory of Jurisprudence says that law evolves with society just like crime is evolving.

Today, we are here talking about terrorism; my grandfather in a remote village of Nwatu never knew what terrorism was. Therefore, if these crimes are evolving, we need to evolve. In fact, we should never be afraid of amending. You pass a law today, next month, you can amend. That is our work and the work of Parliament. (Applause)

5.15
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, I would like to strongly support the guidance that you have given to this House, that we should serve the fish even if it is one. And it is true that the legislative cycle in Government and Parliament is long even if it is a small amendment, it has to go through the ministry, Cabinet, the draftsman, come to Parliament for first reading, go to the committee. It takes such a long time that we should do whatever we can to save time in order to address urgent issues especially concerning the economy.

Mr Speaker, two weeks ago, hon. Anite and I were in India. We had a meeting with Indian Chamber of Commerce and Industry. One issue they raised with us, to my surprise, was that it is difficult to send money to Uganda. I asked what the problem could be and they said there are some laws Uganda has not passed, which make it difficult for the Central Bank of India and other Indian institutions to send money to Uganda. I did not believe it but subsequently, I got some information clearly that we need to move faster in order to meet international standards and obligations in the struggle against terrorism. 

You see, terrorism is moving much faster than us who do normal business and that is why only the other day, Europe and America were saying that now, you can no longer take a laptop on the plane because they have discovered that there may be certain devices that may be taken.

Therefore, I do not accept the argument of blackmailing Parliament. There is no one who can blackmail us; we make our own decisions but we must make decisions that will help our economy. Anything that blocks the development of our economy, we must clear it as quickly as possible so that our people can do normal business.

Mr Speaker, the question of waiting until all amendments are ready and we have a comprehensive law  -there is nothing like that in the area of terrorism because terrorism is a dynamic issue and every day that passes, terrorism –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Mr Speaker, the committee on page 9 and paragraph 5 reports to Parliament that there are 40 recommendations that we need to deal with in order to comply and avoid a situation the honourable Prime Minister is talking about. 

Is he in order to suggest that this Parliament and the recommendations of the committee are actually a wastage of time and we should just deal with one proposal he is making? Because his submission is that they have identified what will cause us a problem, the committee is saying there are 40; is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I heard the Prime Minister. He said you can never have a comprehensive law that takes care of everything and that is why there is always need for amendment. That is what I heard him say.

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: We have identified 40, you may not have a comprehensive one but 40 have been identified now. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That still does not make it a total law, that it will never be amended. That is what the Prime Minister is saying. Even when you bring all those, we may have to amend in future because terrorism is evolving and that is the point he is making. So, please, conclude.

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. Therefore, in conclusion, I appeal to you to pass this amendment and get ready for additional amendments that will be coming in due course - and by the way, I better use this opportunity to alert you that many more will come and must come in order to squarely deal with the situation, continuously firmly and correctly.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the main principles of the Bill have no problem in my assessment. The issue that is at hand is a procedural matter on whether we should proceed with the Bill piece meal or not. That is the issue because I think with the principles of the Bill, I have not seen any debate not to pass the Bill. All we are saying is we will pass it but bring others altogether and we will pass them together so it is not on the basic principles of the Bill. That is the debate that we have had so far. So, I pose the question; is there something that is fundamental to this Bill that we need to discuss other than whether it is alone or it should come with others. That is the question that I posed. Can we have that debate? 

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Speaker, the major point of contention is the introduction of the term “suspected terrorist” and granting the minister those absolute powers to declare a person a suspected terrorist and why am I saying it is a point of contention? Not only does our Constitution presume everybody suspected of a crime to be innocent but also legislating in our criminal jurisdiction suspicion as to amount to a crime is very dangerous and will hold everybody especially if you have a disagreement with a minister to be declared a suspected terrorist.

My only concern, Mr Speaker, is that for us as Parliament to legislate suspicion and criminalise it is very dangerous and is an area where all of us should jointly refuse and abhor.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, maybe I have not been guided properly. Am I looking at the same Bill? Is this the Bill that is of 13 January 2017? It is dated 13 January 2017. 

I have not seen those provisions in this Bill. I am looking at the Bill; there are no provisions on the minister’s powers. There is clause 1) amendment of section 2 of the Anti-Terrorism Act, 2002 and the definition of “a suspected terrorist”, it means an individual designated as such to regulations issued under section 32(A)
2) Amendment of section 7 of the Anti-Terrorism Act, 2002 by inserting immediately after that the following: “A person commits an act of terrorism who- 
a) carries out; 
b) travels outside Uganda….”

Those details are there and part B “By repealing paragraph Y” and then clause 3 which is the last clause of this Bill, amendment to section 9(A) of the principal Act.

“A person commits an offence who willingly collects or provides funds directly or indirectly.” Those are the provisions of this Bill.

I do not see the ones for the minister in this Bill. Honourable, may be you can help me look at them very well because I may not be following very well.

Give it to the honourable member for Ndorwa to look at it.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: I think if we proceed and consider only those provisions it will be fine.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Those are the only provisions on the Bill. I have not seen any other provisions.

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Speaker, my concern is clause 1 of the Bill which tends to bring in the provisions of the regulations that were issued under section 32 of the Act, and in effect when you read those provisions of the regulations and this particular clause we are literary criminalising suspects in our laws.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, let us be clear on this; can an Act of Parliament adopt or refer to a clause in a regulation?

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: No. 

MR NIWAGABA: But that is what it is.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us have this clear.

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Speaker, this is what it is.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can an Act of Parliament draw its strength from a provision of a regulation? 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: No. 

MR NIWAGABA: If we agree on that, let us proceed clause by clause and I will register my objection to clause 1.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I happen to know some of these things. Can an Act of Parliament draw its provision from a delegated piece of legislation?

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: No. 

MR JACOB OBOTH: I will take it from your wise guidance. I will be equally worried if an Act of Parliament is to draw its mandate from a regulation made by one man – a minister. And if that is the case, we have an opportunity to cure it when we come down to the committee stage.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable minister sponsoring this Bill, that provision cannot stand. 

MR NIWAGABA: Most obliged.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It cannot. (Applause) It will be delegata potestas non potest delegari and we cannot do that. So, if that is the provision that the ministers are defending, then it cannot stand here. 

MR NIWAGABA: Most obliged.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We cannot make a provision of an Act of Parliament and draw our strength from a statutory instrument because a statutory instrument is the one that draws its strength from what we have passed. 

MR NIWAGABA: Most obliged. Perfect.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And that is why it is called delegated legislation. How can a delegated legislation now be instructing Parliament as if Parliament – please let us proceed and finish that at committee stage.

MR NIWAGABA: Most obliged. We can do that. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, if we move with that, will there still be a Bill? 

MR NIWAGABA: There will be no Bill. (Laughter)

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Procedure, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, let us sort this out. If that particular provision that refers to a statutory instrument is removed, will there be any Bill left?

COL KULAYIGYE: Some clarification. The Bill is not seeking to give powers to the minister but to define “a suspected terrorist” –(Interjections)- I am giving you information because I studied it and you did not.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I have my Bill back?

MR NIWAGABA: The Bill speaks for itself very clearly.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us take a decision and we go and deal with this at committee stage unless clause 2 also has issues.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, when you look at the essence of this Bill, its strength was on this provision because the rest of the things that they talk about are covered in the Act. 

If you read the submission of the Police to this Bill at a committee stage, they affirmed to that. Other than this other clause, there is nothing new and we no longer have a substantial Bill that defers in material form from what is in the Act.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But there is a proposal in clause 2 to amend section 7 of the Principal Act in the terms proposed in clause 2 and then there is clause 3 which is an amendment to Section 9A of the Principal Act. So it is not the same. 

MR NIWAGABA: We can have those.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not the same. Can I put the question to the motion for second reading – the owner of the Bill, the Minister of Internal Affairs is here.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: The minister is not there. There is no minister. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question that the Bill entitled, “The Anti-Terrorism (Amendment) Bill, 2017” be read the second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ANTI-TERRORISM (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017

Clause 1

MR NIWAGABA: I propose that clause 1 be deleted and the justification is that clause 1 makes reference to definition in the regulations, which regulations are a delegated responsibility function. Under the principal Act, this Parliament did not preserve for itself the right to scrutinise the regulations by laying them before this House.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we have had this discussion and there is a definition of “suspected terrorists” that is now contained in some regulation. 

Is it possible for Parliament to define what a “suspected terrorist” would be? Is it possible to define in the Act what it is other than drawing reference from a statutory instrument because we have that mandate? 

Does a member have a definition that can be accepted or the House can make that definition without cross referencing to anything else? 

We shall stand over clause 1 and go to clause 2. If we come to it and there is no proper definition, then it will come in the other laws when it is clarified.

Clause 2

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is there any amendment to clause 2? I put the question that clause 2 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3 agreed to.

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is there a definition? If there is none then –

MR NIWAGABA: We cannot even have a definition on basis of suspicion because suspicion remains suspicion. However strong suspicion can be, it cannot fix man with criminal responsibility. So I beg to move that it be deleted entirely because as Parliament we cannot legislate by criminalising suspicion. Anybody can be charged under the law of attempt or something else but not under suspicion.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There are still a series of amendments coming. If the Leader of Government Business would be able to properly define it in a way that is acceptable by Parliament, then we shall accept it at that time. 

For now, we are where we are. I will put the question to the motion for deletion of clause 1. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1 deleted.

The Title

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the Title of the Bill stands as the Title to the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The title agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.36
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen) (Rtd) (Jeje Odongo): Mr Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.37
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. (Rtd) Jeje Odongo): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Anti-Terrorism (Amendment) Bill, 2017” and passed it with amendments. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.37
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. (Rtd) Jeje Odongo): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE ANTI-TERRORISM (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017

5.38
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen.(Rtd) Jeje Odongo): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Anti-Terrorism (Amendment) Bill, 2017” be read the third time and do pass. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to that motion that the Bill entitled, “The Anti-Terrorism (Amendment) Bill, 2017” be read the third time and do pass. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED THE ANTI-TERRORISM (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2017

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, congratulations, honourable minister.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE UGANDA COMMUNICATIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016

5.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ICT AND COMMUNICATIONS (Ms Aida Nantaba): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Communications (Amendment) Bill, 2016” be read the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by hon. Bahati, hon. Muyanja and hon. Kahunde. Would you like to speak to your motion?

MS NANTABA: Mr Speaker, the Uganda Communications Act, 2013 was enacted by Parliament and operationalised in January 2013. The Minister for ICT and National Guidance is therefore required to make regulations to give effect to the provisions of the Act. 

According to section 93(1) of the Uganda Communications Act, 2013, “The minister may, after consultations with the commission and with the approval of Parliament, make regulations for the better carrying into effect the provisions of this Act.”

Therefore, the Uganda Communications (Amendment) Bill, 2016 seeks to amend section 93(1) of the Uganda Communications Act, 2013 which provides as follows:

Section 93 of the Uganda Communications Act, 2013 is amended in subsection (1) by repealing the words “and with the approval of Parliament”. 

The objective of the Bill, Mr Speaker, is to amend section 93(1) by repealing the words “and with the approval of Parliament”. 

The justification is that the communications sector is highly dynamic and fast evolving in nature, requiring an expeditious process for the making of regulations. New areas are fast evolving. For example, mobile money, which is regulated as a value-added service and mobile virtual network operators for K2 Telecom that is hosted by Africell. 

While the general principle remains, new trends emerge due to the dynamic nature of the sector requiring that the regulations are updated regularly and expeditiously. Section 93 contains two provisions for making of regulations that is subsections (1) and (3). 

The provisions of section 93(1) provide for making of regulations with parliamentary approval while the provisions of section 93(3) provide for laying of the regulations before Parliament. These two provisions subject the regulations to parliamentary procedure. 

Mr Speaker, my recommendation is that the provision in respect of laying of the regulations before Parliament as provided for under section 93(3) of the Uganda Communications Act, 2013 is sufficient to enable Parliament exercise its oversight function. Section 93(1) however, in its current state, would subject the regulations to the same procedure for a Bill for an Act of Parliament. 

Due to the dynamic and ever evolving nature of the communications sector, the minister requires an expeditious process for the making of the regulations. 

Mr Speaker, the Uganda Communications (Amendment) Bill, 2016 therefore amends section 93(1) and will enable the minister to make regulations expeditiously while at the same time subjecting them to parliamentary scrutiny under 93(3), which provides for laying of the regulations before Parliament. Mr Speaker, I therefore beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, when this Bill was first brought, it was referred to our committee and this motion now provides grounds for the committee to report. 

5.44
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY (Mr Maxwell Akora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am the Vice-Chairperson of the sessional committee on Information and Communications Technology. I would like to present the report of the committee on the Uganda Communications (Amendment) Bill, 2016. 

Mr Speaker, by way of introduction, the Minister of Information, Communications Technology and National Guidance in accordance with Rule 22 (1) and (2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament reinstated the Uganda Communications (Amendment) Bill, 2016 on Wednesday, 5 October 2016 and consequently, the House referred the Bill to the committee on Information, Communication and Technology for consideration.

Background

The Bill is seeking to amend section 93(1) of the Uganda Communications Act, 2013.

Methodology

During the process of analysing the Bill, the committee interacted and received views from the following stakeholders: Ministry of Information and Communication Technology and National Guidance, Uganda Communications Commission (UCC), National Information Technology Authority (NITAU), New Vision Group, Uganda Institute of Communications Technology, Uganda Human Rights Commission, MTN Uganda Limited, Airtel Uganda Limited, Uganda Telecommunication Limited, representatives of Nkumba University Students Guild, Foundation for Human Rights Initiative, National Association of Broadcasters and Human Rights Network for Journalists.

The committee invited the following committees of Parliament to make submissions on the Uganda Communications (Amendment) Bill, 2016 and they include the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline, Committee on Human Rights, Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs and the Committee on Science and Technology. 

In addition to the above, the ICT committee held a workshop with the Uganda Communications Commission to further consult on the Bill. 

Objective of the Bill

The object of the Bill is to remove the requirement for parliamentary approval of regulations made by the minister under section 93(1). The tendered justification for the proposed Bill was that Parliament enacted two conflicting provisions: section 93(1) that requires parliamentary approval of the regulations made; and section 93(3) that obliges the minister to lay the regulations before Parliament.

Observations

In the process of scrutinising the Bill, the committee observed that there were strong views both in support of the Bill as well as those opposed to the Bill, which required harmonisation. These included the following:

    (i) Precedence in the legislative processes

Those advocating for the Bill argued that it is a general principle that when regulations are laid before Parliament, they become subsidiary legislation and Parliament can raise whatever concerns it has with the regulations or advise the Executive to review them accordingly. 

Regulations do not amend the principal legislation; they only enable its implementation and enforcement. Article 79(2) of the Constitution provides for delegation of subsidiary legislative function by Parliament. Other stakeholders submitted that the delegated function is predominantly exercised by the minister responsible for the sector.

However, there are precedents in the legislative process where regulations require the approval of Parliament and these include: Uganda Revenue Authority Act, 1991, which gives powers to make regulations to the responsible minister in consultation with the authority; Uganda National Roads Authority Act, 2006, which gives power to make regulations to the responsible minister in consultation with the board; the National Environment Act, 1995 gives the responsible minister power to make regulations; and the Bank of Uganda Act, 1993, which gives the responsible minister power to make regulations in consultation with the board.

The committee observed that although both precedents obtain in Uganda, in our jurisdiction, approval of regulations by Parliament is the exception and not the norm.

The committee further observed that concerns were expressed by various stakeholders over delays and abuse of delegated authority by the minister. However, these concerns were not substantiated.

The committee observed that there is no stipulated procedure by Parliament to handle delegated legislation. 

    (ii) Emergence of new technologies 

The committee noted that the ICT sector is highly dynamic and fast-evolving and as such, new areas have emerged within the sector that were not provided for under the Uganda Communications Act, 2013. Due to the technical nature of the sector, making regulations for the sector requires extensive technical expertise, which is provided by the Uganda Communications Commission and the parent ministry.

In addition, due to the technical nature of the sector, the making of regulations requires an expeditious process, which should not hinder regulation of the sector.

The technical nature and dynamism of the sector is evident in the areas for which regulations are required, as contained in the provisions of section 93(2) and these include:
    (a) Communications emergency response
    (b) Interconnection and access
    (c) Quality of service
    (d) Competition and protection of operators and consumers from anti-competitive behaviour and practices
    (e) Standardisation and equipment standards and type approval, including energy requirements
    (f) The universal services fund obligations, establishment and management of the Rural Communications Development Fund
    (g) Research and collaboration with educational institutions.

The committee further notes that practical considerations and administrative needs make it unavoidable that in most cases Parliament will allow ministers to make regulations in order to function effectively and efficiently.

The ministry and Uganda Communications Commission have the expertise to prepare legislation that addresses technical matters and meets the needs of the communications sector.

Additionally, because regulations can be passed and brought into force more quickly than Acts of Parliament, matters requiring immediate action such as emergencies can be dealt with in a timely manner by regulations and may therefore not require the approval of Parliament.

The committee appreciated the dynamism and technical nature of the sector, which will require urgency and expertise in regulating the sector. However, the ministry did not provide demonstrable evidence of failure to respond to any such emergencies that could have been exacerbated by the rigorous parliamentary approval.

    (iii) International Obligations

The committee noted that the Uganda Communications Commission is allied to many international bodies like the International Telecommunications Union (ITU) based in Geneva, Switzerland, that is part of the United Nations system. The ITU has 191 member states and more than 700 sector members and associates. 

Such bodies set standards and regulations, which UCC must follow. One of the requirements is for the member states to have a regulatory framework, which is in line with the set standards.

Regulations concerning spectrum are influenced by decisions, which require highly sophisticated technical expertise, which may easily be available to Parliament.

    (iv) Remedy for Aggrieved Parties

The committee noted that anybody aggrieved by the regulations or decisions made by the minister has a right to appeal to Uganda Communications Tribunal, which is provided for in the law or appeal to the courts of law.

The committee observed, however, that the Uganda Communications Tribunal has not yet been constituted as provided for under section 60 of the Uganda Communications Act, 2013 and the committee urges Government to urgently constitute a tribunal to adjudicate disputes arising from regulating the sector.

    (v) Lack of Parliamentary Procedure to Handle Subsidiary Legislation 

The committee noted that the requirement for parliamentary approval entails regulations being laid before Parliament and presupposes that a procedure exists in Parliament for handling subsidiary legislation similar to the procedures for handling a Bill. Both subsections 93(1) and (3) subject the regulations to parliamentary procedure.

The proposed amendment suggests that section 93(3), which requires laying of the regulations before Parliament, is maintained and the provision of section 93(1), which requires approval by Parliament is repealed.

The objective of the amendment is to avoid subjecting the regulation-making process to an onerous procedure, which will encumber regulation of the communication sector.

The matters to regulate are not only numerous but are technical thus requiring detailed regulation.

The requirement for parliamentary approval requires scrutiny of the regulations in the same way that a Bill is scrutinised.

    (vi) Role of Parliament and the Executive

The committee observed that some stakeholders were concerned that the Uganda Communications (Amendment) Bill, 2016 deals with regulating information and knowledge, which are key public and economic goods, which affect numerous human rights such as freedom of expression and access to information and essentially goes to the heart of the democratic processes in the country.

Section 93(1) is fundamental on checking the minister when formulating regulations that affect the right to communication. It makes it mandatory for the minister to seek parliamentary approval in making the regulations.

Section 93(1) does not jeopardise the operation of the minister and the Uganda Communications Commission. It only sets a strict standard on how the minister formulates the regulations.

The section promotes and protects the doctrine of separation of powers, a fundamental pillar in a democracy. The role of Parliament in providing checks and balances is very critical, especially in the management of the communications sector, which forms the bedrock of other fundamental freedoms. 

The committee recognises the importance of separation of powers and checks and balances between the different arms of Government. The checks should be within the norms of parliamentary practice and not interfere with the sacred powers of the different arms of Government.

Article 128 of the Constitution provides for an independent Judiciary to arbitrate where there is conflict or complaint on the other two arms of Government; between the Executive and Parliament.

    (vii) Evaluation and Observance of Consistency of Regulations with the Act

The committee noted that section 93(1) provides that, “The minister may, after consultation with the commission and with approval of Parliament, by statutory instrument, make regulations for better carrying into effect of the provisions of this Act.”

The committee observed that:
    (a) The requirement for approval of the regulations by Parliament was to provide for a better evaluation of the consistency of the regulations with the Act.

    (b) The committee recognises the importance of parliamentary oversight over the Executive in regard to delegated legislation. However, such oversight should be implemented in a way that does not interfere with the principle of separation of powers and proper application of the law.

(vi) 	General Observations and Recommendations

The committee recommends that the minister should consider the possibility of reviewing the entire law to take care of new developments in the sector, including the following:

    (a) Reviewing the two per cent levy on gross annual revenue of operators, which is prescribed under section 68 of the Uganda Communications Act, 2013.

The committee observed the two per cent levied on telecommunications operators under the Uganda Communications Commission Act, 2006, now repealed. With the enactment of the Uganda Communications Act, 2013, the two per cent levy was charged on all operators including broadcasters, which is negatively impacting the sector. 

For example, the Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC), which is a national broadcaster and charged with the responsibility to provide broadcasting services all over the country, is also required under the Uganda Communications Act, 2013 to pay two per cent of its gross annual revenue to the Uganda Communications Commission. 

(b) 	That separate funding of the Uganda Communications Tribunal be made, which is currently partly funded by the Uganda Communications Commission under section 61(3) of the Act, which undermines the independence of the tribunal. 

(c)	The committee recommends separation of the Uganda Institute of Information and Communications Technology (UICT) from the Uganda Communications Commission (UCC). Section 5(w) of the Uganda Communications Act, 2013 places UICT under the management of UCC yet UICT is established under another Act of Parliament; the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001.

Mr Speaker, I beg to report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson. Honourable members -

MR AKORA: Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on the Table the minutes of the deliberations of the committee in handling the Uganda Communications (Amendment) Bill, 2016. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, we have received a report from the committee and I now propose the question for the motion for your debate. 

Honourable members, I now propose the question that the Uganda Communications (Amendment) Bill, 2016 be read the second time. That is the motion before you and it requires a debate on the principles of the Bill. Debate starts now. 

5.59
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have been in the communications sector for the last 15 years and I was extremely happy that Parliament wanted to regulate what the minister could do even after the enactment of the law. I will give you an example. 

There was a time that the managers of the communications sector issued what I would ordinarily describe as a decree that no person in Uganda should be allowed to appear on the same radio and TV programme repeatedly. They said, for example, if you appeared this week, you should only come back in May. 

The nature of communication or the nature of our work, for those of us who are in the communications sector, is that the programming cannot be made by a minister. For example, there are programmes where you will have permanent people and that happens all over the world. However, the minister woke up one day and said, we will not allow the same persons to appear on the same programme repeatedly. That is what they wrote and as a result, some of us who were appearing on some radio stations several times were told that we could not keep going there every week.

The fear that I think Parliament wanted to cure, and the chairperson of the committee has said so, is that no evidence was brought to suggest arbitrariness. We have been dealing with an amendment to the Anti-Terrorism Act and hon. Nzoghu has brought it to the attention of this Parliament. When the minister made a proposal in the Act that the minister should have power to declare people or a person a suspect and this Parliament said no, they went and put it in the regulations, if you read regulation page 9.  

Today, that is what they have been smuggling making claims that we have just refused. Now they are trying to bring it back to get Parliament to put it in the law. If these laws are implemented by people who act in good faith all the time, probably there would be no problem with Parliament asking or not asking for regulations to be brought here. 

However, threats have been issued by the people who are managers of communication. They want people to support the law and they say, they will deal with those criticising Government. I wanted the chairperson of the committee to explain to me what the reasons were at that time. This is because he said, regulations coming to Parliament for approval is not the norm but the exception. Why did this Parliament make that exception? This is because we are dealing with a sector that is very fragile. 

The other day, I remember the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development announced that if we, in the Opposition, did not stop the activities and demonstrations, we were affecting the economy because we were affecting tourism. 

We need to be very careful when we are dealing with the media because it is one of the parameters that the international community uses to judge whether a country is democratic and whether it is governing itself properly. Therefore, by issuing regulations and stopping someone from appearing on a particular radio station programme, you end up injuring the country by yourself.

Therefore, my proposal is that if this Government had brought regulations and they were delayed by Parliament then they could come and say this particular - because they said this is a dynamic industry and ICT changes every day. Yes, it does but in a way you are saying that when you bring regulations, we delay them and now you want to go and do it very quickly. You sit in your offices with one expert and issue regulations on how you want the sector to be run. Moreover, I have pointed out what you did in the Anti-Terrorism Act by smuggling in what Parliament had said could not work. 

The chairperson’s explanation was very good that the only reason you have regulations is to enable the implementation of the law. However, ministers use regulations to somehow make another law and hence, the regulations become another law because it will be their own interpretation. My own interpretation is this and that is how they ended up smuggling what this Parliament said could not be put in the Anti-Terrorism Act and brought it under the regulations. 

Today, by us accepting to reverse the well-considered decision that Parliament made, we are actually now telling them that they can go and do whatever they want. Mr Speaker, I can warn this Parliament that you will hear the consequences because we appear with many of these actors in the same media. They keep telling us their plans and now they have brought an amendment that will enable them to clamp down on the media. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to draw this to the attention of the Members of Parliament that they should be very careful when they are passing this. I remember we warned hon. Amama Mbabazi each time here and he did not adhere because we were from the Opposition side. One time he was going to Mbale to have a rally and they stopped him and he was not happy. I was very happy about this. 

Therefore, the very Government you are protecting can clamp down on you. Today you may pass a law whose intention is to stop some people appearing on radio stations but tomorrow, you are going to be the victim. That is why we must think about this amendment and give it due consideration. 

Government should be able to convince Parliament that because we have been delaying the regulations, this is the problem we have. You must evaluate the performance of the law before you change it. We would be the first Parliament to allow a law to be changed without an evaluation report. What problem have they found there for them to come and suggest that we should not touch their regulations and that they will do it themselves? 

5.59
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would love to thank the committee for the good work. When I followed the committee report, my understanding was that they agree with the position of the Bill. 

Mr Speaker, they refer to Article 79(2). We have actually not effected subsidiary legislation in this Parliament well. I have been privileged enough to travel to other jurisdictions as the Chairman of the Legal Committee and this Parliament is still very hybrid. For example, we do not have a committee handling subsidiary legislation. Therefore, where you call for the approval of regulations by Parliament, you are having in mind that we have a committee that handles subsidiary legislations. Kenya is far ahead of us.

I appreciate the concerns of hon. Ssemujju and I would like to add that whenever we make laws, including those who will be empowered to make regulations, we should be mindful that the law should not have an ‘I’ because we have seen it here.

It is also our role to caution the Executive but we cannot interfere with the matter. Policing is not our mandate. I would like to agree with the minister’s proposal for the amendment. The background in 2013 was poorly understandable. We were very suspicious of every single law that they brought, especially after the oil debate. 

Now if we are going to tie the hands of the minister on this matter because we fear that a minister might issue some regulations to take Oboth Oboth out of the Capital Gang, that would be a law with an ‘I’ and it is a bad one. 

I do not want us to speculate. My humble opinion is that we support this amendment and not add anything. When it comes to the committee stage, we would have to contribute little more but the principle is simple. Our Parliament has the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, we have the Committee on Rules and Discipline but that is about the Rules of Procedure. We do not have the capacity to handle all regulations that we approve. It will just clog the work of this Parliament. If we can make it with a rider, the better but I would be in favour of supporting the amendment. Thank you. 

6.10
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo South County, Dokolo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We passed this law in 2013 and the intention, at that time, was not to allow the minister, who at that time had a lot of appetite in controlling and stopping others from doing normal activities on radio stations. That was the fear that time. We used to go to Club Obligato talk show, Kimeeza and many others, which were banned. The appetite was too high, including stopping other people especially from the Opposition from appearing on radio stations. That was the fear. 

However, Mr Speaker, I am now talking about the power of Parliament. First of all, under our Constitution, we are there to make laws. We only delegate part of our powers to the Executive. The power we give them is not to make another law but to operationalise the laws that we pass from here. However, the problem we have had with our people here is that some of our ministers do not follow the law. They just go and act contrary to the law and powers that we have delegated to them.
 
That is why we had that fear that we could not again give powers to people who do not know what they are doing, I am sorry to say. However, this time I think the ministers are now aware. They know what they are supposed to do and as Parliament, we can now allow.

Generally, under all laws, we have given ministers the power to make regulations and in other countries, subsidiary legislation is not the preserve of Parliament because once we bring regulations to Parliament, it is no longer a regulation. It becomes a law. For us to handle any law, it must come in form of a Bill. Therefore, if a regulation is coming before Parliament in form of a Bill, once it is passed, it is no longer a regulation.

Therefore, with a lot of pain and caution, I am trying to support. (Laughter) This is the normal thing to do but we need to warn ministers to be serious. Once we have given you these powers, do not over step. Work within your powers. If the regulations are contrary to our laws, you know what happens. We have the courts as our recourse. 

Secondly, about the two per cent levy that they have given to –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, that matter is not before us at the moment.

MR OKOT OGONG: I was just sounding a warning that we need to do something about it. However, since it is not before us, I would like us to support the minister and the committee so that we give this power to the minister. Thank you. 

6.14
MR GASTER MUGOYA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have some reservations because if we are deleting the provision for approval, I find a big problem.

As you are rightly aware, the ICT sector is now a lucrative business. I would like to draw your attention to section 10 of the principal Act which says, “A person shall not be appointed to the board who is engaged in an organisation which operates or provides communications services directly or indirectly as the owner, shareholder, partner or otherwise.”

I have conclusive evidence that some members of the UCC own and are the majority shareholders in some of these radio stations. By law, they are not supposed to be where they are today. When you give such a person the mandate to regulate his own conduct and business, by express or necessary implication, you are saying please, expeditiously grow rich the way you deem fit and when you deem it fit.

I will give an example of Voice of Kigezi. Hon. Bahati knows the majority shareholders. They are the people managing the commission and regulating the sector. That is why Members are saying no, we should reserve the provision and preserve it such that Parliament has at least minimal powers to control and approve these regulations. 

Of course, one may rightly say that you cannot, in any way, approve these legislations because we do not have a committee principally to handle that. However, as rightly put by the Chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, we can bring this in our rules. Actually, when we benchmarked in Zambia, they have that and they have competent people in the committee to manage the approval. We are going to borrow a leaf to that effect. 

Therefore, in my humble opinion, I see no legal justification for removal of the provision for approval. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me guide and then we see how to handle this. By some sheer coincidence, I had made a comment on this particular issue when I was dealing with Bills that are brought with the amendments being bigger than the Bills. By the time the Bill is passed, the author of the initial Bill cannot even recognise it as it is a new Bill. I said there is need for the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to set a threshold that if the Bill is much criticised by Parliament to an extent that over 50 per cent of it is new, it should be ordered for reprinting. 

If the sponsoring ministry agrees with the amendments that have been proposed, they should simply withdraw it, take it for reprinting and bring a new Bill. This is because processing those amendments is very difficult and in the process of doing that, you make mistakes. I speak this from a drafting perspective as I used to do that for a living. 

Now, what happened with this particular Bill? Let me explain this. There are three areas how Parliament delegates responsibilities for subsidiary legislation, which some people call regulations or statutory instruments. One type is where Parliament gives that authority and requires that it be brought back for information. Therefore, the statutory instrument is brought for information. 

The other aspect is where it is subject to a negative vote of Parliament. In other words, the power is given to the minister to pass the statutory instrument but we review it after he has passed it; after it is functioning we will look at it. For example, the debate that we are now having on the inspection of vehicles. It was authorised and it is in the law; they have passed it there. You can call back and look at it and say, no, we do not want it. That is when you can cause a negative vote on it and it stops operating. However, the thing with that category is that whatever is done under its authority remains valid and it stops operating on the day it is nullified by Parliament. 

The third category is instruments that are subject to an affirmative vote of Parliament. In other words, they will never become operational until Parliament approves them. Those categories are there but they are very rare because the impact of that is re-legislation. In other words, you have given out the powers but you want to keep them and there are reasons for doing that. 

I will give an example of the Public Enterprises Reform and Divestiture Statute, which is now an Act of Parliament. The first schedule was supposed to be companies where Government will retain 100 per cent ownership. That was in class one of the Act. However, the other classes 2, 3 and so forth were different. Therefore, the Act stated clearly that the minister has authority to amend the schedules to the Act, except class one. 

Regulations made for variations of enterprises under class one will first be laid before Parliament before they become operational. The reason was simple; because Parliament had taken a decision that those particular companies should not be divested and they were listed. If the minister wants to divest them, he must come back to Parliament. Those are the exceptions that are created.

In this particular case, I was the one presiding and it came like the honourable member for West Budama County South said. It came after the oil debate and all those things and tension in the House was high. Members were suspicious of anything. When the matter came at committee stage, it was not a recommendation from the committee. The committee did not look at it as a problem. It came from the Floor in the course of our processing the Bill that Members said, “No, Parliament must look at it before it becomes operational.” 

I then explained it the way I have explained now. The minister who was in charge of ICT was sitting right there and I asked, “Honourable minister, are you sure about this? What is your opinion on this?” He said, “No, it is okay.” I asked, “Are you sure, honourable minister, that this would be a good way to proceed?” Well, he said, “Yes.” and we passed it. Later, implementation came. 

One day I was in the office and Uganda Communications Commission brought 78 regulations for the approval of Parliament. Some were on small issues such as levy of fees for operations but they have to be approved by Parliament. In essence, the Uganda Communications Commission Act has been incapable of implementation because of this. Where will Parliament get the time to approve 78 statutory instruments? 

By the way, the procedure for those instruments is that you cannot amend them. They are like treaties signed outside. You either approve the whole thing or reject the whole thing. Honourable members, it is the practicality of this that has brought this amendment, in my opinion. I remember I said it when I was talking about some Bill that had very many amendments because mistakes were made in the process. 

If we leave it that 78 regulations should be brought by the minister to Parliament, it is a dead law. It will not work because Parliament will not have the time to deal with 78 regulations. Some are very big, some are smaller. Some were, for example, the regulations made in terms of vehicle inspection. I showed a copy to the honourable member for Busongora County North. It is a huge document for a committee to handle. 

The next question is, which committee would handle statutory legislations? In the past, it was the mandate of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to look at the statutory instruments that were required to be looked at by Parliament. However, we removed that in the next set of rules. 

Therefore, honourable members, my guidance on this debate is that you can pass this but the committee has made recommendations that they must be brought to Parliament and Parliament can take a decision to cancel them. It should not be that Parliament must first approve. In which case, it will now be that after the documents are laid, any committee, such as the committee in charge of the sector, can take charge and look at it, check its implementation and if there is a problem, come back to Parliament and say, this one should not go on, we should remove it and then they delete it. 

It might be a more pragmatic way of dealing with this than saying, “Must be with prior approval of Parliament”. Honourable members, that is my guidance.

6.26
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Mr Speaker, thank you for your guidance on this matter. For starters, what is actually coming out of this discussion is that we shall invariably require, as a matter of urgency in the amendment of our rules, a committee on subsidiary legislation. 
I remember in the Ninth Parliament, we had a wide-ranging debate as to whether we actually needed it.  In fact, a Member had moved that we include a committee but somehow we did not get the right guidance as to why we needed it. It is now obvious we need a committee on subsidiary legislation to take care of these extraneous matters that relate to the powers we delegate to other entities and individuals.

Mr Speaker, the chairperson and the committee generally observed that indeed Parliament requiring approving regulations is an exception, but not the norm here. Being an exception means that only in particular circumstances can Parliament require approval of regulations before they are made operational. Part of this reason is what hon. Okot Ogong advanced that more often than not we legislate in an environment of suspicion. I do not know whether the suspicion is mutual or exclusive. 

However, what he has not really done to allay the fears of some people on this side of the House is whether this suspicion or the appetite – like he called it – has gone away or instead the marginal propensity has not gone up. This is the problem. We shall require understanding the urgency from the minister because I waited to get the rationale – as to whether the minister at any one stage was constrained in implementing the law as it exits and, therefore, requires some extraordinary powers to act.

Mr Speaker, this particular amendment comes at the backdrop of UCC, in particular the executive director, acting in a manner I could conceive as arbitrary. He has banned individuals from appearing on particular media houses without citing any law. His action is contrary to Article 41(2), of our Constitution because access to information includes disseminating information. Therefore, if you bar someone from disseminating information because you disagree, then there is a problem. 

My point is that the suspicion remains. I am failing to understand – looking at the amendments moved – whether the minister has encountered a roadblock that all of us should appreciate. I am waiting to listen to the minister or the chairperson whether in their reviews and meetings with the different stakeholders there was a particular kind of argument that indeed there was a problem and, therefore, the minister was compelled.

The committee rightly observed that indeed the minister has failed to put in place a tribunal. You do not have a tribunal which in the law is the immediate legal remedy where someone is facing injustice from the powers that be. Therefore, you have no tribunal, but you are calling for more powers to continue acting arbitrarily.  I have a problem because the first test was failed – you have no tribunal. You failed the first grand test of appearing to be fair in your dealings with the law. 

Therefore, I hesitate to give you extra powers when the little powers - not even small powers – you have under the law to at least appear to be fair by putting in place a tribunal where people are going to seek remedy, but you are now calling for more powers. I am afraid and I may not support the minister, my good friend, in giving her extra powers.

We had the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority (PPDA) regulation here and Parliament passed them because they were not controversial. This particular amendment is controversial. Therefore, I am hesitant. Unless moved differently, I will not be able to perhaps rethink my position on these particular amendments sought. Thank you.

MR OBOTH: I wanted to bring back hon. Mpuuga but I know you will be kind enough. For the sake of the record, he made a passionate appeal to be moved. How does he want to be moved and by who? We have the Minister of Information, ICT and Communications the other side. Is he requiring the Minister of Information, ICT and Communications to move him or any one of us or the Chair? Hon. Mpuuga, I was seeking clarification from you.

MR MPUUGA: Mr Speaker, I know the chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs is trying to be controversial. However, I will avoid his controversy and only state in unequivocal terms that I would like the minister to tell us in plain language what she would like to do.

MR AKORA: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the House that the committee has proposed an amendment that we hope will reconcile the different positions and hopefully move my honourable colleague to agree with the committee’s position at committee stage.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am looking at section 93 (1) and (2) - the regulations we are talking about are of this nature:  
1(a) fees payable on the grant or renewal of licence – that we are now saying should come back to Parliament so that we can approve the fees.
(b) 	The classification of categories for licences – that one we are also saying we should approve. 
(c) 	The use of any communication station apparatus or license.
(d) 	Obligations to permitting and facilitating the inspections of any communication sessions, apparatus or licence - these are the ones we want to decide on as Parliament under section 93. Those are the 78 regulations that were brought. Is it what Parliament wants to approve? 

Honourable members, we need to be realistic. This is a Parliament. Are we going to approve licence fees payable? This is the Act. If there are specific areas that you would like to exclude from this category, it would make sense. But section 93 (1), from (a) to (r), are in relation to these kinds of things. If there are other matters, for instance, in 93(4) or (5) that you would like to look at and exclude, it would make sense but not on all these smaller issues that you are asking Parliament to do. 

Honourable members, this is the Act. Please, look at the Act and tell me that this Parliament wants to approve fees and I will be very comfortable to preside over a decision of Parliament to determine fees payable by operators.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI:  Mr Speaker, I beg your indulgence. However, I do not also think that the minister is having issues with those powers. Let us be the devil’s advocates. We are talking about ICT and the media which is a fourth estate in a functional democracy. It is also a ground for contestation and in a bid to acquire power, we lose it. It is the most critical issue today. Therefore, as we move to give powers to the minister – and the minister wants these powers practically to limit that space.

Mr Speaker, as a parliament that must ensure that there is good governance and democracy, we have to be extremely careful. Right now, we gave away some powers in the new Public Finance Management Act, 2015. 

Some of us are constrained and we are coming back to Parliament to get those powers back because they are being abused with impunity, regarding supplementary budgets. This is because we gave away a small space for good intentions. They are now making it a rule to alter the way we need to budget. We cannot operate like that. The reason the minister wants these powers is to limit the space for freedom of expression.

MR KAKOOZA: I would like to thank you and to supplement what you have said. This Communications Act came in 2010. We had messed up and made a law which fixes the community mobilisation amplifiers with radios. What is happening today is that the Communication 	Commission which we gave powers – you have heard they are closing down these mobilisation and community amplifiers. The reason is simple. This is because they are losing out on the market. The poor people go to these mobilisation community amplifiers and no longer take their announcements to the radios. This is the reason we separated them when they brought an amendment here – I was here. By then, the minister of ICT was the Prime Minister now, Rt. Hon. Ruhakana Rugunda. I told him that we are making a mistake and if we put all of them in the same category, there would be a problem.
 
What hon. Kivumbi is saying is that the suspicions we have concern the technocrats; we have given them powers and they have abused them. What they are supposed to do, they do not do it first. They have a conflict of interest. What my colleague from Busoga has said - that most of these people have radio stations and they want to make money by monopolising the market. Therefore, if you give them power, they will monopolise the market by closing out those that come to compete with them.

That is why in section 91 we said that the minister, in consultation with the Commission, can come back and we approve those regulations. This is after we are contented that the powers we have given them are not abused.

However, what is happening today is that we are losing track. We give powers to these people to implement and do what they are supposed to do and they do not do it correctly. That is the reason why Parliament had those suspicions. They are doing it with impunity.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, that is why we are ultimately careful with what ought to be done here. If we can tell you – hon. Kakooza and I now know the extent of what the Minister of Finance has done with the limited freedom we gave them – terrible stuff. You will soon get to know - I do not want to pre-empt the debate, but it is terrible stuff. (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What does “terrible” mean? Is it unlawful? 

MR KIVUMBI: No, not unlawful. That is why I said that “not unlawful”. Thus, as we give away these powers – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you had risen on clarification –

MR BAHATI: I have changed my mind, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I will not allow changing your mind. (Laughter)

MR KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, that is why we think that the vulnerable people need to have our hand as a last resort, which should always be Parliament. We are the guarantors of these freedoms to those that are not powerful. The minister in coming back to pervade what Parliament can do is not because of those fees. No, those are not the intentions. We know where this country is going and we know what will happen. I, therefore, would like to plead with this Parliament - my good friend, I am going to give you information. My good friend the minister with whom I do not have issues as a person, but the powers you seek, you will not use them for the good of our country.

MR MUGOYA: Thank you very much for giving way, hon. Kivumbi. The information I would like to give not only to you but to this august House is, if you went to the UCC today, they have two questions to put to you as an applicant: whether you want a license or a frequency and if it is for a radio station.

They will also tell you that the frequencies we have are either in Abim, Kotido or Napak, but in Kampala, we are full. In the event that you feel you would own a radio station within or in Kampala-extra, you then need to negotiate. They will then tell you that “We are selling the frequency between 70-90, that is where the greatest majority of listeners are and the equipment we have” -  they will also say that “We need Shs 50 million” this includes the radios we have in our cars. However, we can also agree and give you a frequency where you pay a monthly charge, but we can license your company that is manning this frequency that is managed by us.” The intention is what Members are querying. This is practicable, we have to make this amendment because it will offload us from the tedious work we do as legislators. 

However, in reality, we need to overhaul that commission. It is quite sad to hear a member holding such an office telling you that, “You pay me Shs 50 million to buy my frequency or I can license this to you on a monthly basis at such an amount of money.”  It is the intention  that we are against. The law itself has no problem but we cannot open a Pandora box for these people to remain unchecked. That is our position.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have liberties in this House, but we should not exceed those to hurt people that are not in this House and cannot speak for themselves. Those are very strong allegations that you are making. There are always better ways of making them than putting them the way you have. We, therefore, need to be courteous to people that are not here physically in the House to respond to what you have just said.

However, we also need to accommodate them and make statements that still accord them the benefit – I think it is better if we respect the decorum of the House by respecting those that do not appear here. I think that it is important. This is the Parliament of Uganda. Who was holding the Floor?

MR KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, as I wind up, it is important to become cognisant of the fact that the spirit of this law leaves a lot to be desired. It is so difficult for the minister to re-assure this Parliament. In line with the submission of Okot Ogong – I think your fears then are still alive and kicking. 

MS NANTABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have listened to the concerns of the honourable members of Parliament. However, I would wish that they peruse the last page of the report of the committee – that is page 11.

Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that Parliament may by resolution revoke the regulations or particular provisions of the regulations within 30 days from the date the regulations are laid - meaning we have to first lay the regulations. We will not regulate wherever we sit and then start implementing. We will bring them here, lay them before Parliament and we shall give you 30 days to peruse them before starting on the process of revoking this or that particular regulation. So, that is already well catered for - if you can go to the last page.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what you have just said is not different from what the law says. Honourable members, this is the situation we have. Those regulations are present. 
If we decide not to proceed with this Bill, which we have the mandate to do, I will ask the minister to bring the regulations to Parliament tomorrow so we see how to proceed with them. It is not that they are not yet drafted; I have personally seen them. So, if you decide not to go ahead with this amendment - those regulations can be brought here and we see how to handle them and how they will work.

6.46
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. Article 79 (1), (2), (3) of our Constitution is very clear. But also international legislation standards mandate or dictate that any parliament can only entertain amendments when given valid justification. We had the proposed amendment from the minister and the committee chairperson. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to urge this House that the justifications brought forward are not valid enough. The committee consulted and that was a good spirit. But this can be interpreted to be a situation where you are interested in cutting down a forest but you instead consult a monkey. With due respect, what do you expect the monkey to do?

Also if you were to cut down or destroy a forest because of petitions from the people in the neighbourhood, probably because of hostile reptiles, let them still mention the same, Mr Speaker.

The minister and the committee –(Interjections)– in the interest of time, Mr Speaker, can I please develop my point. My senior brother, I am sorry. 

We are talking about delays - bringing those things back to Parliament will probably cause delays but I thought where you have some accelerated application, it is still within the mandate of this House to have also accelerated approvals that can cure your predicaments.

However, should we go ahead to say that this Parliament should not be part of the regulation process? I look at two scenarios: that we have got to have a Parliament that is going to focus on the product yet we know that the product is as good as the process. As a matter of fact, it is a process that determines the product and that is the reason I would like to end my submission by saying, no amendments. Thank you.

6.25
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Mr Speaker, I must say I am personally convinced by your explanation, on how this matter should be handled. 

However, initially I was very surprised that we could take away our role as, Members of Parliament. Like the honourable colleague stated, my biggest concern on this report has been the justifications that were advanced by the committee.

Mr Speaker, if the committee talks of “Approval of regulations by Parliament” not necessarily being a norm but an exception, there is need to know that certain exceptions are not necessarily bad because for instance, what is the extent of harm? If this law came in 2013 and this is now 2017, what is the extent of harm? Hon. Ssemujju asked whether there is any record delay by Parliament to this effect - and probably we would want to know the practice in the region, if you could help -(Interruption)

MR AKORA: I wish to make a clarification on the committee position. I reported that we received representations from different points of view and one point of view quoted, cited a number of precedents, in terms of parliamentary approval of regulations. So, it was the committee’s observation, on that submission that that was an exception and not the norm.

It is not our submission that because it is the exception then this particular Bill or Act or the regulations should be subject to that exception. We are just saying that a particular position was submitted to us that there is already a precedent in Uganda and we are saying yes, that precedent is the exception and not the norm. We should look at the merit or the rationale for the exception rather than quoting exception per se. 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Thank you, chairperson. That makes it a little clearer now. However, in terms of the expertise that is present in the sector, I would like to let you know that even in this August House, we have people who are highly knowledgeable about this sector.

Therefore, if it was the intention that the preserve of making regulations should be with the minister because of the expertise that is present in the sector, there is expensive technical expertise in this House as well. But you should also be aware that in this Parliament, we have a team that does research for Members of Parliament.

Therefore, whenever we are legislating, we legislate from a point of knowledge – (Interjections) - yes, that team is there. 

When you made mention that your fear was parliamentary approval processes being vigorous - to me, this is good. It is good to be critical whenever we are making any legislation. It is not bad at all because Parliament should not only be a rubber stamp. So, being vigorous means we are critical and that is a good practice. 

However, Mr Speaker, if - as long as the honourable minister can assure us that the legislation will be consistent with the Act, then with the explanation you made earlier on, I have no problem in supporting this amendment. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to make progress. We need to find housing for providing for a procedure so that we know what will happen. If it is the decision of the House that we should approve this - because there are two provisions and one is this: “…the minister may, after consultation with the commission and with the approval of Parliament, by statutory instrument, make regulations for better carrying into effect the provisions of this Act.”

Now, in the absence of a committee - to which I will refer the instrument when it comes because it is there and it will come - can we then put in the Act a provision that gives guidance on what procedure? Is it going to be by a motion or by a resolution of Parliament? This will guide on whether they should bring it here for debate and see whether to pass it or not? This is important because I don’t have a committee to which I will refer this matter. 

So, can we make provisions using this Bill? This is because if we don’t use this Bill, we have nothing else to use to make those provisions on the procedure on how Parliament will handle the statutory instrument.

MR OBOTH: Mr Speaker, I appreciate the concerns raised by several colleagues but -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just to conclude because in (3) it says, “…regulations made shall be laid before Parliament.” 

MR OBOTH: My real problem is with parliamentary approval. How do we realise that? If a mistake was made yesterday and we are today looking at tomorrow, must we do the same mistake in this Parliament? The mistake is that we don’t have a committee that can scrutinise the regulations and bring a report here for approval. 

The amendments that we will make now will be to give the minister powers to make the regulations and submit them here for our information.

Mr Speaker, this is my heart that we shouldn’t throw away the baby with the bath water. The concerns we have here are that we should continue, since we make the laws - and this is the argument I made for the other legislation that we are afraid of amending laws because we made them. But that is why we are here and that is why we are paid. If we made a mistake the other day, that mistake should not continue today. That is my submission and when this Parliament is making a resolution towards - I will make my stand known even louder.

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, the Constitution gives us powers but also lays for us procedures. When I look at Article 91 of the Constitution on the legislative powers of Parliament - see Article 91(1), it says, “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the power of Parliament to make laws shall be exercised through Bills passed by Parliament and assented to by the President.” So, the powers of Parliament are to make laws that come in form of Bills.

So, when you talk about subsidiary legislations, those are laws that we have delegated to the ministers. If any law is now coming to Parliament for approval, then the procedure should be followed as laid down by the Constitution. It should come in form of a Bill because now you are approving a law using the other door to pass a law in Parliament –(Interjections)– yes because the constitution is very clear that any law that we pass must come in form of a Bill; it is there in the Constitution. So, when you talk about passing other subsidiary laws –(Interruption)

MR MUGOYA: Mr Speaker, you know that issues of the ‘generals’ should sometimes be left to the ‘generals.’ (Laughter) Yes, because when you are looking at the Constitution, you have to look at it in totality. 

I want to dissent, with due respect as guided by the Speaker; look at the core and primary functions of Parliament in Article 79 and closely look at 79(2), which says, “Except as provided in this Constitution, no person or body other than Parliament shall have power to make provisions having the force of law in Uganda except under the authority conferred by an Act of Parliament.” And in the phrase “under an Act of Parliament” is where we find the subsidiary legislations. Are you getting the point now? That is why - because of Article 79 and other provisions of the Constitution, you did not for example, enact your rules of procedure by way of an Act of Parliament; they are called Rules of Procedure. They were not brought to this House by way of a Bill. So, that is the clarification and probably professional guidance that I wanted to offer – (Interjections) - Mr Speaker, under our rules and he was party to the rules of the Ninth Parliament, one cannot seek clarification where a member is on the floor seeking clarification. 

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, I don’t want to question the capability of my good friend in understanding legal jargons but what I understand is that Article 79(2) is very clear that it is Parliament to give that power to anybody and it should be by law. Once Parliament has delegated that power, it cannot again, through the back door, take it away.

When we want to take that power, we have to go by the way we normally make laws and that is by using Article 91. So, I am wondering why a regulation, which we have delegated, under a provision of an Act of Parliament, giving it to the minister to make is again –(Interruption) 

MR OBOTH: The information I want to give to the House is that with this trend we should stop giving powers to the minister to make regulations. Let’s possess ourselves since we are possessed with power to make laws. We can give ourselves powers to make regulations if that is what we want. That is the information I am giving hon. Felix Okot-Ogong.

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, I am saying this in good faith that Parliament needs to follow the procedure of our legislation. I have actually raised the procedure of legislation here and I think it is very comprehensive. I want to appeal to my brothers to accept to give limited powers to ministers to make regulations on particular issues. As the Speaker said, we can even make it in such a way that the minister can only make regulations on this and that; we can still limit it. Where we are not sure about the ministers, we can actually remove it and retain those powers with us here so that if any minister wants to make any regulations that refer to the Act, such a minister has to come to the Parliament through a Bill; the regulations will be made by Parliament but not give powers to ministers to make regulations that we are not comfortable with.

In this case there are areas of fees, which are simple and I think such powers can be given to ministers to regulate.

7.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and colleagues. I just want to take it on from where hon. Oboth and hon. Felix Okot-Ogong have stopped that we can limit the areas where a minister can make regulations. Actually as guided by the Speaker, this is already limited and we know for sure that probably it might not be prudent for this House to take itself in that direction while we know that it might be cumbersome to approve 78 regulations. 

Mr Speaker, if I heard you correctly, you suggested to this House that when we request the minster to make regulations and lay them on the Table, if a member is not comfortable with any one of those regulations, they can move for it to be removed. We have –(Interruption)  

MR ONYANGO: Information.

MR BAHATI: I know that it is friendly.

MR ONYANGO: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. The information that I would like to give is that I am a member of the committee that came up with that report and I would like to inform this House that the same way we are having this heated debate is how it was even in the committee. 

We tried our best. We came up with all these arguments that are being put across and we realised that it is impossible for the House to pass regulations. 

It is the reason we came up with such recommendations for example, that after regulations have been laid before the House, within 30 days, any Member with a query or concern can come up – we saw that this was workable and we agreed to it as a committee. 

We would like to implore this House, following on the guidance of the Speaker, that it is very difficult for us to come to the House with over 70 regulations at once and look at them.

We also looked at the option of having a committee that can process regulations because we don’t have such a committee at present. So, we really need to look at this critically and not in bad faith so that we agree. I thank you, honourable minister, for giving me the opportunity to give you information.

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much, honourable, for that useful information. Mr Speaker, I would once again like to appeal to our conscience that we can move in a direction that will have limited areas for the minister to make regulations. The minister will bring them here for laying on the Table and if there is any problem with any of them, we can remove them. 

We have done this on even more complicated issues like oil and the Public Finance Management Act, which you are going to remove. We have also done it with the Public Order Management Act. 

There is abundant evidence that regulations that require approval of Parliament do not really work. Why should we go in a direction that we for sure know does not work? Thank you.

MR AKORA: I wish to add to the submission from my member, hon. Gideon Onyango, on the deliberations that we had in the committee. We extensively pondered over this matter.

The number of institutions and stakeholders that we considered and consulted with together with the committees of Parliament and the legal advice we took from the Director for Legal and Legislative Services in Parliament – the consensus was that the House does not have the capacity, both at technical and committee levels –(Interjections)- I am reporting what the committee position was – that the House does not have the capacity, time and institutional arrangement, in terms of a dedicated committee, that would handle subsidiary legislations.

For that matter, we came up with an amendment to the Bill that we thought considers the concerns and fears of members of that committee, which fears have been repeated here. 

However, with regard to those fears and concerns, I would like to appeal to the House that we should not legislate in either bad faith or fear but for posterity that we are mandating and empowering Government; and that we recognise the power and role of the Executive and Parliament. 

We believe that both arms should do their work. If the Executive fails or abuses its power, there should be a remedy and we cannot write that remedy in the law. Why would we pick and choose on particular areas or sectors or Acts or Bills and not in every area because every area is subject to abuse?

In regard to the Uganda Communications Commission, if the Commission is not exercising its mandate properly, there should be sanctions. Even when an individual in the Commission is abusing their authority, there should be sanctions but that cannot be written in the law.

Therefore, I would like to appeal to the House that we should legislate for the country and for posterity and not for individuals. I believe that there are adequate checks and balances in the way regulations are written. 

The law says that the minister may after consulting with the Commission but within the Commission, there is a board. They consult stakeholders and all this is written in the Act.

The Act defines the powers of the minister, the Commission and areas of legislation that the Speaker has been reading. So for us to insist that all this must come before the House before they become effective, would be constraining the sector. That is my submission. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, it is now almost quarter after 7.00 p.m. We may need to go back and reconsider this. But it is in the interest of the presiding officer that mistakes are not made and that is why in the Bill that came before, there was that provision that made some error of principle and I think we took a firm decision on it that it could not pass. 

However, for this particular one, I will still guide like I guided before that it would render the law incapable of implementation. If your Parliament is going to decide on fees, community radio and all those sorts of things – like those are the things we should do and yet we have the substance of the other Bills to discuss. 

Honourable member, it looks like my voice excites you very much because each time I am speaking, you are standing. (Laughter) I wish I could make it less exciting to you so that you – because we currently have substantial Bills that are pending. I have about 16 of them on the list here which we need to enact.  Actually, this is not comprehensive because I am told there is one on disability that is not included on this list, which I shared with the Leader of the Opposition yesterday.

We have these ones and we are going to add 78 statutory instruments to this. Really? I would like for us to go and look at the Act again. Look at the provisions that this authority is given to the minister to do and then come back tomorrow and see if we still insist on legislating on fees and the other items that are listed in Section 93, then we will take that decision at that time. Otherwise, my guidance is that the specific areas may not need us to come back. 

However, there may be areas where we want to retain our legislative powers to look at them again before they are implemented. But many of these are not such areas in my judgment.

Honourable members, please go and look at Section 93 of the Act and then we come back and we see whether the minister can use those powers to stop other members from appearing on radio like it is being indicated. 

Otherwise, I think the debate just highlights the spirit of suspicion that has been existing for a while, that we give people powers and they do not handle these powers well. But in this particular case, I do not know how somebody can mishandle the issue of fees and related matters. 

This House will come to these matters tomorrow but recall that I had scheduled some matters of urgent importance to be raised and so I will allow them.

7.17
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak County North, Amuru): Mr Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance. On the 19th day of March in my constituency, especially in the area of Apaa, some people crossed from Adjumani District, abducted five people and killed one known as Joseph Onek, using bows and arrows. 

Again on the 2nd of April, they burnt 104 huts and on Sunday evening, they crossed from Adjumani to Amuru District and beat three people to near death. Those three are admitted at Lacor Hospital as I talk. The victims are: Richard Yero, Ochen and a one Opot. The matters have been raised to the Prime Minister –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, these are urgent matters that you need to give responses to. If they come to your sector and you have gone, that will be a problem. Please let us stay and finish these matters.

MR AKOL: I raised this issue to the Office of the Prime Minister and we had a meeting with them. They promised the security of the people and further promised that they would supply those whose huts were burnt with some relief items. They further promised that people would be taken care of in regard to their land and that they would put a commission of inquiry in place. 

However, to date no action has been taken. No relief items have been given to the people whose huts were burnt down including the ones who were admitted in the hospital; this is a matter of insecurity. 

I am in shock because if this continues - I alerted Government since September last year about the problem. If the people from this side try to revenge, then there will be more serious problems. Therefore, I thought this matter should be considered seriously. Thank you.

7.19
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, I want to agree with the statement made to the extent that there was a meeting in the Prime Minister’s Office. I agree that the meeting took place and my colleague raised the same issues and the Prime Minister gave assurance that the culprits would be found and that the security personnel would look –(Interruption)

MR AKOL: Mr Speaker, the First Deputy Prime Minister is an interested party in this issue. In the matters that I have raised to the Government, he is one of the persons claimed to be sending the attackers. Therefore, I do not think that he is the right person to respond to this issue but rather another person in Government.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to find a solution to this problem. You are an actor yourself much as you have raised the issue. So, it will only be natural that another actor, who is in position, can say something for us to assess whether his submission is meaningful or not before we take the next step. 

However, let us allow him to submit what he would like to say and we will draw our own judgment from his submission.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Mr Speaker, I was reporting what happened in my presence in the Prime Minister’s Office. During that meeting, I said I was not aware of what had happened as reported and therefore, I could not deny or confirm because I had no evidence. 

However, I would like the House to know that the Prime Minister –(Interruption) 

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The information I would like to give to Gen. Moses Ali is that he should not deny that he does not know what happened in Apaa, because some of the culprits who were arrested stated very clearly that they got their spears and pangas from you. 

Therefore, you are aware of what took place in Apaa and since 2008 you know exactly what is happening in that place. Therefore, it is so bad of you to deny the truth yet you are much aware of the history of Apaa.

Mr Speaker, as you guided, let us bring this matter to an end. Every year we come back to the same issue. You remember in the Ninth Parliament, we presented the same issues and fought in that place and so many things happened but nothing has been done since then. We further held a meeting together with the Prime Minister and came up with very good resolutions and Gen. Ali – therefore, the information I would like to give you is that when we held a meeting with the Prime Minister, we came up with over 10 resolutions and you made it clear that you are a soldier and would never respect those resolutions.

Therefore, let us be serious Gen. Ali because this is a matter of life and death. We cannot allow our people to continue suffering that way. 

Anyway, the information I would like to give to Gen. Ali, is that he is aware of what is happening and should not run away from that because he is the first suspect and he knows exactly what is taking place. (Laughter) Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a rule in this House and that rule is clear on imputation of improper motive on another member. Let us keep within the decorum of the House when we say the things we say. It does not change the fact even when you say it in another way; it does not make it better by saying it the other way. 

Please, let us respect one another when discussing these matters.

MR DULU: Mr Speaker, I would like to give this information to the House. I am a Member of Parliament for Adjumani East, the constituency that borders Kilak North constituency. On 18th people from Zoka, Olwee and nearby villages assisted the police in arresting those lumbering trees in Zoka Forest illegally and handed them over to the police –(Interjections)– this is on record and you can even call police and they will tell you what is happening. 

Unfortunately, on the 20th one man called Christopher Ojera, the former Pabbo LC III Chairperson, went to the police and told them that if they didn’t release the people arrested, his people were organising and that they were coming for revenge and they did it that very day. 

It is absurd to turn it the other way round, saying that our people attacked Amuru. The document that I am holding here shows clearly the place they are claiming is not in Amuru. This is a research carried out between 13th and 17th September 2015. It is on record. I do not know why these people keep referring to that particular place to be in Amuru. That is the information I want to give.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us do this, please. This matter came years back. This matter has been discussed. Ministers have gone there and the Prime Minister has been and is still involved. The way it is moving now, it is not going to help us in this House; it is not going to be productive. 

So can I – the Rt hon. Prime Minister is not here - refer this matter to the Prime Minister so that they can come back - maybe tomorrow is too early for us to – 

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You recall that yesterday I raised this matter as I talked about the security situation in the country. But while I was making my contribution, the Member for Adjumani, hon. Jesca Ababiku, rose on a point of information. And her issue was that as long as the boundaries are not clear and demarcations are not known to the parties, this issue will never come to rest.

Therefore, I would like to suggest, Mr Speaker, that as the Prime Minister comes maybe to clear the air and make the final conclusion on this matter, it should be geared towards harmonising the issue of boundaries. Otherwise, we shall keep seeing these issues come up. 
I was in Adjumani and heard serious sentiments from both sides. When you get there, you will even find that there are tribal sentiments trying to come up. I would suggest that we first sort out the issue of the boundary. When we do that then we can see what will happen and deal with it thereafter. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why I am saying that we need to get this matter back to the Prime Minister then he comes back. That is because even that boundary you are talking about, there have been processes of re-opening it but it has led to further conflicts. So, it is not just a matter of where the border is, it is also now about where people believe the border is. 

So, the issue is more complicated than just going to put lines that this is this and that. That has happened before – people have gone there to try and reopen the boundaries and there have been issues even about that; that the people who were re-opening the boundaries were shifting them. So, there are all these issues. That is why I am saying it needs a forum other than the House to look at it in a more comprehensive way.

So, I will allow the Deputy Prime Minister to make a comment and take this issue back the way we have discussed it. If you need to take it to Cabinet, please do. If you need to have it in another forum where the honourable members from those affected areas can sit with you and discuss it then we can be briefed as Parliament on what progress has been made. This issue has been outstanding for a long time. In fact it started in 2002.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Mr Speaker, I am unfortunate because I am a Member of Parliament and until this Parliament, I was a Member of Parliament of Adjumani as a district because it is a one constituency district. However, like Amuru, the constituency has been divided. Now we have two constituency members in Adjumani plus one lady representative and the same applies to Amuru District. 

In the meeting at the Prime Minister’s office, I told my brother, hon. Anthony Akol, that I was happy that my constituency had been divided. And as I speak now, my constituency is no longer bordering Amuru. It is hon. Dulu’s constituency that borders Amuru and that is the man responsible. Actually you should talk to him now and not me. If you want to kill me, at least you will be killing me as an innocent man because I am no longer responsible. The person responsible for that area is hon. Dulu.

There are a lot of allegations, which I just ignored. And in that meeting I told the Prime Minister that because I have been an MP for this area until this Tenth Parliament and because my brothers – in fact I told the Prime Minister that I found it easier to deal with hon. Gilbert Olanya those days – perhaps because we were only two but I thought hon. Olanya was a bit less more devil I know than hon. Akol. (Laughter) That is because I do not understand hon. Akol at all.

Mr Speaker, allow me to say what I actually said in the Prime Minister’s Office. I also suggested to the Prime Minister that because I am not trusted by my – the person I trusted has now proved to the House that he is actually worse than hon. Akol. So I do not know who is who now. (Laughter)

Therefore, I suggested to the Prime Minister that Government should hire an independent body to go and solve the problem of boundaries between Amuru and Adjumani – independent of me and them. That way, we could have a different approach. Whatever has been proposed there – I have never sent anybody. I even had no idea about these things. It is wrong to say that I gave pangas to the attackers; that is a very grave allegation, which he cannot prove. Nobody saw me collecting people and giving out pangas to them. You cannot say in this House that I did it. That is wrong.

Therefore, I suggested to the Prime Minister that we get an independent body – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a point of order.

MR AKOL: Mr Speaker, when we had the meeting with the Prime Minister, this is the same conduct the First Deputy Prime Minister exhibited; trying to intimidate us. And the way he is holding his stick – as if maybe because he is used to holding a gun before, he thinks we shall fear him. Is it in order for him to intimidate people over this land matter?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have been presiding over this and you raised the issue when I was here. I have not witnessed the First Deputy Prime Minister intimidating anybody. He used his stick to demonstrate that: “To say that I gave pangas is not acceptable and that it is a grave allegation.”

That is what he said so I do not think he was intimidating anybody in particular. If there was anybody who should have been intimidated, it should have been the Speaker for allowing this matter to come up. This is because I know how emotive it becomes when we touch on these issues but it is still important that we find a solution to it.

MR MAGANDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a procedural point. In your earlier submission, you had sought to refer this matter to the Prime Minister. I thought based on the mood in the House and the fact that the neighbours seem to be on a different page, we are instead engaging in a discussion that may not yield into having a resolution to the problem. 

I would still refer to your earlier submission as a point of procedure that we still subject this matter to the Office of the Prime Minister. It will probably now revisit the earlier provisions in the resolutions they had reached before in the earlier meeting that would now engage to come out with an alternative to resolve this issue between Adjumani and Amuru districts. That is my point of procedure. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. In fact that is what I had said but then we got the Rt. hon. First Deputy Premier before he concluded his remarks. However, in the process of trying to conclude, he is now exciting other members by him also getting concerned about some of the statements that have been made. 

Anyway, honourable members, in this House, we find solutions and seek the best way of co-existence with neighbours and all categories of people around us and that should be the spirit that should inform our dialogue. If we have to be in a situation where we need to discuss this thing, we should have the national character on this because those little borders that separate us are not deeper than the blood that connects us as human beings. 

Therefore, we should focus more on our connections as human beings than on little borders, streams, mountains and forests that separate us from each other. I think that should be the spirit that we should adopt in finding solutions to sometimes apparently very difficult things. 

In the past, when I first went to that place, the ordinary people did not have any problem. They were moving left, right, and coming and going to drink this and that side; they never had any problems. We still have to understand where this problem came from. 

The trigger of this problem came in 2002 and I was in this House when the then Minister of Tourism brought areas for gazetting for game reserves and there was no debate because people - they brought something about East Moyo and some other things. The issues came when Uganda Wildlife Authority started removing people from where they had always been based on some resolutions that had been passed by this Parliament. That is where the problem started from. So the solution to that problem is actually in this House. 

However, we also need to find a way of bringing it back to this House properly because the issue is not about the people of Adjumani and the people of Amuru. The issue is the Uganda Wildlife Authority now throwing away people based on a resolution that was sponsored by people from Adjumani. That is where the problem started. (Applause)

So, the issue should involve the Office of the Prime Minister and that is why I am saying the Prime Minister as a person and the people in control would be the best to find a solution to this thing. If they need to revisit the issue of the gazette which was given in 2002, then they should bring it back to Parliament so we remove the gazetting and then the communities can sort themselves out. This is because there is a community of Adjumani and Amuru but then there is also the Uganda Wildlife Authority that is a factor in this whole thing. So, let us find a better way to deal with this thing.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I really tried my best because I also want a solution in this matter but the solution, as I said, is that we need an independent team. Government should look for an independent team so that - we are already biased. My teams are there and my brothers are biased - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you are not biased. You are partisan. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Okay, that is better English perhaps. Definitely, I am not going to be judged well. If my brothers over there were to judge me, I know I would not have a fair trial. Thank God they are not going to try me and therefore, I am not worried. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And they are also thanking God that you are not going to try them.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Neither and so I would not even need to try them because I do not know how I can try them. I will still say that tomorrow I will be going to report to the Prime Minister that the matter came up and I will repeat my request of setting up an independent team. I do not know how they are going to do it but I should not be there because I will be there as a witness. 

Therefore, thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity and I am waiting to solve that problem as a witness somewhere. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am not going to open this now because – okay, point of procedure.

MS LUCY AKELLO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Hon. Akol stated that so many huts have been brought down and people are suffering. 

However, I would like to say that attacks are still going on. Even as we look for a lasting solution, I would want the House to pronounce itself on the emergency situation that is on the ground. 

Therefore, the procedural matter I am raising is in regard to the issues that have been raised, which are actually very urgent and may not wait for a very long time. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The office of the minister responsible for disaster preparedness actually is in the Prime Minister’s Office. That is why I am saying it would be the one stop centre for finding a solution to this thing. So, we will also find a way of extracting and alerting the Prime Minister about the issues that have come before the House on this particular matter so that we can take action. 

Honourable member, are you rising on a procedural point? If information yes, then it is granted but if you are going to give information again that will be contested, then it is going to be a problem.

MR DULU: Mr Speaker, I wonder whether procedurally we are moving on well. The matter we are trying to reintroduce is a matter that was expeditiously dealt with. The report I am holding here is a report by the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development that was carried out in 2015 and - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The problem, honourable member - 

MR DULU: The procedure is - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Wait. The issue is that on the 18th - you are talking about 2015 yet we are talking about what happened last month or is happening today. That is why it is here. In spite of that thing of 2015, these issues are still going on. That is the problem. So, let us find a solution because this problem has continued even after that report of 2015. 

MR DULU: Mr Speaker, whether we disassociate ourselves from what I am saying or not, that is the origin because the people on the other side refused to accept the boundaries stated by the Constitution of Uganda – 

MR AKOL: With or without the border, the demarcation or reopening that you are talking about, no person can be evicted from their land. 

Is it in order for my honourable colleague, Mark Dulu, to insist that something was done in 2015 and so people should be evicted, beaten or killed even after your wise ruling?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is exactly what I stated before the honourable member came back. Can we stop here for now as the Prime Minister is briefed to take appropriate steps to see how this matter can now be handled in terms of both the humanitarian issues - if they are practically there - and also see how solutions can be found including this other aspect that is bringing further tension between the two communities that have co-existed for many years? This House is now adjourned to tomorrow at 2:00 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 7.47 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 6 April 2017 at 2:00 p.m.) 

