Wednesday, 20 April 2005

Parliament met at 2.33 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, today I have received this communication addressed to you, the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. It is from the Apostolic Nunciature in Uganda. It reads as follows:

“The Apostolic Nunciature in Uganda presents its compliments to the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda and has the honour to inform you that following the death of His Holiness, Pope John Paul II, the College of Cardinals has elected as his successor, His Eminence, Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger, who has taken the name of Benedict XVI. 

His Holiness, Benedict XVI was born in Marktl am Inn, Germany on 16th April 1927. He became Archbishop of Munich and Freising in 1977 and was ordained Cardinal by Pope Paul VI in the same year. 

He has been a perfect prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith of the Holy See since 1981. 

In 2002, he was appointed by Pope John Paul II Dean of the College of Cardinals. 

The Apostolic Nunciature has the pleasure to inform you that a Mass for thanksgiving will be held in Rubaga Cathedral Kampala on Wednesday, 20th April 2005 at 5.00 pm. The Members of Parliament are cordially invited to attend.  

The Apostolic Nunciature in Uganda avails itself of this opportunity to renew to the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda the assurances of its highest consideration.” 

The communication is dated 19th April 2005 and signed by Christopher Pierre, Apostolic Nuncio, Kampala. (Applause). Maybe because of this development we shall be adjourning a bit early.

2.38
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (Madi-Okolo County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Following your communication from the Chair, I want to add my voice to that of the Papal Nuncio -(Laughter)- that I am personally elated by the election of former Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger. I went to church last Sunday and I dedicated the service to the election of this particular Cardinal. God Almighty might have heard my prayers and answered me directly. (Laughter) I will continue to pray for the Holy Father that he finds fulfilment in what the Lord and his church have placed in him so that he continues to bring unity to the world.

But at our political level, we have a great lesson to learn that the process of succession must not be in doubt at anyone time. (Applause) It must be exact so that the community is not thrown in disarray. I think the Catholic Church has shown to us that this is possible; all we need is commitment.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.40
MS BETTY AMONGI (Woman Representative, Apac):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also add my voice to my honourable colleague as a potential nun for the Catholic Church -(Hear! hear!)- I think it is important to congratulate the Papal Nuncio, Christophe Pierre, the diplomatic representative of the Vatican in Uganda upon the election of the new Pope. 

I also congratulate in a special way the Embassy and Ambassador of Germany for the elections of a German national as the new Pope. I further congratulate Emmanuel Cardinal Wamala who represented Uganda and participated in the Pope’s election. I further congratulate the Catholic Community in Uganda and worldwide for the election of a new Pope and hope that the new Pope will bring to the forefront gender issues in the main stream of the issues of the Catholic Church. I thank you.

2.42
MR ISAIAH IMUMET (Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of security concern.

HON. MEMBERS:  About the pope!

MR IMUMET: No, I am talking about the security concern in my constituency in Katakwi District. Mr Speaker, the security situation in my constituency right now is very appalling. The disarmament exercise in Karamoja has now become a source of insecurity for my constituency. The LDUs we used to have were taken to Karamoja to beef up the UPDF.  This has created a gap in my constituency so that the Karimojong instead of being in Karamoja, have now come to take refugee in my constituency while the army and LDUs are in Karamoja.  So, it is just a change of venue, the army has gone that way, the Karimojong have come to take refugee in my constituency. 

This is very unfair because we had recruited the LDUs for the defence of the locals but now they have gone to do the work of the UPDF leaving our place unsafe for the people to stay.

Mr Speaker, yesterday at 2.00 p.m., there was a burial of a pastor who was killed in my constituency on Sunday while he was returning from a place he had gone to conduct service. From morning up to around 10.00 a.m. you are not supposed to be moving from point A to point B because there is danger on the way. The only time people can now walk around in the constituency is from 10.00 a.m. to 2.00 p.m. From 2.00 p.m. onwards it is dangerous again. 

So, I thought that I would air out this issue for record purposes. I have even talked with the Ministry of Defence on the same issue and promised to handle it. The Arrow Boys who were brought from Soroti, Amuria and Kaberamaido to replace the LDUs who had been working in my constituency are few. What is even worse now is that logistics like food and other items are not always in constant supply. So, much as people are in the camps, it is a problem; there is no food for the wananchi themselves; now the burden of maintaining these young men who are guarding the camps is again on the wananchi who do not have food themselves; they are in the camps.  

So, Mr Speaker, I would like the Government to take note of this and to try its best to rectify the situation. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.45
MAJ. (RTD) JIMMY KINOBE (Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to address this matter to the Prime Minister and the Minister of Local Government in particular. We are aware that Government made a political undertaking to suspend graduated tax for the next 10 years effective from the next financial year, which is about a few months away. 

Mr Speaker, we all know that graduated tax is a major source of revenue for the local governments, but there is also a political commitment to have it suspended. Two days ago, when I was in a budget conference in Luweero Town Council the authorities asked me whether they should budget for graduated tax as a source or not, and I could not effectively answer.  So, the purpose of this matter, because I have also got it from other local governments, is to seek information from the Government whether, first of all, this undertaking of suspending graduated tax is still on, and if it is, what steps has Government made to amend the Local Government Act to effect this suspension?

Two, the local governments as we speak now have not got any guidance on how to treat this matter as they prepare the budgets. At what stage is the Government going to inform these local governments on what to do?  

Finally, what steps has Government embarked on to fill the gaps that are going to be created by this suspension if it is still stands as it was pronounced?  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think we will get a statement soon either from the Prime Minister or the Minister of Local Government. But graduated tax is not a matter of statute alone; it is a constitutional issue. I think the people who talked about it thought it was a statutory matter, but it is a constitutional issue. Anyway, we shall get guidance soon.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

2.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, Section 31 of the Referendum and other Provisions Act enjoins the Minister responsible for that law to make regulations for the operationalisation of the Referendum and other Provisions Act. It is now my honour, Mr Speaker, to lay the said regulations on the Table. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let the same be studied by the appropriate committee of Parliament.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.49
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. Honourable Members, today I am going to make a statement on tsetse fly control. My statement was put on the tables outside; it is being distributed.  

Mr Speaker, as you may be aware, tsetse flies are major vectors, which transmit trypanosome parasites that cause a disease known as trypanosomiasis in man and animals. In man, the disease is called sleeping sickness while in animals it is called Nagana. This disease is a major disease that affects the economies of many countries in Africa including Uganda because it causes morbidity and mortality and indirectly and directly negatively affects agricultural production.

In Uganda, it is estimated that 5.2 million people and four million heads of cattle are at risk of contracting human and animal trypanosomiasis respectively.  

Sleeping sickness occurs in the acute form known as Rhodesian type and the chronic form of that disease is known as Gambian type. Uganda is probably the only country in Africa where both forms of the disease occur. The Rhodesian form occurs in the Southeast while the Gambian form occurs in the North West of the country.

 The two foci of the disease have been separated for a very long time, however, these two different types of vectors are moving in from Arua and Busoga and could easily join. If the current northward advance of the Rhodesian sleeping sickness is not checked, the two forms will join, this will bring very serious complications in diagnosis of the two diseases and treatment of affected human subjects as the two forms of the disease are diagnosed and treated differently.

Mr Speaker, Nagana on the other hand affects cattle, goats, sheep and pigs and is characterized by debility, abortions, retarded growth and high mortality is susceptible to livestock populations.  The disease is widespread in Uganda and is one of the major constraints to animal production in about 70 percent of the country.

Mr Speaker, the current assessment of the levels of tsetse infestation in the country has been made on the basis of areas in which high, medium and low risk tsetse challenge occur in animals as below:

High risk areas include: 

a) The mid-west region (Hoima and Masindi districts), western region (Kabarole, Bundibugyo and Kasese), the districts of Mubende and Luweero in central region and western parts of Apach in the northern region. 

b) The south-west region (parts of Bushenyi and Mbarara) and southern region (south Rakai).  

c) South-eastern region (Jinja, Iganga, Mayuge, Bugiri, Kamuli, Busia, Tororo, Soroti, Kayunga, Mukono especially Buvuma Islands).  

d) The north-western region (Arua, Yumbe and Moyo). 

e) Northern region (northern parts of Gulu and Kitgum.  

Medium risk areas are: 

a) Northern region (Lira and the rest of Gulu, Kitgum and Apac districts) 

b) North-western region (Nebbi district)

c) Kaberamaido and Katakwi.  

Low risk areas: 

a) South-west region (Kabale, Rukungiri, the rest of Mbarara and Bushenyi) 

b) Southern region (Masaka, Mpigi and the rest of Rakai) 

c) Central region (Kampala) 

d) Eastern region (Mbale, Sironko, Kapchorwa, Pallisa and Kumi) 

e) North-eastern region (Nakapiripiti, Moroto and Kotido).

Mr Speaker, the recent restocking of cattle by central and local governments and the displacement of people in districts of the North brought about by insurgency has contributed greatly to the spread of sleeping sickness and Nagana. For example, sleeping sickness in Soroti was introduced by animals brought for restocking from Kamuli and other sleeping sickness endemic areas of south-east. The current sleeping sickness epidemic in the North and North-East is closely associated with restocking and the displacement of people and their livestock from Lira, Apac, Kaberamaido, Katakwi into Soroti sleeping sickness area.

Tsetse control in the country:  

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, as you may be aware, under the Local Governments Act of 1997, and following the restructuring of Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF) in 1998 and 2000, animal husbandry extension services and vector control activities including and Nagana control were decentralised to local governments. Districts are therefore, expected to undertake tsetse control activities by providing personnel and logistics. However, most if not all districts do not have the capacity to control tsetse infestation. Furthermore, tsetse control is not high on the priorities of districts. This is compounded by the fact that tsetse flies do not know boundaries. 

Mr Speaker, there are therefore varying levels of tsetse control activities in the districts depending on the priority accorded to tsetse and trypanasomiasis control. There are some few districts like Mukono, Kamuli, Bugiri, Mayuge, which have contributed to tsetse control activities in form of purchase of traps, hand sprays, pumps, insecticides, construction and rehabilitation of dips. 

In the south and south-west farmers are highly sensitised about tsetse and tick control and routinely use deltamethrin on their cattle. This has significantly reduced tsetse in these areas.  In the majority of the districts, however, very little or not tsetse control activities are taking place. This is reflected by: 

(i) The high tsetse densities in some areas reaching over 1000 flies per trap per day in Buvuma Islands where pedestrians in some parts move with a branch of a tree chasing away these flies. 

(ii) The high Nagana prevalence in some parts reaching 40 percent as reported recently in Tororo districts.  

(iii) The continuous advance of Rhodesian sleeping sickness northwards in the districts of Lira, Apac, and Kaberamaido.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, from the above it is evident that decentralisation of vector control including tsetse control to local governments was a serious oversight which must be reviewed and reversed. 

Ongoing initiatives to control tsetse and trypanosomiasis: 

Mr Speaker, the ministry is aware and mindful of the negative impact these two can have on the people and the economy of the country.  We are also aware of the hardships faced by local governments in undertaking tsetse control including inadequate capacity. In order to supplement the efforts of local governments in this endeavour, the following are ongoing activities by the MAAIF to address the problem. 

a) Farming in tsetse controlled areas (FITCA) project: 
 
The ministry is implementing the EU-funded project, Farming in Tsetse Controlled Areas (FITCA) in 12 districts namely: Mukono, Jinja, Kamuli, Iganga, Bugiri, Busia, Tororo, Palisa, Mayuge, Mbale, Kayunga and Soroti. The project is implementing an integrated community based tsetse control with promotion of appropriate farming practices for improvement of the welfare of the local communities. It should be noted that the project operates in 12 districts whereas it was planned initially to operate in 6 districts. This has meant overstretching of the available resources.  Consequently tsetse control is carried out only in high challenge areas. Activities being undertaken under this project fall into two categories:  

Tsetse and Nagana control: 

i) Deployment of insecticides impregnated tsetse traps in affected areas, limited though;

ii) Establishment of crushes for spraying animals, live-bait application of insecticide of cattle; 

iii) Establishing protected zero grazing units for dairy cattle;

iv) Carrying out mass treatment of cattle; and
 
v) Providing support to districts to strengthen diagnostic capacity for Nagana and setting up tsetse trap manufacturing units in the affected districts. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, last year the agricultural show in Jinja really demonstrated various traps even locally made here in Uganda, which are affordable for farmers.  

Sleeping sickness control:

i) Establishment of diagnostic and treatment centres for sleeping sickness in the affected districts; 

ii) Active and passive surveillance of sleeping sickness strengthened.  

As a result of the above intervention:
 
a) There was more than 75 percent tsetse population reduction in 34 sub-counties of operation.  

b) The number of counties with more than 5 sleeping sickness cases recorded annually was reduced from 20 sub-counties to 7 sub-counties.
  
c) The average prevalence of Nagana in the project area was reduced from 6.6 percent to 4.6 percent.  

What is happening in the non-FITCA districts of the North and north-east?  

Activities for tsetse control in the non-FITCA districts of the north and north-east include: 

a) Sensitisation of the population in the districts on the use of tsetse traps bait technology; 

b) Districts have been encouraged to allocate more resources for tsetse control; 

c) In some districts the ministry has donated some traps and insecticide in kind; 

d) Concurrent with these efforts, there has been passive and active surveillance for both Nagana and sleeping sickness and the treatment of positive cases by veterinary and medical personnel respectively.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, what the ministry intends to do to control tsetse fly in affected districts, it will consolidate all the achievements above and the ongoing efforts outlined above, but in addition will do the following:

Under the National Livestock Productivity Improvement project, whose implementation has just commenced in the ministry, there is a provision for tsetse control in the districts of the cattle corridor, which include Kamuli, Soroti, Masindi, Kumi, Katakwi, Kaberamaido, Apac, Lira, Gulu, Kitgum and Pader. Activities to be undertaken include the following: Strengthening district capacity for diagnosis by rehabilitating or building and equipping laboratories; provision of insecticide impregnated traps to the districts; sensitisation of the local community on tsetse control; animal disease and disease vector control strategy, a strategy to control animal disease and disease vectors including tsetse fly has been developed and is awaiting Cabinet approval.

Implementation is to commence immediately after the approval. The short-term objective of the strategy is to suppress tsetse population to manageable levels in areas currently every infested.  

Within the available resources, the following integrated approach will be used:

• Application of insecticides treated nets and targets.

• Application of insecticides on livestock to kill the tsetse fly and ticks at the same time.

• Treatment of all livestock brought to markets from sleeping sickness areas.

• Prophylactic treatment of all livestock in affected districts.

The medium and long-term objective is to eradicate tsetse from all parts of the country first, by creating tsetse free zones and eventually eradicating by use of Sterile Insect Technique (SIT).  

Area-wide tsetse project. Under the area-wide tsetse project, whose implementation is expected to commence in July 2005 once Parliament approves the loan for financing the project by the African Development Bank, tsetse control and eradication is to be addressed on a long-term basis by creating tsetse free zones.  This will be achieved by:

(a) Area-wide application of environmentally friendly technologies like insecticide impregnated traps and targets.

(b) Application of SIT with support from government and international atomic energy agency. Capacity for SIT is being established in Tororo.

Funds, Mr Speaker, are being availed under the ministry’s budget for the financial year 2005/06 for the rehabilitation of the infrastructure at livestock research institute for mass-rearing of tsetse flies for the use under the sterile insect techniques. This should give government capacity to produce the required volumes of tsetse flies under this science.

Mr Speaker, in addition to the above measures and for the affected and sustainable control of tsetse in the country, government is to undertake the following: We need to review the status of the tsetse control in the country with the possibility central government taking over the responsibility of controlling tsetse and Trypanosomiasis in the country, because the prevalence of the latter has reached the epidemic proportions and districts have no capacity to contain them. The control of these two is a public good because it affects both human beings and livestock which also act as reservoir of sleeping sickness. There is, therefore, need to revisit the Local Government’s Act, 1997 and recall tsetse control programme back to the centre. 

In light of the present extent of infestation and the northward advance of the Rhodesian sleeping sickness, there shall be an integrated approach with MAAIF collaborating with the Ministry of Health to concurrently address the fly.

The cattle and human subjects as follows:

Use of insecticide impregnated tsetse traps, application of insecticides on all livestock where applicable and environmentally acceptable sequential area spraying, active and passive surveillance and treatment of all positive human subjects in the affected areas.  

Prophylactic treatment of all cattle and sheep, goats and pigs in the affected areas; treatment of all pigs, sheep, goats and cattle bought from markets or moving out of sleeping sickness areas to eliminate all animal reservoir.

Government’s ongoing programmes and projects such as the Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF), WIWA and PMA shall have to prioritise tsetse control in the affected areas. 

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries together with the Ministry of Health are to review and consider reallocation of the health facilities for treatment of patients infected by sleeping sickness under Lillie to Namungalwe, Iganga District where there already exist adequate infrastructure and facilities for handling sleeping sickness victims. This would facilitate consolidation of facilities including the medical team in one place.

Finally, Mr Speaker, I would like to commend the honourable colleague who brought to the attention of government concern on tsetse fly infestation in the new affected areas in the country, and with him and others, we shall do our best to eradicate this problem. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Honourable members, I do not know really whether we are going to have another debate because we have had debates on this matter before, this was to supplement what had been done. The Minister in charge of Tourism made a report and the Minister of Health did so. Really, we have noted the efforts that are being taken. I think we should not reopen a debate on this subject.

MRS KAVUMA: Mr Speaker, just a simple clarification. What worries me is that in all the reports that have come, Kalangala has not been included and we had several death cases.  So, I do not know whether it is because the ministers cannot reach the place, and they have nobody in those areas. But in the three, none of them has mentioned Kalangala and we have got very many cases. We almost lost a very leading person in this country due to sleeping sickness.

THE SPEAKER: Well, we note that Kalangala is missing in these reports.

CAPT. (RTD) BYARUHANGA: Mr Speaker, when we got the statement from the Minister of State for Tourism, he told us that he is charged with protecting the tsetse flies, conserving, and the Ministry of Agriculture is in charge of destroying. So, I wanted to know how these ministries work together for the good of this item.

MR WANDERA: Mr Speaker, you have made a ruling, and a pursuant to Rule 65, your ruling can only be reviewed upon a substantive motion. I would, therefore, beg that we proceed to the next item.

THE SPEAKER: My ruling was not simply exercising my powers, but I think we agree that this matter was handled and we end it there. In future, if there are serious concerns, some can be raised with authorities concerned.

DR STEVEN MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, looking at this paper, there are quite a number of faults, which should be rectified in dealing with sleeping sickness. No local government or district has the capacity to deal with sleeping sickness so that the central government should completely takeover the control and treatment of – please let it be taken as an emergency. No district can manage to deal with this situation, and this is a historical disease in this country, as the lady from Kalangala has been pointing out. There was a reader in Luganda, who used to say; “Lakeri omusasiizi kumbalama z’ennyanja” and it was to deal with control of tsetse fly. There was a lady called Rachael who worked very hard in the control of disease all along the shores of Lake Victoria.

Unfortunately, we have allowed it to spread and it is not an easy disease to control.  The East African Community had a whole research station at Tororo and a treatment canter, which was neglected, and has more or less gone to the dogs. It should be revived and this disease should be taken very seriously. Thank you very much, hon. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, no further debate on this. And as for hon. Dr Mallinga, I think in the statement they said government may have to take control from the districts. This was stated in this statement. As I have said, there is no further debate on this matter, but when there are developments you can always put the question. Otherwise, we will be debating tsetse flies everyday.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (PENSIONS) (Mrs Benigna Mukiibi): Mr Speaker and honourable members, you will recall that during the plenary debate of Parliament to consider the Uganda Broadcasting Corporation Bill 2004, Members of Parliament expressed concern over delayed payment of pension arrears. I consequently, requested to be given an opportunity later to make a report in the House about this matter. I accordingly rise to make that report.

Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the Members that the provision for the Public Service Pension is enshrined in the Constitution of Uganda Article 254.

The pension scheme for the traditional civil service and local governments is operationalised by the Pension Act (Cap. 286) and the Pension Regulations hitherto, while pension for military is provided for under the Armed Forces Pensions Act (Cap. 298).

I would like first of all, to handle the traditional public service pensions. Mr Speaker and honourable members, my ministry is currently responsible for the payment of gratuities and pensions to officers who served in the traditional public service. This includes officers who served in: 

• The central government ministries and departments
• The teaching service
• The judicial service
• The health service
• The police and prisons service and
• Former employees of the defunct East African Community.

The pensioners, Mr Speaker, are regularly and promptly paid their monthly pensions through their bank accounts. There are currently 25,650 pensioners in this category. 

Local government pensions:

Mr Speaker, retirement benefits for employees of the local governments, which include gratuities and pensions, is a responsible of each local government. According to Clause 4(3) of the Pensions Act, money for payment of gratuities and pensions for the service in local government is paid out of the funds from that local government. However, due to the recent retrospective revalidation of pensions, and in the application of the revised formula, in computing of retirement benefits, many local governments have expressed inability to pay due to lack of funds. 

Therefore, in an effort to ascertain their level of indebtedness, it was established that by 28 February 2001, local governments had accumulated pension arrears amounting to Shs 17.5 billion. Government pledged to look for funds to assist the local governments clear these arrears. This process is still ongoing.

Mr Speaker, the efforts to bail out local governments from the pension arrears by central government did not mean that central government had assumed responsibility for payment of pensions and gratuities to employees of local governments. The pension zero on this matter has not changed. In effect, it was expected that local governments would be paying their pensioners promptly from March 2001 and the backlog be reserved as outstanding arrears.

On the question of which authority will be responsible for pension payments whenever new districts are created from the already existing ones, I would like to propose that since pensions are not the only liability in such situations, and are not an exception, pension liabilities should be on the agenda for resolution between the affected local governments.

Military pensions:

Mr Speaker and honourable members, since 2003, my ministry was charged with administering the military pension scheme previously handled by the Ministry of Defence. Since then my ministry has been paying out survivors’ benefits to widows and orphans of the deceased officers, women and men of the UPDF. 

They are currently in our records 40,652 approved claims in this category. More claims are continuously forthcoming. 

Due to budgetary limitations, my ministry resolved to apportion the available funds to beneficiaries on a monthly basis. A monthly pay roll was therefore introduced with effect from this financial year and the beneficiaries are now regularly being paid through their bank accounts. What was owing before this arrangement has been preserved as arrears to be resolved along the general efforts by government to clear other pension arrears.

Pension arrears:

Now on the issue of pension arrears, Mr Speaker and honourable members, you will further recall that in May last year, the Rt hon. 2nd Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Public Service made a statement to this august House about the status then of the payment of pension arrears and other related matters. In the statement, he explained that government has decided to settle pension arrears following a two-way pronged approach namely:

(i) That Government proposed to secure a loan from the development partners and,

(ii) That government was prioritising payment of pension arrears within the total domestic arrears provision for the medium and long term.

Mr Speaker, I wish to inform the House that the proposal to secure a line of credit is still being pursued by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Government is also addressing the issue of settling the pension arrears via budget allocations. In this regard, Shs 8.0 billion was provided in my ministry’s budget estimates for the current financial year 2004/05 towards the liability of pension arrears. Out of this amount, Shs 4.0 billion has been dispersed to the beneficiaries using the criterion of precedence of age.  Therefore, pensioners, who were born by 1933 and before, are currently being paid their dues. (Laughter) The remaining Shs 4.0 billion has been paid to 501 former employees of the defunct East African Community mainly those in Group C of the defunct East African Railways and Harbours Corporation who had never benefited from the previous payments.

Furthermore, it has been agreed that the pension arrears will in the medium term, be paid over a duration of five years with effect from the financial year 2005/06. It is, therefore, planned that settlement of pension arrears will be finalized in the financial year 2009/10.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker and honourable members, government realized that apart from streamlining payments for current obligations and settlement of pension arrears, there is need to address key issues in the entire National Social Security sub sector in order to ensure affordability, sustainability and professional management of pensions. 

In this regard, government has embarked on undertakings to introduce changes to streamline the current pension arrangements, which include:

• The introduction of a contributory scheme that will be widened to take on board all officers whose salaries are paid through the Consolidated Fund.  

• Government is making further arrangements to ease vesting and portability arrangements so that benefits accrued from any service in the course of the carrier of a citizen in the scheme are easily preserved. This measure will enhance mobility of labour and will as well ensure affordability, fairness, equity and efficiency of pensions administration in the service sector.  Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

3.24
MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA (Mwenge County South, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank the minister for her statement. I have a few comments to make. The first one is on the issue of the very first page and subsequently what is mentioned as having been received from the government. First and foremost, I thought the honourable minister would make mention of the fact that this Parliament did pass a resolution on the issue of pension arrears and that hitherto she had received zero and after that particular resolution, the government at least gave her Shs 8.0 billion. I had hoped that she would make mention of this. 

I would like to thank the government for giving her ministry this Shs 8.0 billion, but I would like to also mention that, although Shs 8.0 billion was given, the fact is that the bulk of pension arrears is more than I believe Shs 600 billion. Whatever was given, especially if it was used to pay off the East African Community workers, still does not do much to abate the fact that pension arrears for East African Community do still earn an interest and they are pegged to the dollar rate, which means that if she paid Shs 4.0 billion, whatever she may have paid, could have only gone to off set the interest and the pension arrears are still as high as they were then.

Mr second point, Mr Speaker, relates to the issue of the local governments. On page 2, she says that she had hoped that the local governments would take on the issue of pension arrears and retirement benefits, but many local governments have expressed inability to pay due to lack of funds. I would have expected the minister and the government to foresee this inability, because it is common knowledge that most local governments cannot even pay for wages of their staff. Most of the money used by local governments comes from the central government and, therefore, for government to pass on Shs 17.5 billion to local governments was in a way postponing a problem, which would have come back to the central government sooner than later.

Mr Speaker, I could go on and talk about the issue for example of the military pension scheme on page 3. I wonder why administration of the military pension scheme, which was previously handled by the Ministry of Defence, was given to this particular ministry notwithstanding the past record that it has gotten zero. I do not know why this particular military pension scheme did not stay with the Ministry of Defence, which had hitherto been given some good amount of money and I have heard very many calls from my constituency and from the great Toro region asking about this particular military pension scheme. 

Mr Speaker, I have come to a point where really I would like to plead with the government to give priority to pension arrears, because this is a right, most people have died, others are dying and those who are even 70 years have not got any pension. It is a very serious issue and I would like this government and the minister to give it priority when we are considering our budget this year. I thank you sir.

3.28
MR DAVID WAKIKONA (Manjiya County, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter of pension, as the honourable minister has put it, affects almost everybody in the country particularly all those people who had worked at the local governments before decentralisation came in.  Many have never received a coin and many do not have any hope considering that the figure seen here of local government is Shs 17.5 and of central government is in excess of Shs 16 billion.

Mr Speaker, the life expectancy in this country, we are told through statements in this House that, is 45 years. The minister is saying he is now paying people who are born in 1933 and backwards but many of them are dead. I would suggest that you begin paying those who are alive and then maybe find money to pay the beneficiaries of those who have died much later. Because right now, many people of 73 years and above – I think even in this House if we counted we would get nobody.  

Mr Speaker, the minister has dealt very much with the idea of pension but I would have liked her also to talk a lot about gratuity. Gratuity normally is paid after contract service and this is a matter, which is known that a contract is five years or 10 years so that money must be available. Some people including the man speaking here, my gratuity is still pending in that Ministry of Public Service, and yet we have offered service and in the letters we got they said, “After the end of this contract you will get 25 percent as gratuity.” I am very old now and yet even when they keep it there is no interest.  

I am requesting, Mr Speaker, that the Minister in charge of Pensions comes out with a comprehensive list of all Ugandans whose monies are owed in form of gratuity or pension so that we find a way - it is good he has said they are looking on donor partners maybe the Americans, maybe the British, I do not know, but the time taken people continue to go. If the list comes so that we know the exact situation on the ground, it will help us to guide even in the budgetary estimates we might know where to live. 

The budget estimates, as the minister has mentioned, are not financed 100 percent. If you go on performance, you find 80 percent, 70 percent so even when the pension she mentions that they have included this in the budget, we may not realise or finish the figure we are talking about. I thank you very much.

3.32
CAPT. (RTD) CHARLES BYARUHANGA (Kibale County, Kamwenge): I thank you, Mr Speaker. Last financial year, as a Committee of Public Service and Local Government, we discussed extensively the issue of pensions and gratuity and even this morning we were still haggling on the same issue. 

Mr Speaker, maybe if I could read from the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy XIV, General social and economic objectives: “The State shall endeavour to fulfil fundamental rights of all Ugandans to social justice and economic development and shall, in particular, ensure that –

(b) all Ugandans enjoy rights and opportunities and access to education, health services, clean and safe water, work, decent shelter, adequate clothing, food security and pension and retirement benefits.”  

Mr Speaker, when you read the current Pension Act as it is, money for pensions is appropriated as we appropriate the wage bill. So, these pension benefits remain in the consolidated funds and this Parliament is not obliged to appropriate further this money because we appropriate as we appropriate the wage bill. But, I think intentionally, government has done it to borrow money from these senior citizens by tagging it to the budget we appropriate and yet their money is appropriated every year as Parliament appropriates the wage bill.

Mr Speaker, the Minister of State in charge of pensions has said that Ministry of Finance is pursuing - last year, in our recommendations to public service, which recommendations were adopted by this House, we recommended assessing this loan and the Minister of Finance promised us that by the end of October he was coming back to this House to tell us about the progress of this loan.  

Mr Speaker, at least I have written to the Chairperson in charge of Government Assurances because the Minister of Finance has never come back to this House – [Mr Ekanya: “Information”] – I am giving information, let me first continue. Mr Speaker, the Minister of Public Service has been pursuing, writing to the Minister of Finance on the progress, at least from the two letters I have seen from the Minister in charge of Public Service, no response has been got from Finance. Independent forces from Finance say that this loan has hit a dead end because the development partners did not support it, and there is a vacuum between Ministry of Public Service and Ministry of Finance and the pensioners are left at large to suffer.

Hon. Dora Byamukama has raised the issue of pensioners for the East African Community. Mr Speaker, we reported here, when the East African Community disintegrated all governments of Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda got their money. The Government of Kenya paid the pensioners, the Government of Tanzania paid the pensioners but the Government of Uganda borrowed their money until they went to court. This Shs 4.0 billion that has been –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: So, is this information or a contribution?

CAPT. (RTD) BYARUHANGA: It is information, Mr Speaker, so that people may debate from an informed point of view because I am privy to the information as a chairperson. This Shs 4.0 billion that is being appropriated now, that they have put in the budget it is paying only interest, the large sum of money, the Shs 45 billion remains on paper and it continues accumulating interest and it is tagged to the dollar. This is what I wanted to inform the people.

Mr Speaker, on the pension arrears in the local governments, yesterday, the Ministry of Local Government reported to the committee that so far the amount of money in pension arrears of local governments, which has been sent for verification, is Shs 265 billion not Shs 17 billion. It is no longer Shs 17 billion. So you see the plight of these pensioners; and I think as Parliament – 

I listened to one radio programme and some pensioners calling in and threatening to take government to court over their rights and when government is taken to court, this money will begin accumulating interest once there is a court judgment. Actually I do not know the priorities but at a later stage, since we are still discussing this, there will be some redundant money, which I will propose that we give to these pensioners. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.37
MR MARTIN WANDERA (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am disturbed because of the casual manner in which my senior colleague, the Minister of State in charge of Pensions, is dealing with this matter. When we talk about pensions we are talking about peoples’ lives; lives of people who dedicatedly served this country. 

I am, therefore, concerned that the minister could afford to say that a number of local governments have expressed inability to pay due to lack of funds. This is commonplace knowledge. Any Member of Parliament or any minister should know that local governments cannot afford to pay pensions. For the minister to try and seek the protection of section 4.3 of the Pensions Act leaves a lot to be desired because Article 254 of the Constitution is very clear. It states that: 

“(1) A public officer shall, on retirement, receive such pension as is commensurate with his or her rank, salary and length of service.
(2) The pension payable to any person shall be exempt from tax and shall be subject to periodic review to take into account of changes in the value of money. 
(3) The payment of pension shall be prompt and regular and easily accessible to pensioners.”  

It is clear that employees of local governments are, under the Constitution, entitled to regular and prompt payment, and this is not happening. Whether section 4.3 of the Pensions Act states that their money will come from the local governments is for me not an issue that should be pleaded by the Ministry of Public Service because as leaders we have an obligation, under Article 254. I, therefore, hoped that the minister would conclude by proposing an amendment to take away the responsibility of pensions of the local government workers, from the local governments because it is very clear -(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE, PENSIONS (Mrs Benigna Mukiibi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank hon. Wandera for giving way. My statement is in response to the debate, which was here when we were handling the Uganda Broadcasting Corporation Bill. I was trying to answer some of these questions and that is one of the questions: “Who is supposed to pay the local government pension?” That is why I am stating it here because in the current legal framework this obligation is for the local governments. In my conclusion I did state that we are working out a contributory scheme. That is the reform, which we are going to make, which will include local governments as well as the military. So that is the solution we are working on. But as of now, they are supposed to pay. 

MR WANDERA: But Madam Minister, by the workers of local governments not getting their money we are acting in contravention of the Constitution. And the earlier you as a government or the Executive branch move to take away this responsibility from the local governments, the better because the longer it takes the more this money accumulates. It will become a very big burden on us. 

So, I invite you - I do not know how long the reform process is going to take but in the medium term an amendment Bill of section 4.3 of the Pensions Act would be the most appropriate thing to do. I would think of a Private Members’ Bill but the minister is aware of the restrictions under rule 99 of our Rules of Procedure, and Article 93 of our Constitution. So we ask you to move very expeditiously. People are dying out there without enjoying their pension; many cannot afford to live. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.40
MR AHMED AWONGO (Koboko County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In 1994 all ex-servicemen from West Nile were registered for three objectives. Objective No. 1 was that they could be officially retired. Objective No. 2 was that the registration was for them to get their retirement package. Then objective No. 3 was for those who qualify for pensions to also begin to get pensions.  

Last year in August the Minister of State for Defence wrote a letter to these people to inform them that all their names had been transferred to the Public Service and that Public Service would begin to pay them. As I speak now these people are very anxiously waiting for these payments. 

When you look at page 3, paragraph 2, the Minister of State for Public Service has said that they are currently 4,652 approved claims in this category and more claims are forthcoming. This is her statement. I would like to know from the minister whether the ex-servicemen are also included in these 40,000 people who are waiting to be paid. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.43
MRS IDAH MEHANGYE (Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister in charge of Pensions for bringing this statement. I actually sometimes pity her for having this ministry because it seems to have very little output as far as I am concerned in Kamwenge.

 Kamwenge is unique because in 2000 when Kamwenge District was created from the district of Kabarole, the people who had worked in Kabarole who retired had hopped that they would go to Kabarole and get their pensions. But Kabarole said, “No, you now have a new district. Go to Kamwenge and you will get your pensions”. 

Actually for one month these elderly men and women who served government very diligently received pension. But after that Kamwenge turned round and said, “Oh! No, you do not belong to us. You actually belong to Kabarole because for us we have not yet had people retiring from work. So, you go back to Kabarole to receive your pension”. These people were tossed left and right, Kabarole tosses them to Kampala, Kampala tosses them back to Kamwenge. As I speak now there has been no solution to these people’s problems. They retired over four years ago.

We need a government, which is very sensitive to the needs of the people. These men and women served this nation very diligently. By then there were no tenders for them to steal from; they were not even very corrupt and today nobody seems to care what happens to them. I would like to ask the honourable minister, “What fate is to befall these people of Kamwenge”?

Kamwenge was born on the same day as Kyenjojo and Kyenjojo District was also running up and down in Kabarole, looking for this money for the pensions of their people, and they were pushed to the corner, to go to court to sue Kabarole for not paying the pensioners. When you look at this money -(Interruptions)

MR BASALIZA ARAALI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for giving way. However, I would like to inform her that Kabarole was tossing those people around not because they did not want to pay them but because they did not have money as a local government. That is why I suggest that the central government takes over. Even now Kabarole has failed to pay pension to its own people who belong to the district. 

MRS MEHANGYE: Thank you very much. That confirms what I am saying, Madam Minister. We would like to know the policy. When a new district is created, where do the people get the pension from so that they do not have to spend the little they have on transport and night allowance trying to look for the pension, which is not forthcoming?

DR NDUHUURA: Thank you very much for giving way. The information I would like to give on when new districts are created is that the matter of pensions is a liability, just like other liabilities. So when a new district is curved out of an old district, which becomes the mother district, you have got to agree on how to share the liabilities and pension is one of those liabilities. That is the information I wanted to give.

MRS MEHANGYE: Mr Speaker, these ministers are showing us that they need to plan a little bit better before they create districts. These guidelines, which are being given here on the Floor of Parliament, are guidelines that are not known to the pensioners. These people do not know what to do; these people do not know where to go for their money. So before districts are formed, like Kamuli in the offing, should -(Interruptions)

MR WAMBUZI: I have been listening to what the hon. Member of Parliament is pursuing, but the line she is pursuing is really not tenable. Even districts, which have never been petitioned, have got a problem of pension. Whether we divide districts or not, really the question of pension affects all of us. That is why it is being pushed back to the nation. 

Is she in order to start persuading this House that the problem of pension is being caused by dividing districts, yet she knows very well that the people of Bulamogi have been in bondage for 42 years? Is she really in order to start suggesting that in this House when she actually benefited from the division of Fort-Portal and she is enjoying a new district? Even a new headquarter building has been commissioned by this government. Is she in order to suggest that partitioning government is the problem yet she knows that whether districts are big or small, pension is a problem that will remain there if we do not address the issue of employment? Is she in order to start persuading this House in the wrong direction?

THE SPEAKER: My assessment of the contribution of the hon. Member for Kamwenge is wider than the issue of creating new districts. She was talking of the issue of decentralizing services without planning for funding. When decentralization services, we should be able to find a way of providing funds for those services, including pension issues.  

MRS MEHANGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. That is why we are very proud of you. (Applause) In actual sense I was supporting the formation of Kaliro District, and you have my vote. All I am saying is that before government creates these structures, they should look at a wholistic package so that you do not have to suffer like the people of Kamwenge are suffering.

Like I was saying, Kyenjojo did take trouble to take Kabarole to court and they won the case but I am looking at the court fees. The money spent on court fees would have actually been the money given to the people who are looking for their little package in terms of pension. I would like also to know, honorable minister, what is the supervision strategy put in place; when these agreements are not well catered for, who takes charge? Who takes charge if these people should agree? Suppose they do not agree on this agenda of resolving problems and sharing liabilities, how does your ministry go out to supervise and see how these other districts have benefited or not benefited?

I would like to appreciate that the honourable minister has put Shs 8 billion in the budget and Shs 4 billion has already been distributed. Could we know which districts are the beneficiaries of this? Definitely Kamwenge is not, so we would be glad to know these very elderly people who were born in 1930 or whatever, who are the beneficiaries of this pension?

I would like to end by once again saying that this government should take the issue of pensions seriously. It should not be dilly-dallying and using lullaby words: “You know the process of taking a loan, this process is still on going”. That is a kind of lullaby message. Things are forever ongoing, ongoing, and ongoing. We would like to see action! All I want is to see my pensioners in Kamwenge receiving their little package and that is all I ask of you, honorable minister. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.55
MR HILLARY ONEK (Lamwo County, Kitgum): Thank you very much –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Madam Minister, did you have information or you want to wind up? Why do you not come at the end? (Interjection)- please, let us take about three minutes because at the end of the day we are not making any resolutions. It is a general debate on a statement and we shall find a way out sometime.

MR ONEK: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is the second time the Minister of Public Service has brought a very unsatisfactory report to this House. I think we deserve a better report than this because most of the pertinent issues are not answered in your report. 

First of all, I would recommend that you come out with a comprehensive report on how government can borrow in order to pay off these arrears of Shs 265 billion. There should be some comprehensive report on that. I would recommend that the Government should come up with a way to settle this money because government can borrow even internally as a short-term economic and social gap, to cover all these pension deficiencies.

Secondly, I support my previous colleague who said the ministry should plan better. The way in which pensions are being settled is haphazard. For example the case last time we mentioned this in the House, Kaijuka worked for seven years, and he is earning ten times what I worked for for 15 years as a pensions scheme. That is very big anomaly. Looking at their proposal for pension reforms, pension reform in the country here is a much wider exercise if it is supposed to be fulfilled. 

First of all, it will involve issuing identity cards to every citizen, national identity cards with a social security number so that any citizen who is employed somewhere his social security number will be the same so that remittances for his pension will continue undisturbed, just like in other countries. And also when they are not employed and they are searching for jobs, arrangements are made so that they do not starve. They should get some kind of money to keep them alive, like many organized countries are doing in the area of social security.

It is in view of this that I recommend strongly that a wider programme should be carried out by government to establish a system where every employee will have a social security number irrespective of where he is employed, whether he is moving from one employment to another, or moving from the private sector to government so that wherever they are employed the social security deduction goes straight to their account.

Secondly, we must also have a viable social security body, which has got a high level of integrity whereby the workers savings for the pensions are looked after properly. The scandals in NSSF are one of those problems that we are facing or that our pension schemes are facing. The Government has to ensure that that kind of body, which looks after workers’ pension is in place. The lack of social security amongst our workers and the lack of adequate social security have fueled very high levels of corruption among our civil servants. Most of them are corrupt because they want to secure their own social security. Most people who are corrupt in government service are securing their own social security because of the inadequate social security structure and management in our country. 

I think the Minister in charge of Public Service has to come out with a better report than these few piece of papers, which cannot really answer the serious problem in relation to that. Thank you.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I want to ask the honourable member, when he was working in a parastatal, did he secure his social security?

THE SPEAKER: I thought honourable member had concluded his contribution.

4.01
MR FRED OMACH (Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Three minutes only.

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, from 1977 to 1979 I worked with the Ministry of Public Service and Cabinet Affairs as a personnel officer. And my terms were very clearly permanent and pensionable. Many of the civil servants who are now serving are serving under the same terms. These people who serve very diligently, when they reach the age of 60 or thereabout, they are no longer permanent. At that stage they expect to get their pension so that their terms of service come to fruition. 

Many people serve diligently because they expect that at the end of it all they will get their pension. It is, therefore, very sad to note that a number of these people who have hardly made 60 years do not get their pension. Mr Speaker, you did witness that when the Minister responsible for Pensions mentioned something about the precedence of age as a criteria for giving pension to people, the lights went off because the spirits of those who died without getting their pension and gratuity were haunting this Parliament.

If it is necessary to borrow and pay, let it be so. In this country as I talk now, the people who are 15 years and above account for over 50 percent of the population. The people who now we can talk as being 60 and above are very few. Most of these people who are over 50 per cent of the population will not be able to know what a grandfather or grandmother looks like if these very old people are not given their pension and therefore, they can live longer.

Mr Speaker, I am given only three minutes and I would like to use it all.  This Government has done a lot in many sectors. I believe that this is a sector that the Government should address seriously and ensure that people’s pensions are paid on time.  

Mr Speaker, we have been told that Ugshs265 billion is in arrears as far as local Governments are concerned.  This is not small money by any standard.  The Minister had told us that it was Ugshs17.5 billion.  I believe, Mr Speaker, while we await the payment of this, most of which I believe is gratuity, is it not possible for these people to continue to get on monthly basis from the central government. This is a very small amount that can be paid to them even if they have already retired- [Mrs Mukiibi: “Information.”]- I will take it.

THE SPEAKER:  But time is over.  No, honourable Minister, since you are going to make concluding remarks –

MRS MUKIIBI: Mr Speaker, let me answer this. The honourable member is making very serious statements that we are not paying pensioners.  We are paying them their monthly pension as you have concluded.  We pay them their monthly pensions; these are arrears besides their monthly pension except maybe for local governments.  So, I do not want you to go away thinking that we are not paying any pension. The precedence of age is only applicable for arrears, for someone who is on our payroll, who is being paid every month.  

THE SPEAKER:  Let’s now listen to Dr Nabwiso, and then we go to the pensioner, ambassador, Ogola and Dr Mallinga. We shall see how to proceed.  But just three minutes.

4.05
DR FRANK NABWISO (Kagoma County, Jinja):  Mr Speaker, I want to congratulate the Minister for her statement.  But I have two major issues to rise. The first one appears on page 3, this is the Government proposal to secure a loan from the development partners. She gave us a very interesting statement below that Government will continue to look for a line of credit.  I think we need a very clear answer on this.  Supposing the Government fails to get a line of credit, what shall we do?  Will these people ever be paid or not be paid?  I think honourable Mehangye raised a very important question. Shs said that if the Government remains insensitive to these issues it is going to face an electoral defeat in 2006 -(Laughter)

Mr Speaker, some of the people I represent in Kagoma County proposed the following. They said that if we want to save money particularly to address these important issues of pensions, we should not waste money on the referendum although it is a constitutional obligation. Once Parliament and district councils agree on these matters and the Government wants people to go multiparty and political parties want multiparty, why should we waste Ugshs25 billion instead of dealing with these problems?  

Mr Speaker, today is a historical day, because we are debating three important issues.  One, we have a motion to take us to referendum. Two, we have this problem of Ugshs265 billion, which we have not paid to pensioners and then the third problem is, we are fighting sleeping sickness.  Let us prioritize, let us take money out of unnecessary things and deal with this problem of the pensioners. NRM Government should be really interested in this, if it does not solve this problem how are you going to convince people to vote for you?

Then lastly, Mr Speaker, I am wondering if the Minister could at one time come and give us a statement on death gratuity?

THE SPEAKER:  You mean, payment of pension is a condition for a person to vote?

DR NABWISO:  It is going to be a major issue in the politics of this country -(Laughter)

MR EKANYA:  I would like to inform honourable Nabwiso, that the elders from Tororo and Eastern part of Uganda whom I met, have said that Government told them to sell their cows to go to Bombo, register, so that they can get their money.  These are especially ex-servicemen and world war veterans. 

They have informed me to inform Government that they are not going to participate in the coming politics if Government does not refund their transport, which they used to visit Bombo and also compensate them.  So, it is a very serious matter that Government must consider.  If Government cannot pay them, Government should refund their transport.

MR MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order.  Honourable Ekanya has raised this issue here, not once, not twice.  He has said it in those words many times before and each time he has said that, I have made a statement to the effect that, that was an error and that we were prepared to reimburse the transport costs of those who travelled to Bombo.  Is he, therefore, in order to raise this same question over and over again which we have given answers to many times before. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER:  Well, you see, you have to assess the situation, maybe a week ago these people went back to him and he -(Laughter)

DR NABWISO: Can I just finish my request to the Minister that she comes back to Parliament and gives a statement on death gratuity?  A number of people are asking about this problem and she knows I have been to her office several times. If people died 40 years ago, 30 years ago and the gratuity has not been paid to their relatives, what do we do about that problem?

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable member, don’t you think the issue in this matter is to create funds so that money is paid? The issue is lack of funds that pension is not paid. Therefore, we find a way of creating funds for Government to pay.  Have we not really covered- this is a Ministerial Statement; it is not under a motion, it is a question of influencing Government. Don’t you think we should really end this debate and handle another matter?  The points have been taken. Those concerned will take them up. Otherwise, we are repeating ourselves.  

4.14
MR MICHAEL OGOLA (West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you very much.  I have listened very attentively to the statement by the Minister of State in Public Service and the more I listened to the statement from the public service the more I sympathize with them.  I sympathize because here is a situation where truly is equivalent to a puppet and the puppeteer- in this matter, the Ministry of Public Service does not raise money; it is allocated money through the budget by the Ministry of Finance. 

 I believe that as a matter of protocol, it is true, we must listen to the Minister of Public Service, but the Minister of Public Service is running short of where the problem is and therefore who is the puppeteer in this case, the puppeteer is the Ministry of Finance.  The Ministry of Public Service is made to dance around and to be tossed around on the string while the puppeteer is invisible.  

My intervention here, Mr Speaker, is really to request that perhaps the time has come to shift the problem away from the Ministry of Public Service to the Ministry of Finance so that we really ask the Minister of Finance to take on this problem and tell this House where is the money.  We speak here not just because we are pensioners, I am, yes, I but we are also ambassadors of other pensioners who are not in this House. 

The real thing I request for is that, Mr Speaker sometime last year- I believe the committee on Finance did make it mandatory for the Ministry of Finance to raise the funds so that the Ministry of Public Service can pay.  So, the problem is with the Ministry of Finance. Where are they, what can they say if we gave them an opportunity now, because I think we are torturing the innocent person.  

Another thing, Sir, is about payment that is probably where we can get the Ministry of Public Service to answer. It is not true that the payment is based on age.  There are some people who are younger but who have already got their money and we would like to know whether this statement is false from the Ministry of Public Service and if they are, what are the extenuating circumstances under which such a situation can arise, when you have already given everybody hope that it will be done by following the age line and yet even the age line is wrong because death does not make application as to whom it is going to kill and therefore, it does not know age.  

Thirdly, this money which is being withheld by the Government tantamount to asking the pensioners to subsidize Government because we are lending money to the Government when our children must go to school, the grand children are sitting down without going to the university and we are lending money to the Government involuntarily.  I beg the Government to look beyond the usual constraint of excuses of saying budget does not allow.  

Sir, this is my request, could we allocate time to the Minister of Finance to give us a real statement with regard to this matter.  Just as much we hold the Ministry of Public Service responsible, but I think the Ministry of Finance owes this House an explanation.  Thank you, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, since we do not have a motion, we are not debating under a motion but contributing to the statement made by the Minister, we may really not make any conclusion on this statement. We can refer this matter so that the Minister or the Ministry can sit with one of our committees, scrutinize this issue and maybe involve Ministry of Finance to reach some reasonable conclusion which we can adopt rather than generally making a general debate on a statement of the Minister.  Is that not the best way?  

There is a committee on Public Service and Local Government, it should also - I think - co-opt some people from committee on Finance and then handle this matter and report to us.  So, I think it is carried, that is the way forward.  

Now, honourable Members as you heard at the beginning of this sitting, we were invited by the Pope’s representative in Uganda and I understand many are interested to go and attend that service. I do not know whether we can push in some 20 or 30 minutes and handle the next item then towards a quarter to - I shall adjourn the House.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO REQUEST 
THE HOLDING OF A REFERENDUM FOR CHANGE OF POLITICAL 
SYSTEM UNDER ARTICLE 74(1)(A) OF THE CONSTITUTION

4.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesigye): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move a motion that this august House passes a Resolution under Article 74(1) of the Constitution to request the holding of a Referendum by the Electoral Commission for purposes of changing the political system.  

Mr Speaker, the motion is moved under Article 74(1) of the Constitution, and Rule 37 of our Rules of Procedure on the basis of which I have already notified your office about this motion.  

WHEREAS in Article 1 Clause 4 of the Constitution, the people of Uganda are given the right to exercise themselves, to express their will and consent on who should govern them, and how they should be governed through regular, free and fair elections of their representatives and through referenda; and 

WHEREAS under Article 69(1) of the Constitution, the people of Uganda have the right to choose and adopt a political system of their choice; and 

WHEREAS in Article 74(1)(a) of the Constitution, a referendum shall be held for the purpose of changing the political system if requested by a resolution supported by more than one half of all Members of Parliament; and 

WHEREAS the Government proposes that a resolution should be passed by this Parliament to request the holding of a referendum by the Electoral Commission for the purpose of enabling the people of Uganda to decide on the change of the political system; 

NOW THEREFORE, I beg to move that this Parliament resolves as follows: 

That in accordance with Article 74(1)(a) and Article 61 (b) of the Constitution, Parliament request the Electoral Commission to hold a referendum for the purpose of enabling the people of Uganda to decide on the change of the political system.  

Mr Speaker sir, I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER:  I remember when you gave us notice there was a problem of whether it was in the proper form. We referred this notice to the committee to re-advise us whether it was in a proper form. Don’t you think we should get a report from this committee before proceeding with the debate on this motion?

MR ADOLF MWESIGE:  Mr Speaker, honourable members, colleagues will recall that on the 29 June 2000, the people of Uganda participated in a referendum -(Interruption)

CAPT. (RTD) BYARUHANGA: Mr Speaker, last time the Minister brought a notice and the notice was referred to the committee. I do not know whether procedurally we are correct to proceed the way we have done.  

THE SPEAKER: Chairman of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, we referred this matter to you.  Do you have anything to report before we proceed with debate?

4.25
MR JACOB OULANYAH (Omoro county, Gulu): Mr Speaker and honorable Members of Parliament, it is true the matter was referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary affairs after the Minister read the motion to the House on that day.  

Mr Speaker, in that line I would like to present the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs- (Interjections)- the copies are supposed to be here. I do not know- the report was only ready this morning and they had to process the photocopying- I do not know why it is not here but it should be coming any time.

THE SPEAKER: In circumstances what I suggest we can do, is, let the members get the copies, we adjourn, we shall deal with this matter tomorrow when Members have read through the copy of the report.  With this we come to the end of today’s business; the House is adjourned till tomorrow 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 4.26 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 21 April 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)
  

