


Wednesday, 7 April 2021

Parliament met at 2.58 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I would like to announce the presence of the following guests from Soroti Regional Referral Hospital in our gallery: 

    1. Dr Joseph Epodoi
    2. Dr Josephine Namugenyi
    3. Dr Rev. Sr. Ajiko Mary
    4. Dr Joan Owantege
    5. Dr Amina Nakawesa
    6. Dr Florence Alaroker
    7. Dr Claire Nakubulwa 
    8. Mr Keem Jackson Moding
    9. Mr John Guma Ambaga
    10. Ms Zenaida Kituyi
    11. Sr Medrine Kibetenga
    12. Sr Sarah Alekat
    13. Sr Jeniffer Ajilong
    14. Mr Daniel Ebwalo
    15. Sr Margaret Ajok
    16. And a very important elder, Mzee Dominic Etelu. He is the father to Dr Joseph Epodoi. We are happy to see him.

We also have the following Members elect accompanying them: 

    1. Hon. Julius Emigu
    2. Hon. Atan Okia of Soroti Municipality
    3. Hon. Julius Ekudo 
    4. Ms Joan Achom Alobo
    5. Hon. Stella Apollot Esodu of Ngora District

I had forgotten Dr Innocent Ocen in the list. They are here to listen to the motion relating to their outstanding work at Soroti Regional Referral Hospital. 

Honourable members, this is now my communication concerning the death of His Grace Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga. On 03 April 2021, the country woke to the tragic news of the demise of the Archbishop of Kampala Archdiocese, His Grace Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga, the Roman Catholic prelate, who served as the Archbishop of Kampala Archdiocese from 2006. He had previously served as the first Bishop of Kasana-Luwero Diocese from 1996 to 2006. 

Archbishop Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga oversaw remarkable successes in various faith-based projects in the realm of education, health and livelihood among others. The spectacular renovation of Namugongo Martyrs Shrine and the robust Wekembe Microfinance Village Bank that is benefitting over 30,000 people are just some of the numerous projects that exemplify the remarkable and transformational leadership of His Grace Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga.

I might add, on a selfish note, that Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga gave Kamuli District their second bank, the Centenary Bank. So, we are really grateful to him.

He was an unwavering advocate for good governance, speaking out-rightly against human rights violation and various ills in society. 

I am aware that the State accorded him an official burial yesterday, and I hope that at an appropriate time, we shall also move a motion in this House to honour him. The country has indeed lost a gallant citizen, exemplary leader and remarkable patriot. 

Honourable members, we also had the death of a very serious educationist, Rev. Sr Veronica Landonio, a member of the St Daniel Comboni Missionary Sisters. 

She was the first Head Teacher of Bishop Angelo Negri Primary School in Gulu from 1975 to 1990. She succumbed to COVID-19 on 13 March 2021 in Milan, Italy. She had been living there since April 2017 when she left Uganda.

During her tenure, Bishop Angelo Negri Primary School was one of the academic giants in Uganda, attracting learners from all parts of the country. The foundation she built led to the formation of Bishop Angelo Negri College. Both schools are still operational in Gulu to date. 

She will be remembered as a disciplinarian, avid music and mathematics teacher, and a meticulous and visionary servant of the Lord.

Her dedication to cultivating academic excellence in Northern Uganda at the time of civil unrest makes her an icon whose legacy deserves acclaim. I ask Members to rise to observe a moment of silence in honour of the departed. 

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, concerning the Inspectorate of Government declaration forms, the period was extended from 31 March 2021 to 23 April 2021. I, therefore, would like to remind any Members who have not submitted their online declaration to the IGG to oblige by using this additional time. 

You may also recall that on 30 March 2021, the Chairperson of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline, hon. Ongalo-Obote, presented a report of the committee on proposed amendments of the Rules of Procedure. I deferred debate on the motion for the amendment of the Rules of Procedure to a date to be appointed. I guided you to submit your proposals to the Office of the Clerk. 

So, honourable members, this is to notify you that Parliament will consider the proposed amendments next week. I urge you to submit your proposals by Friday, 9 April 2021. 

As you are aware, we are very strict on spontaneous amendments. If you are really interested in amending these rules, make sure you submit your proposals well in time. Thank you very much.

There are a few matters of national concern. Let us, however, be strict on the time of two minutes. I invite hon. Abbot Ouma. 

3.04
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

It is true that the Government of Uganda deployed people in the lakes to protect them. Some three weeks ago, I am told that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries accepted that some kind of fish called Synodontis, which is a seasonal fish especially for the poor people – the ministry has given licence to particular people to catch the Synodontis fish. 

In my constituency, they have given licence to 20 people only. The licenced people are rich and the poor people have been left out. You have also known that these restrictions have given only the rich people the power to be in the lake. 

I want to know from the ministry concerned what criterion they have used to licence the 20 people, if this Synodontis was also barred. And I am told they each pay Shs 250,000 at the expense of the poor man. This country is enabling the torment of poor people every now and then at the expense of people who think that they have money.

My prayer is that the ministry concerned should clarify to this House whether it is true that they gave licence to the 20 people and if so, which criteria they used. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you recall, hon. Ndugwa, MP for Buvuma, raised an issue on the Synodontis fish and we expect an answer. The Minister for Fisheries is required to add the information that has been requested for by hon. Abbot Ouma when she is answering the question. Clerk, please remind her to come and – Oh, she is here. Hon. Adoa -

3.07
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES) Ms Hellen Adoa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This House directed me to go to Buvuma District to find out if it was true that the Nile Perch had disappeared and the Synodontis was all over the place (also known as “Nkolongo” and in Ateso “Ejwijwi”).

Last Thursday, I was able to go around Buikwe and Buvuma and met the district leadership. Indeed, I found that at a certain period, this fish comes up and the Nile Perch disappears but not every year.

This particular season, for about three or four months, it is a lot in Buikwe, Buvuma and Busia. I was not aware about Namayingo and I am just hearing it from a colleague now. As ministers from East Africa, especially where Lake Victoria is shared, we agreed that we do some experiments.

We agreed, as Uganda, to do some experiments with only three districts of Buikwe, Buvuma and Mukono. We picked 40 fishermen per district to check for three months so that by September, when we meet in Nairobi, we are able to see whether this fish can be included among the species that we are licensing at the moment.

When you allow this type of fish – it is caught with size 3 nets, which will affect especially the Nile Perch and Tilapia. We are only doing experiments in these three districts. I am not aware of the 20 in Namayingo.

MR OUMA: Madam Speaker, this Synodontis is not in any particular district but everywhere in Lake Victoria. In the months of May, June, July and August, it is there in plenty. It is not an under-size fish; it comes in the months that I have mentioned. 

Is the minister in order - or maybe she has not done enough research to say that she is not aware whether that fish is not also in Namayingo or Busia. If they are saying that they are going to use the undersized nets, then what criteria are they now using to give this to these 20 people?

In Namayingo she is talking of 40 but already, some rich men from the district and fisheries officers are the ones claiming that they have been given licences by the ministry to go and fish. Therefore, is the minister in order to say that she is not aware whether that fish is in Namayingo? Namayingo is in Lake Victoria, Synodontis is in the whole of Lake Victoria.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, all those areas mentioned are part of Lake Victoria; so, it cannot be that some parts produce different types of fish and others do not. There are issues of equity involved, especially if you have licensed a few people in Namayingo.

MS ADOA: Madam Speaker, I said I am not aware of the 20 from Namayingo but only aware of the 40 per three districts that we have selected to start with because this fish has not been among the fish species that we have been licensing, according to our Fish Act.

Therefore, I would like to request the honourable Member and the House to allow us do the experiment that we are doing for now because it has not been there. After our meeting in September, I will be able to give the House feedback on what we have come up with. For now, even if it is everywhere in the fishing communities of Lake Victoria, we have only selected three districts to start with. 

I ask other districts to be patient; after all they have not been fishing this particular species. Allow me up to September with only the three districts that we have selected then we will bring feedback.

THE SPEAKER: The only problem is that the Member who is requesting for an answer will not be here in September.

MS ADOA: But we shall be here and the lake will be there.

MR MUYANJA SSENYONGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable minister should know that currently in all the islands of Lake Victoria, that is the only type that they can fish now and if they wait up to September, that means they will have no way to survive.

As we speak, the security that was deployed is going on. Much as it was not within our Fisheries Act, they are still arresting them because they regard that type of fish as young fish whereas they are mature and that is their size.

Our concern is that the minister should come out clearly and order the security forces to leave the people engaged in fishing that type of species for the time being as we also get clear answers.

However, if you say up to September and yet our people are being arrested and we are seated here and like it is said, some of us might not be here then, how can they be assisted now?

THE SPEAKER: Minister, I do not know whether you were here when hon. Ndugwa brought the fish to display here, that it was mature. These are people from the fishing communities and they probably have more information than us.

3.16
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I hosted the state minister in charge of fisheries. I thank her for being prompt but of course, the results are not what we anticipated. That is when we actually got to know that there are some people who have got licences.

Even as a Member of Parliament, I was not aware but we came across 20 people - which is not bad. However, our issue was that this was going to bring issues on the lake because how does one person in an entire subcounty be the only one with permission?

In that meeting, we inquired from the technical officer about how these people, who applied for licences, got to know that there was this offer. Our request in that meeting was that whereas it is an experiment, we need to increase the number.

Thirdly, this fish – like has been submitted – is seasonal, migratory and moves with the Nile Perch. It is not in Kenya like it is in Uganda. It is not in Tanzania like it is in Uganda. To rely on the Council of Ministers for East Africa to be able to harvest fish, which is only in Uganda; we shall be doing ourselves a disservice. There are certain issues that we can agree on as the East African Community and there are those that we can manage as a country.

Our appeal is that at least raise the number to 200 or 300 for all fishing districts, but not only a few. Even for Buvuma with 20, we cannot come here and thank Government for allowing the 20.

Therefore, our appeal, still, is that the number should be increased and our sister districts that are harvesting this Synodontis should also be included. As we talk, the season is running out, so the earlier, the better –(Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I raised a matter regarding the management of our water bodies. Whatever we are discussing is governed by law - the Fisheries Act – and it vests all powers in the Commissioner for Fisheries.

What we are dealing with is that the army took over management of the sector and are just gambling on what is taking place. The minister is falling short of telling you that she does not have power over the activities taking place on the water bodies.

Madam Speaker, I raised that matter here on the Floor but we did not get a satisfactory answer. I wonder whether this is not a matter where we need to vest the powers again in the Commissioner for Fisheries because it is the commissioner who knows how to manage this.

When we talk about undersized fish, the Act clearly spells out what is undersized and it is only the technical people who must determine what it is. However, what is taking place now is that all those people they have deployed on the water bodies are beating up people, claiming to be the army.

I wonder, Madam Speaker, whether it is not procedurally right that we instruct the minister to talk to the Appointing Authority to get a statement on the subject matter, with an input from the technical people. You seem to be speaking about something else, despite you being my friend. (Laughter)

I was actually getting worried; that is why I am saying that we should not take that direction. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am aware that a Bill is before this House. There is a proposal from the Government. Can we make use of that? I do not know how quickly it will come and whether it will come before we close but the Bill is there and we should take advantage of it.

Honourable minister, in the meantime, what you are dealing with concerns the economic survival of many communities. So, I think you should take into account the complaints of the islanders.

MS ADOA: Madam Speaker, first of all, we thank you for giving us chance to bring the Bill. We had a retreat and soon, we shall be able to bring back the Bill to the House.

Secondly, regarding what my colleague, hon. Mwiru, has said, it is not true that I do not have powers and that it is the army. When I was appointed, we are all aware that there was a lot of outcry but as we speak, the way the army previously managed the lake is not how they are managing it at that moment. 

Most of the fishermen are even crying that they should go back to the old system but right now, the army is friendly and is doing a good job. It is playing its role. 

Coming back to this type of fish, as I stated, Uganda shares the lake with Kenya and Tanzania. Tanzania even takes a bigger portion. If we allow undersized nets to be used by Ugandans, it will affect the other side of East Africa.

I request, Madam Speaker, that since it is something we are introducing to get an experiment out of, allow us these few months because it has not been there. It is from technical advice. When you directed me to go to Buvuma, I consulted and went with technical people there, who allowed 40 - not the 20 that they stated. It is 40 nets for these three districts.

I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what we are saying is do the same for the other islands. It is about their economic survival.

3.22
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to raise a matter of national importance. It relates to the over 1000 students who graduated in 2017 at Busoga University but have not received their transcripts from then up to now.

That is approximately three years yet it is a requirement for most of the employers that you have academic documents. As a result of failure to have those documents, it is depriving those students of their economic right because they cannot get any job since they have no academic documents.

I am aware that the University and Other Tertiary Institutions Act places this responsibility of supervising these universities on the National Council for Higher Education, which falls under the Ministry of Education and Sports.

I seek your indulgence, Madam Speaker, to alert the Minister of Education and Sports to come to the House and give a statement on how a university can fail to deliver certificates to their students after a period of three years. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Education and Sports is required to come and explain to the country the situation about the 1000 students, who completed the exams in 2017 at Busoga University. Today is Wednesday; they should come back to us next Tuesday.

3.24
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo County South, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. Yesterday but one, we received – in Tororo – heavy rains, coupled with a storm and wind that left many schools, including Osia Primary School and Ochegen Primary School, destroyed and their roofs blown off.

It left many households suffering. Their animals, including birds, were washed away and they died in the course of this heavy downpour and storm. It also left bridges that connect the county completely washed away.

Madam Speaker, my prayers are that firstly, as children resume school, they are supported with replacement of the roofs. Secondly, the households, through the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, be supported with seedlings and other necessities to enable these communities to go recover since they lost even what was in their houses - the saucepans were swept away too. Also, emergency food supplies should be provided for these people to move on. 

However, above all, we also have a problem with the road near Tororo Cement Industry (TCI). The water that flows from uphill has caused a big problem both to the community and to TCI, which is our main investor around there. The water comes in huge volumes and hits their walls, disorganising the community.

My prayer is that the Ministry of Works and Transport, together with the Uganda National Roads Authority move very first to realign the designs for the road and construct drainage channels to evacuate the heavy water that flows from uphill.

A quick response from the disaster office will be highly desirable. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Fortunately, I see the minister for disaster here; I don’t know whether he has anything to say about this Tororo matter.

3.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr Musa Ecweru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable colleague, for some reason, had already drawn the attention of the ministry to this challenge. I am happy to report that the technical officers in my office have got in touch with the Chief Administrative Officer of Tororo, who happens to be the chairperson of the district disaster management committee.

The Chief Administrative Officer has undertaken to send, with immediate effect, a comprehensive and detailed assessment report on the situation. We have requested him to break it into sectors that the honourable colleague has mentioned for us to know which areas need emergency intervention like the delivery of emergency relief. We will be able to do that. However, we will come with our colleagues from the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Works and Transport for them to intervene in their sectors.

I would like to draw the attention of colleagues to the fact that climate change is real and many things are going to happen, now that rains have returned. The warning that we have got from the department of metrology, both within the country and the IGAD region is that in the next four months, we are going to have above normal rains in most parts of the country and they will be characterised by storms.

Therefore, send signals to people in many of our places, particularly the hilly parts of the country asking them to get out of areas that expose them to outright danger. Otherwise, when it comes to emergency support, with the limited resources available, we shall do the needful. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We expect a statement from you and your colleagues on this issue. Can we receive it by Thursday next week? Thank you.

3.29
MR ABDU LATIF SSEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. A couple of weeks ago, we discussed the issue of curfew on this Floor. The Government Chief Whip assured us that the national taskforce would review the curfew enforcement procedures with a view of either extending it or doing away with it.

However, Madam Speaker, while it is almost a month now, we have not received any response yet Ugandans are still suffering due to curfew regulations. To make matters worse, enforcement of the curfew regulations is done selectively.

A couple of weeks ago, the Committee on Human Rights was in Mbarara. We had our supper at around 11.00 p.m. and everything seemed normal, even boda-boda cyclists were moving about and people were moving freely. 

Madam Speaker, through you, when I raised the issue of this great concern, I stated that many businesses were being interrupted yet people were beginning to build up their businesses. I also indicated that for most people in the urban areas, between 6.00 and 9.00 p.m. is the prime time for them to make business.

Next week we are going in for Ramadan and there are special prayers that we conduct during Ramadan. Many businesses, especially restaurants, get a lot of revenue by providing things that Muslims use to break their fast. I would like to request that curfew should be either extended to 11.00 p.m. or be done away with because many businesses are suffering losses yet in other areas, life is normal; curfew measures are being implemented selectively.

That is why, Madam Speaker, I request for your indulgence that we do away with curfew –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Do we need information to that?

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to pass on to my brother is that in Kabuusu, on Easter Sunday, people were busy dancing and they were given security by our own security personnel - the army. I just wonder what kind of curfew we are talking about. 

This curfew is putting curfew on the economy. This information is very important my brother, we are in problems and it should be dealt away with.

THE SPEAKER: Please close.

MR SSEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Curfew is a money making venture to some security operatives. They stage road blocks and extort money from the public. I request that since the national taskforce promised us to review this, they do away with the curfew so that we can build our economy and if it is to stay, it should be extended to at least midnight.

For the Muslim community who are going to start fasting next week, we should help them to have their prayers at night; such prayers end at 9.30 p.m. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had asked the Prime Minister to give us a response on this matter taking into account that the holy month of Ramadan is coming and the Muslims will have to be outside their homes in the night. Can we ask the Prime Minister to come and give us an answer on - if he could come tomorrow because this matter is known? The Prime Minister should come and give an answer on the issue of the curfew tomorrow.

3.33
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I stand to raise a matter of national importance concerning the Uganda Human Rights Commission. At present, the commission has no substantive chairperson. Two commissioners have also not been appointed and 80 per cent of the staff’s contracts have expired. For the last nine months, they have been working on the basis of goodwill.

Madam Speaker, this is very serious because even the tribunal that should be fully constituted by the commissioners cannot sit because there is no quorum – (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Komakech. Madam Speaker, it is not only the Human Rights Commission alone having such challenges in its operations; you can imagine a situation where a sessional committee sits and has to receive a report from such officers. There is no way a person whose contract has expired can come in.

I also raised here the issue of the Inspector General of Government whose contract expired and they have left and there is no one running that office. Even the contract of the Deputy IGG is coming to an end in the next one or two months. It is the same case with the Equal Opportunities Commission. 

I think the Government should be serious and solve this matter. How does the Government expect these commissions to operate yet this is the time when commissions are appearing before the sectoral committees? Now, how shall we process their budgets? Who will answer the questions? Are they going to deal with junior officers and not accounting officers, who are vote holders in these commissions? Thank you. 

The Speaker: We had asked the Attorney-General to come and respond to this issue. Otherwise, it is now very urgent. It has been a matter we raised over time. Therefore, can the Attorney-General come tomorrow and explain to the country what has happened to the Human Rights Commission, the IGG and the Equal Opportunities Commission. Thank you. Item three. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO DR JOSEPH EPODOI AND THE MEDICAL TEAM AT SOROTI REGIONAL REFERRAL HOSPITAL FOR SUCCESSFULLY SEPARATING CONJOINED TWINS

3.37
Mr Elijah Okupa (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, I am here to present a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay glowing tribute to Dr Joseph Epodoi and the medical team at Soroti Regional Referral Hospital for successfully separating conjoined twins. This motion is moved under rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

“WHEREAS the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, l995 (as amended) under objective XX of the National objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy enjoins the state to take all reasonable measures to ensure provision of basic medical services to the population;

AND WHEREAS on 22 March 2021, Ms Loyce Alinga, a resident of Aojangor Village, Obalanga Subcounty, Kapelebyong District, gave birth to conjoined twins at Amuria Health Centre IV;

AWARE that due to the complex nature of the surgery required to separate the conjoined twins, doctors of Amuria Health Centre IV referred the twins to Soroti Regional Referral Hospital, which in turn referred them to Mulago National Referral Hospital for further management;

NOTING that since the doctors at Mulago National Referral Hospital, under unclear and unfortunate circumstances, could not attend to the conjoined twins, the parents of the conjoined twins returned them to Soroti Regional Referral Hospital and on Friday 26 March 2021, Dr Joseph Epodoi led a team of doctors in conducting a successful operation to separate the conjoined twins;

RECOGNISING that the operation was highly risky, owing to the babies being conjoined around the stomach area and sharing a liver, a number of ribs and a major artery and was further complicated by the fact that one of the conjoined twins had died;

COGNISANT that Dr Joseph Epodoi and his medical team at Soroti Regional Referral Hospital exhibited remarkable dedication to work, professionalism, unique skills, service above self, patriotism, hard work, and a strong adherence to the medical code of conduct and ethics by providing competent, compassionate and dedicated care to the citizens of Uganda;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament that;

    1. The Parliament of Uganda pays glowing tribute to Dr Joseph Epodoi and the medical team of Soroti Regional Referral Hospital for successfully separating the conjoined twins;

    2. Government institutes mechanisms to leverage on these skills and further enhance the medical sector performance with a view of championing medical tourism in the region;

    3. Government considers increasing the pay for doctors and medical personnel across the country and in upcountry Government medical facilities; and

    4. Government equips and rehabilitates Soroti Regional Referral Hospital and other upcountry Government hospital in order to provide adequate medical care to the people of Uganda.” 

I beg to move.

This motion is seconded by the following Members:

    1. Hon. Oseku Richard - Member of Parliament for Kibale County;
    2. Hon. Clement Ongalo-Obote - Member of Parliament for Kalaki County;
    3. Hon. Patrick Okabe - Member of Parliament for Serere County;
    4. Hon. Hellen Adoa - Woman Representative for Serere;
    5. Hon. Veronica Isala Eragu Bichetero - Member of Parliament for Kaberamaido County; and
    6. Hon. Theodore Ssekikubo - Member of Parliament for Lwemiyaga County.

The Speaker: Honourable members, is the motion seconded? It is seconded by all Members of the House. As you justify it, I had introduced the following guests, in their absence:

    1. Hon. Peter Julius Emigu,  Member-Elect for Ochero
    2. Hon. Moses Attan Okia,  Member-Elect for Soroti East County
    3. Hon. Julius Tom Ekidu, Member-Elect, Bugweri County
    4. Hon. Joan Alobo, Member-Elect, Soroti City
    5. Hon. Stella Apolot Isodo, Member-Elect, Ngora District. You are welcome.

Mr okupa: Attached to this motion is an appendix of the surgical team that separated the conjoined twins at Soroti Regional Referral Hospital. The surgeons included:

    1. Dr Joseph Epodoi – Senior Consultant Surgeon/Urologist.
    2. Dr Rev. Sr Ajiko Mary Margaret, Consultant Surgeon.
    3. Dr Josephine Namugenyi, Medical Officer Special Grade Surgery.
    4. Dr Joan Uwantege, Medical Officer.
    5. Dr Innocent Ocen, Intern Doctor.
    6. Dr Amina Nakawesa, Intern Doctor.

The team of Paediatricians included:

    1. Dr Florence Alaroker, Senior Consultant Paediatrician
    2. Dr Clare Nakubulwa, Medical Officer (Special grade Surgery)
    3. Mr Jackson Keem Moding, Senior Anaesthetist Officer
    4. Mr John Guma Ambaga, Senior Anaesthetic Officer
    5. Ms Zenaida Kituyi, Anaesthetic Officer

The nurses included:

    1. Sr Jenifer Ajilong, Nursing Officer
    2. Sr Alekat Sarah, Nursing Officer
    3. Sr Medrine Kibetenga, Nursing Officer
    4. Mr Daniel Ebwalu, Theatre Assistant.
 
It is an honour for me today, to present this motion and also to justify that on a selfish note, Dr Epodoi happens to be my old boy (OB). We met at Teso College in senior one, until we joined university. In this House, we are two of his contemporaries with hon. Elotu. When we were at the university, we were in the same hall. We also met Dr Baryomunsi, who was a classmate of Dr Epodoi at that time.

Allow me to say that it is not the first time that Soroti Regional Referral Hospital has undertaken specialised surgeries, which would ordinarily be undertaken at the National Referral Hospital. They have always tried to do their best to save the lives of those who get stuck and cannot afford the cost related to treatment in Kampala’s best facilities of which, this was one of them.

The Siamese twins, who were both girls, were delivered by caesarean at Amuria Health Centre IV in Amuria District on Sunday, 21 March 2020. One of the twins was still born. They were then referred to Soroti Regional Referral Hospital for further management. 

However, on assessment, they immediately referred this matter to Mulago National Referral Hospital, which has the facilities and a combination of skilled people that are required to separate and manage such patients. The mother however remained in Soroti Hospital.

The patient, after two days’ stay at Mulago Hospital from 22nd to 24 March 2021, returned on 25 March 2021 to Soroti with one of the dead twins decomposing, while the other was still alive.
The grandfather was frustrated and had nowhere to go but decided to get back to Soroti Hospital to wait for the second twin to die while attached to the other decomposing one, as they had been told from Mulago.

Madam Speaker, this was a very touching thing and it is on this note that this team deserves what we are according them today, and we would like to thank them. (Applause) No amount of money can be given to this team to thank them - they saved a life. These are the types of people we need in this country. 

Today, we are told that the child is able to smile, pass urine, stool - what a great service this team has done for the people of Uganda, Teso, Soroti and Serere, where Dr Epodoi comes from! I see hon. Okabe and hon. Adoa smiling because these are the sons and daughters of Serere District and Teso Subregion; we are very grateful for that.

Madam Speaker, it is at this time when they returned to Soroti Hospital that the doctors sought consent of the grandfather and decided to undertake this super specialised surgery. It is now 12 days since the surgery was undertaken. The child, as I told you, is recovering well from the neonatal intensive care unit. The mother has also been managed and is out of danger. (Applause) Members of the august House, this team has done a great job. It has made this country and our region proud. 

Madam Speaker, we would like to pray that from now onwards, the Government of Uganda establishes super specialised services at the regional referral hospitals, as provided for in the Uganda Vision 2040. This would help decongest Mulago as some of these conditions would be handled up country in these regional hospitals.

Equip Soroti Hospital that has showed dedication, to start with, but also all other regional referral hospitals need to be equipped with essential medical equipment for specialised care.

Improve the human resources for the health care. These doctors need refresher training. Soroti Hospital is operating at a human resource capacity of about 40 to 50 per cent. If all the regional hospitals in this country had personnel to even 80 per cent, I think we would be able to do a lot for Ugandans.

Madam Speaker, there are requirements that have been requested for by the doctors. There is need for the reconstruction of Soroti Regional Referral Teaching Hospital, now that Soroti University is there. Soroti District and Soroti City have already availed 19 acres of land for establishment of this teaching hospital. 

The filling of the vacant posts will go a long way in helping the hospital and all the other teams.

It is on this note that we once again applaud and thank Parliament, and you, Madam Speaker, for giving the Ateso and Ugandans at large the opportunity to know that when you do good, you get recognised. These are the people who should be given medals in Kololo on Independence Day - why not, if not? I hope the ears have heard that today, here, we have candidates for the medals –(Interjection)– and a handshake of course. (Laughter).

Madam Speaker, it is very important to motivate Dr Epodoi. He would have opted to go elsewhere. All these doctors here would have opted to go elsewhere but they decided to go and work in Soroti from the time they left Makerere University.

Madam Speaker, as I told you, there was a team of about five - Dr Epodoi is one of them, Dr Ekure who has established the first orthopaedic hospital in Kumi, Dr Okol, who unfortunately had to leave for the UK, he is a senior consultant in the UK. We have Dr Bwaimo in Nairobi- and that was their team in Teso College.

Madam Speaker, I would like to applaud them, because even during the difficult time of the LRA war, they did not leave Teso- many people were injured but that team you see, remained. That team has been very patriotic. They remained to serve the people of this country.

I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, and the Parliament of Uganda and I also would like to wish the baby and its family a long life. May God bless them, especially that child. Thank you.

3.52
MR RICHARD OSEKU (NRM, Kibale County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker for allowing the tabling of this motion, and I also thank hon. Elijah Okupa for moving it. I am motivated to second this motion because of the nature of the act that our brothers and sisters performed.

This is not a very common development in this country. It is an exceptional operation by these brothers and sisters; demonstrating bravery and compassion. We were told that the family of the conjoined twins is really poor. However, the compassion that these brothers and sisters had is something that moves us all - and you have seen the whole House, everybody is eager to contribute to this motion simply because this act demonstrated a lot of compassion, commitment and dedication.

Hon. Okupa has talked about patriotism by this medical team. We would like to thank you for what you have done. Not only does this demonstrate commitment to work, the risk they took and the results that came out of it, but to me, it is a heroic act. I would like to request all Members of this august House to support the motion to pay tribute to our brothers and sisters in Soroti Hospital. 

There is this song called, “God Bless the Woman” by the late Lucky Dube. He says that there are heroes we praise every day, but there are those that we forget to praise. He talked praising the woman and that was granted. Today, we would like to praise the team led by Dr Epodoi in Soroti Regional Referral Hospital for what they have done. We are very proud of what they did. 

Hon. Okupa has talked about this; that our country celebrates Heroes Day every 9th June. So, this time round, the medals committee does not have any time to waste; these are already heroes that deserve medals on that day.

I am also touched by this act because it is something that revives hope in the medical profession and even in the people who seek health care. Many times, people even desert medical facilities and resort to funny remedies like the herbalists. Some people go to churches and die there while praying to save their lives. Others go to witchdoctors. We have heard of drinks like Mukamanayamba, Kituzi etc. People are now consuming all kinds of things.

This surgery is a very good sign. For me, it revives the hope and confidence of the people in seeking medical care. 

We will not forget the circumstances and background under which this team did this operation. I have been to Soroti Regional Referral Hospital myself. Yesterday, for those of you who could have viewed a television report by Walter Mwesigye, he went to Soroti Regional Referral Hospital but the state of the hospital is not good. 

I think they built infrastructure in the other hospitals like Arua and Moroto but Soroti Regional Referral Hospital is operating under very dilapidated infrastructure. This must be attended to urgently in order to motivate our brothers and sisters who are here to continue rendering a good service to the people of Uganda. 

The theatre, according to the report of the director, has just two beds in a very small space. Indeed when you look at the video which captured them in action, the medical team were so squeezed. They were struggling to do this work under very restrictive conditions. Therefore, we think it is only befitting that as a House, we give them a big “thank you”. 

Hon. Okupa has said that we cannot give them anything but sometimes, there are two things that are difficult for us Africans; saying, “Thank you” and saying, “Sorry”. 

As Parliament, we want to say, “thank you” to Dr Epodoi and his colleagues. We would like to encourage you and pray to the Almighty God to reward you for that dedication. This is a sign of the will of our medics to do their work. It is a good spirit that we need to salute. It is a conviction that we need to applaud.

It is a big lesson to the country that we need not look anywhere because we have the brains, the experts and the people with the capacity to render good medical services if the Government can do its part in putting the necessary infrastructure and motivate our medical personnel to attend to our people. The COVID-19 success is an example.  

Madam Speaker, I thank you once again. I also thank hon. Okupa and the whole team of the medical workers and health care givers in Soroti Regional Referral Hospital for what they have done. I think when the explorers reached the Cape of Good Hope, the coastal headland, King John II of Portugal decided to name that place “Cape of Good Hope” because of the optimism that they had to open the sea route to India. 

Soroti is not a cape because it is not on the coast but I am throwing this to Soroti City, Soroti District and the Ministry of Health that we can put something new on the face of Soroti Regional Referral Hospital. My proposal is to rename it Soroti “Good Hope” Regional Referral Hospital or something like that to give the public new hope, which has already been demonstrated by the work of our people there. 

The budget process is still going on. When we looked at the infrastructure which was shown on TV, the Committee on Health and the Committee on Budget should intervene, as a sign of emergency, and renovate the theatre or expand it within this budget so that the people see that we are – 

I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the Members for listening. May God bless you all. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ongalo-Obote, followed by hon. Ecweru. Honourable members, let us use three minutes please.

MR ANGURA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is important. The information I wanted to give the honourable colleague and the House at large is that the Minister of Health and the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Health who are responsible for the sector budget came here, greeted the team and took pictures with them. We told them to go and realign and see how to provide for Soroti Regional Referral Hospital in their current budget. I thought that you should get that information. Thank you.

4.02
MR KENNETH ONGALO-OBOTE (NRM, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to second this motion paying tribute to Dr Epodoi and the medical team at Soroti Regional Referral Hospital. Soroti Regional Referral Hospital, for those of you who may not know, is a small hospital in Teso, which is understaffed and underequipped with poor infrastructure serving 10 districts of Teso with a combined population of about three million people. It has only about 300 beds. 

In spite of all that, this hospital has been able to serve not only Teso but to change and save lives of other people over the last 15 years. 

I would like to pay tribute and honour these young men and women who, through their commitment to the Hippocratic Oath that they took, have taken sometimes the difficult decisions of saving lives that otherwise had been given up for loss.

The surgery that was performed in Soroti Regional Referral Hospital on 26 March 2021 was a surgery that is usually undertaken at a national referral hospital. We only have one such hospital, which is Mulago Hospital, where the patients had been referred to. However, after two days, they had to go back to Soroti Regional Referral Hospital, keeping in mind that one of these twins was a still birth and conjoined to the sibling for six days. It was already putrefying. 

When these twins were taken back to Soroti, the one that was still alive was taken back to die. Dr Epodoi and his team decided that if she was going to die, at least she should die with a chance and because of that, this kid is now alive. I honour and respect them for what they have done.

However, I would like this House to know that this historic operation for which we are paying tribute to these young men and women is just a tip of the iceberg in the great service that these people have been offering to the people of Teso.

Every week, Soroti Hospital performs multiple operations on children born with genital complications and nobody speaks about that; these are children born in poor families and would die if they were referred to hospitals in Kampala where their parents would have to pay a lot of money for such surgical operations.

Soroti Hospital, over the last 15 years, has successfully operated over 2,000 women for urinary tract challenges, which would have broken their marriages. These young gentlemen and ladies have been able to do that with the understaffing and under equipment that they have to work with.

In 2003, in a period of less than four months, Soroti Hospital was able to conduct surgeries on over 230 victims of the Lord’s Resistance Army war victims of gunshot wounds that had gone septic because they had been in the bush for so long; victims whose arms and limbs would have been amputated were saved by this dedicated team.

Madam Speaker, there is a common disease in Teso known as the hydrocele, almost every village in Teso used to have a hydroceles man but thanks to Dr Epodoi and his team, I want to inform the Ministry of Health that the hydrocele is now history in Teso. 

This is an affliction that people had to live with to a point where it became normal; they were able to erase it and this is why I began by calling Soroti Hospital a small hospital because when you look at the amount of work they have been able to do, you cannot believe that such an operation had been conducted in this small hospital.

In June 2020, Dr Epodoi and his team were successfully able to deliver a child who had grown full term in the liver of its mother. When you hear of some of these things, you think they are just folklore stories. A child that had grown to the side of the liver of its mother was successfully delivered by this team; that child is now 8 months old. 

A story is told of Dr Epodoi in 2006 walking in the rain at 3.00 a.m. to save the life of a child that had been given up for dead; that child is now 13 years and in senior three. Thanks to Dr Epodoi.

I am told that he once saved the life of a woman who had already been taken to Soroti mortuary for dead. When somebody thought that they had seen the woman move, he could not take that risk. He had that woman extracted, taken to the theatre and he was able to save her life. She is a testimony to the service that these young men and women have been giving to the people of Teso.

My colleagues who were here before me have spoken of medals and I support them; they have spoken of handshakes but I also believe that it is the duty of Parliament to be very clear in what it intends to be done. I request that not only should they get medals and handshake but they should also get envelope shakes. Thank you, very much.

THE SPEAKER: Concerning medals, I am going to submit all their names to the national awards committee. I can deal with that; we need to find a way for the other one.

4.09
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER, RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Mr Musa Ecweru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are here today to honour a team of heroes but I am happy that my colleague, the Minister of State for Health is here. Truth be told, if these conjoined twins were for some high-ranking person, a Member of Parliament or a rich person, they would have been given priority in Mulago.

The people who received them would have handled them with all the delicateness they deserved. Unfortunately, they happened to belong to a wretched family, the poorest of the poor. 

The medical officers in Mulago who received them did not see any meaning in their lives; I say this with a very heavy heart. In that direction, they decided to send them away to die. One was rotting away and was going to make the other one also die.

Yes, Mulago has been renovated, it has good facilities and it has also got some very exemplary doctors but there are still officers in Mulago and in many parts of the country that before they tackle you, they will look at the status of the patient and that status determined what they did.

When these children reached Soroti, Dr Epodoi and his team did not care about their status; they saw human beings in these children. Wretched as their parents may have been, they saw human beings and endeavoured to do what was humanly possible and here they are today, heroes in this country.

Madam Minister of Health, we have i a risk - COVID-19 has so many success stories because His Excellency the President himself took responsibility to champion the process. That should not cloud the story of poor health service delivery in Uganda.

I want to say to my colleague, the minister, that in many parts of the country, the health centre IIIs are for giving prescriptions. The health centre IVs where there are even theatres - today if you to fell sick in some of these parts of the country, when you are poor, it is like you have a death sentence around you.

We have done very well in peace and security and even roads but in health delivery at rural areas, we have not done well and I say this with a very heavy heart. If there is anybody who doubts me, go to any health centre IV and ask people to report to you so that they testify what must have transpired to them in the last two to three months, you will get chilling testimonies across the country.

It is against that background that we, who are responsible for this country given the mandate we have here, have a big responsibility to confront the challenge head-on and make sure that service delivery to the poor is equal to everybody else.

I want these health facilities in Kamuli, Kisoro - each time we move there, we must ask ourselves, if I, Musa Ecweru fell sick today, can I be admitted in Kamuli, Katakwi or Amuria? If not, what is the problem? If we do not answer that question, we have a problem on our hands.

Because of that, Madam Speaker, Dr Epodoi and his team did not see status; they went ahead and however poor these people were, did what they could. What do they want us to do to Dr Epodoi and his team in a hospital which does not even have a blood bank? 

We have been requesting and we are requesting, honourable minister, that now that the local Government of Soroti has already advanced 19 acres directly opposite the teaching university of Soroti in Arapai Town Council, we want a state-of-the-art hospital built there in honour of this team. 

We want a blood bank started immediately in that area. Madam Speaker, the whole of the Eastern region all the way to Karamoja, depends on the blood bank in Mbale. We have 19 acres of land. I thank the local Government of Soroti because they have secured the land. 

As we talk, Madam Speaker, I will bring a commitment by the Ministry of Local Government where they have already transferred the title to Soroti Regional Referral Hospital. There is land for an ultra-modern hospital near Arapai Town Council. 

My prayer to you, Madam Speaker, is that let us use the power of this Parliament to work with the Executive and cause resources to be availed for this state-of-the-art hospital, to be built there immediately. 

Simply coming to thank Dr Epodoi and his team, who are operating in a very wretched looking facility, is not sustainable. We want a hospital which is ultra-modern, a blood bank and some intervention.

Again, honourable minister, this whole idea of our medical and clinical officers in the rural areas first looking at the status of a patient before they handle him or her must be stopped. I support the President that we must enhance the salaries of scientists.

When we do that – which we must do – we must follow it with a second thing; close all the pharmacies that surround hospitals. Like in Mulago, the hospital is surrounded by private pharmacies. You do not need to be a rocket scientist to know that this is wrong. 

4.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES) (Ms Hellen Adoa): Madam Speaker, I am blessed this afternoon to have Dr Epodoi and Dr Rev. Sr Ajiko coming from Serere District. I have known Dr Epodoi and Dr Ajiko since I was a young girl in church.

Dr Epodoi is like my elder brother. It is unfortunate that three months ago, he lost his mother who should have watched him or would have accompanied him, the way the fathers accompanied him here. 

I second the motion and like others have said, motivation is very important. Sometimes, as others have said, they need a handshake or envelope. However, this morning, when I got in touch with Dr Epodoi and asked him where they had reached and what means they had used, I was shocked that the team that we are giving glowing tribute borrowed a vehicle to come here. They even squeezed the same hospital to give them fuel.

I feel that we have honoured many people, sometimes by the way they are received at the airport and I feel that this team should have been flown to Kampala, taken to a very good place for lunch – (Interjection) – Yes, we gave them lunch here but that alone is also part of motivation. 

As we speak, most of the people in Serere and Soroti are watching us and they have kept calling saying, “We hope that team will come back”. On 1st April, somebody lied on social media that Dr Epodoi had been appointed as His Excellency the President’s personal doctor. (Laughter) This prompted many people to call the radio stations and they said a lot of things. Even this morning, they called and said, “We hope Dr Epodoi, Dr Ajiko and other doctors will not be taken to remain in Kampala.”

Therefore, I stand with others to say that our medical teams everywhere need refresher courses. They need training and the hospitals are the grassroots. As others have said, Madam Speaker, I get calls from Serere every day where many people cannot afford to pay Shs 500,000 or Shs 700,000 for an operation.

We need to support these health centre IIs and health centre IIIs. As much as they are poor and have these challenges, they are medical people at the grassroots who even use their meagre resources to support people who come to these hospitals.

There are also doctors who we need to recognise now that God has helped to open the door. They have been doing a lot of things in Soroti. Nobody recognises them but then God said, “I think Ugandans should wake up, support and help doctors”.

When you talk to Dr Omaginor at the Uganda Heart Institute, you see that he wants to do something with the team but they are limited because of the equipment they have. When you go to the Uganda Cancer Institute, you see Dr Eyoku struggling with his tram. We thank God that we were able to do something for the Uganda Cancer Institute but we still need to do more.

There is a lady called Dr Jennifer Olel. This lady has done a lot of things and we need to see that this team that has opened the door is honoured, not only by them coming to be praised here but they should go back with something; even from among us, honourable Members of Parliament. This is so that when they reach their homes, their children will say, “You went to Kampala to be honoured. You have come back home and paid for the fuel that you borrowed.”

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I want to ask this House – as hon. Ecweru has said – that this Parliament can support the Executive to make sure that during these five years, we specialise and give more attention to the grassroots hospitals and recognise the people who do a lot, not only medically but also in other areas. 

Through that, we shall be able to motivate people so that every time they do something, they will be able to work harder. I want to thank the Soroti team and those that have remained.

I was actually looking around to see Dr Kirya; he has been like a twin brother to Dr Epodoi. I wonder where he was on that day. However, we want to thank them. Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving them the opportunity to come to Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I invite Hon. Eragu, let me reassure the people of Teso that we invited the team here for only this honour. We are not deploying them anywhere else. I would like to give that reassurance to come for this motion just.

Concerning how - I am sure even the Government can do- this is what parliament can do and is within our means.

4.25
MS VERONICA ERAGU (NRM, Kaberamaido County East, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I raise to support the motion to pay tribute to Dr Joseph Epodoi and the team. I also would like to associate with those who have spoken before me and support all that they had to say.

I first met Dr Joseph Epodoi in 2002 when he was one year in Soroti Hospital out of university. He operated on my father who had a urology and at the age of 85 years, my father was supposed to wait and die. However, Dr Epodoi gave my father 13 extra years to live. I want to thank you again and again. He knows I thank him.

We continued working with Dr Epodoi where we have this association which has become a big name in Teso; TEREWODE hospital. This is an organization that Alice Amasu, Winifred Agabo and myself founded in 2001. Dr Epodoi together with Dr Kirya and other medical professionals used to help us in doing surgeries for the fistula. Little did I know the experience would grow to this level?

Madam Speaker, Dr Epodoi loves his calling. He is always close to his patients and always on time doing his ward rounds. He is very kind, calm and patient. Dr Epodoi lives by his Hippocratic Oath and together with the team, they led a mission which I would call a “mission impossible” but they made it possible.

To the valued team of Dr Epodoi, you have done a great service to Uganda. Please come out even more boldly and be an example to health workers all over Uganda. A lot of what you have done has already been said. Even those who did not do what you did, let them pick up from your good example and continue doing all those works.

To the Government especially the Ministry of Health, you know what our health workers need. Honourable minister Ecweru has gone even “local” to tell you what exactly is needed. Can you inculcate in the health workers all those things that we need to give them? Let us improve the equipment and infrastructure for these hospitals so that we can take care of these people.

Please, provide for them to be able to gain confidence if they work with the right tools to perform better, the pride of every nation is the health of their citizens. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. As I invite Hon. Okabe, one of the things we could do is to demand for either a loan to support the regional referral hospitals to upgrade their facilities so that people do not have to come to Kampala.

4.30
MR PATRICK OKABE (NRM, Serere County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to support this motion and thank the movers of the motion. For your information and information of the whole House, Dr Epodoi comes from my constituency and same sub county with me and so is Dr Ajiko.

Dr Epodoi has helped a lot even with my own relatives, my father and other relatives with prostate cancer.  He has done very much complicated surgeries and I have known this father- the father is here today- this family is dedicated to the services and welfare of other people and we do appreciate them.

It is important to learn to appreciate other people for what they do and the achievements they make. However, also, this achievement might create a lot of jealousy from others. Let our doctors not be persecuted for that, they did what they did and everybody should be grateful.

Mulago may not be happy with their achievement. They were even advising them not to come here and that one, I can say it on the Floor because nobody will hold me accountable. However, this is a landmark operation that has opened our eyes and exposed the inhuman hearts of people. Where are the people with compassion in this country? Why turn away a poor person from getting treatment?

I know that in Mulago, if you do not pay money, you will not get treated. Our people come from upcountry and even from my constituency and they call me saying “I am stranded here” so die from there and we have to transport them back just because they are poor people.

I, therefore, would like to strongly support the other proposal of decentralizing the specialized medical services. Let every region have a hospital equivalent to Mulago so that our people do not travel here all the time and get stuck and stranded.

Madam Speaker, two years ago, Hon. Abala and I visited Soroti Referral Hospital; one, we found that the director of the hospital was not there. The one who was there, his contract had expired and up to date, there is only an acting director and there is no director for Soroti Referral Hospital. 

Now, when we are talking about putting resources there and renovations when there is no substantive director, who will manage the resources? We have also come to learn that the acting director is never there. He is there for only three days a week and he lives in Kampala. 

Therefore, Minister of Health, kindly take not of it –(Interruption)

MS AMONGIN: Madam Speaker, first of all, I would like to thank Hon. Okabe for giving me a way to give information. I know this very topic we are talking about is very touchy and I may not take the Floor again.

Madam Speaker, before I give that information, can we ask Dr Epodoi and his team to stand up and we applaud them properly as Parliament of Uganda, though I know they are within the gallery?

The Speaker: Honourable member, we introduced them individually and they stood up.

Ms amongin: Okay, we already talked about the situation of Soroti Regional Referral Hospital. Anyhow, the information I want to give is in regard to the administration of the hospital. As one of the members who sit on the Public Accounts Committee of this Parliament I can say that there are a lot of issues regarding the management of Soroti Regional Referral Hospital.

Despite the achievement and having excellent people, the like of Dr Epodoi, staff in there, are working under a very terrible environment. It is good the Minister of Health is present in this House. As a matter of urgency, the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Public Service and the other relevant ministries should ensure that the administration of this hospital is immediately revamped and rectified to serve the interest of the people of Teso.

As I go to sit –

The Speaker: Is that the information?

Ms amongin: The other piece of information I would like to give Hon. Okabe is that as we talk about Soroti Regional Referral Hospital, we have over eight districts in Teso with an overwhelming population served by just Soroti Regional Referral Hospital, which is still lacking –

The Speaker: Honourable member, you are smuggling in a contribution and taking Hon. Okabe’s time. 

Ms amongin: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Okabe, over to you.

The Speaker: Hon. Okabe, please conclude.

Mr okabe: Madam Speaker, I would like to conclude by putting a request. If time allows, let the Committee on Health visit Soroti Regional Referral Hospital as soon as possible. Last year, the ceiling collapsed on patients. 

Madam Speaker, I request you to allow the committee to visit the hospital and bring a report to this House. Thank you. 

The Speaker: I will give the Chairperson of the Committee on Health an opportunity to speak about that issue.

4.38
Ms susan amero (NRM, Woman Representative, Amuria): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to join the rest of the people to congratulate the team from Soroti Regional Referral Hospital that is before us today.

My colleagues have spoken about the state of the hospital. Honestly, the hospital infrastructure is dilapidated. It is the only hospital that has never been renovated or given a facelift since colonialism ended.

The operation was successful because people put in their hearts. It is very interesting to know that we still have Ugandans who have a heart for the people. Despite the failure by Mulago to operate on the children, they were taken back to Soroti from where the operation was carried out successfully; we would like to congratulate this team!

I would like to raise the issue of human resource and I will start from where Hon. Okabe ended. The Acting Director of Soroti Regional Referral Hospital is a substantive Commissioner in the Ministry of Health. Let this House interest itself in finding out how he is drawing his salaries. It looks like the reason he is never in Soroti is that he has a conflict of interest. He is positioned in Soroti to get money but other things are done here in Kampala. That is the information that I got.

I do not know if we are talking about nurturing talents.  These people are working; can’t we promote one of them? The minister should have keen interest in this because if we have people who are committed to work, why would you send somebody from the ministry to Soroti?

About the infrastructure, in Amuria where these twins were delivered from, people do not have a scanner or an X-Ray machine and so, doctors do not have better ways of managing patients. I once paid an impromptu visit to the maternity ward. Of all the patients there, there was only one who was waiting to be operated on; even that one wasn’t operated on. The order of the day is operation yet we all know that once one is operated on, life will never be the same.

Therefore, if we are not thinking about paying these doctors properly - all of them have clinics around the hospital to which they refer the patients. They make agreements that upon payment of the money, one would be operated on in the hospital. 

These people need to be facilitated if they have to deliver. They are doing a good job but because they are not paid well, they have to look for other sources of money.

With COVID-19 where we got a lot of resources, I thought it would trickle down to the lower local governments; those general hospitals and health centres III to enable heath workers there attend to our people. However, because the manpower is not paid well, when the drugs arrive, they leave the hospitals by evening. What next? People have to go and buy them from pharmacies outside. 

Therefore, something needs to be done by this House. I am happy COVID-19 – (Member timed out.)

4.41
Mr abraham byandala (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Madam Speaker, I am here to support the motion brought by my young brother, the Hon. Elijah Okupa. I cannot do better than thanking these gallant sons and daughters of Uganda for the great job they did. Do not worry about envelops; God has seen your work.

What these gallant sons and daughters have demonstrated to us – and on this, I ask the Prime Minister, who is present to take note – is what is lacking in the entire public service. People there have the technical know-how but they lack technical confidence. That is why you see on their desks trays marked “pending.” They do not have the confidence to take decisions. It is good these people had the confidence and took a decision. They did not risk. They knew they had the technical confidence.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when our civil servants do not get this technical confidence, things do not move. That is why we are not absorbing the money we get. It is just because people cannot take decisions. Allow me give an example. In the Eighth Parliament, while I was the Vice Chairperson of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, we toured the Northern By-Pass and noticed that engineers there had spent six months without taking a decision yet Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA), had engineers with a master’s degree like myself.

We asked what the problem was. We took a decision there and then. Hon. John Nasasira was the minister. The next day, work went ahead. What was lacking was the technical confidence. I would like to thank you for having technical confidence. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, inculcate in all public servants this technical confidence so that things can move.

They have told us how they came from Amuria, referred to Mulago - I appeal to the Government to provide district hospitals for each district. You are talking of national referral, regional referral - some people have only health centre IV. How can somebody from health centre IV be referred to the regional? Let us get district hospitals for everybody. 

Madam Speaker, I support that we must give adequate payment to the scientists. We must support the President and give adequate salaries and allowances to the scientists. These doctors would have gone somewhere but since they are patriots, they are here.

4.45
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWDs Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion to thank Dr Epodoi and his team for what they did in Soroti. I also want to thank him and the team for showing an example so that our children who will venture in that profession can remain and work at home - it is service above self. Thank you very much and may God bless you.

Madam Speaker, my Committee on Equal Opportunities went to visit that hospital but the hospital is sick. I grew in that hospital - my mother was a nurse and for your information, I also come from Serere. 

In this hospital, men, women and people with TB are accommodated in one ward. This is very terrible. We all got scared and said is this a regional referral? Now, what happens with the health centres? The mortuary can only accommodate two bodies, and it is very squeezed. 

When you go the theatre - the very theatre my mother used to work in, in the 1970s, is the same theatre these people are still working in and it is very tinny, with very old things in the room. The table, where the patients lie is very old.  I am ashamed, honourable minister. The ceiling was falling down and I said, “What is this?”

There was a building that was condemned - in fact, all the buildings in Soroti Hospital, right from the administration are condemned by engineering standards.

Madam Speaker, these doctors work under hard times but they are committed. When we reached there, we found a problem of management right from the board members - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MS ASAMO: Madam Speaker, as the Chairperson of the Committee on Equal Opportunities, I want to beg that issues of equity should be given to all hospitals. Now that we have cities, why not make them national hospitals? You can imagine a patient in Soroti Hospital has to get blood from Mbale. By the time you get it, the person would be dead.

Madam Speaker, I hope that in the coming budget, starting with the doctors, we increase their salaries. The President put this in his manifesto and so, we need to see it in action. Then we can look at the infrastructure.

I support the building of the teaching hospital. Otherwise, we also visited the land. Madam Speaker, when the minister comes to respond, we do not want lamentations. We want to hear actions. Thank you.

4.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also rise to support the motion moved by Hon. Okupa to pay tribute to our friends from Soroti Hospital led by Dr Epodoi. We would like to say thank you, for the heroic and professional work that you have continued to do and most notably, the separation of the Siamese twins, we are debating. Thank you, Dr Epodoi. 

Dr Epodoi was my classmate. We entered medical school together in 1990 and graduated on the same day. We took the Hippocratic Oath on 19 January 1996 together. We were a great class and we agreed to do very heroic things in whatever direction we take (Laughter). Therefore, while some of us do heroic things in politics, I am happy that Dr Epodoi and his team are doing very well and I want to thank them very much.

Madam Speaker, I agree that as the Government and Parliament, we need support the health sector. There are many health facilities, as many members have said which are not in very good physical shape; the regional referral hospitals, general hospitals, and many of the health facilities. 

In addition, much as there has been some improvement in the pay of the health workers and scientists, more needs to be done. Dr Epodoi, I think you remember when we qualified, we were just earning peanuts. There have been some improvements but I agree that we need to put more resources to motivate our health workers.

What happened in Soroti is testimony that we have many health workers out there who are doing wonderful things and maybe, sometimes we do not recognise and motivate them. Therefore, Soroti Hospital has led the example. We need to therefore start this culture of appreciating people who do good.

We need to rehabilitate our health facilities, including Soroti Regional Referral Hospital and the others. We also need to pay better the health workers and scientists. Therefore, we would like to plead with Parliament that when the Government comes with proposals to improve the health sector, we should, as usual support them so that the health sector can - (Member timed out.) Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.52
MR ANDREW KOLUO (NRM, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to add my voice to thank Dr Epodoi and the team for the excellent work done to separate the conjoined twins. Thank you very much.

Madam Speaker, on top of that job, I would like to bear witness. Last week, I had a sick brother, who is a farmer and teacher. He is diabetic and was supposed to be referred to Mulago Hospital. To tell you the truth, yesterday, he called me that he is fine and started doing his job, thanks to Dr Epodoi.

Soroti Hospital is at the centre of the new Soroti City but the hospital is in a dilapidated state. I kindly request that the Government should overhaul the hospital, particularly the theatre, the medical ward, which is even non-existent, the mortuary and the surgical wards.

Before I conclude, Madam Speaker, what Dr Epodoi and the team have done has sold the image of Uganda. Soroti Regional referral Hospital is located in a place where there is Soroti International Airport. If this hospital is upgraded, for sure, we shall find people from abroad coming to treat patients here, in Soroti. That will promote medical tourism in our country. 

I thank you. Dr Epodoi, the majority of the patients you receive come from Toroma, the people who love me. I kindly request that the health centre of Toroma should be upgraded, to not only the title of health centre IV, but it should have a theatre, an ambulance and a well-qualified staff. I submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Akurut, Hon. Lokwang, Hon. Elotu, Hon. Abala, the Chairperson of the Committee on Health, Hon. Kibalya, the Chairperson of the trade committee, and then we will close on this side. I have written all your names. Let us use the day for this – I do not know what to do. 

4.55
MS VIOLET AKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise up to add my voice to the mover of this motion in paying tribute to the team of doctors from Soroti, led by Dr Epodoi. Indeed a lot has been said about the health status. As a country, it is quite wanting. 

This surgery has been an eye opener. How then can we move forward in improving the health sector of this country? How then can we go forward to improve the pay of the doctors and the health staff? 

I think we are lucky to have such people. They train for five years, and the Government spends a lot of money in training them. We are lucky to have them still in Uganda. Mark you, there is a lot of reporting on social media going around. As a result, so many eyes are watching them. I hope we will still have them in Uganda.

We have had a lot of brain drain because of not motivating our health workers. We would like to avoid this. The Minister of Health is here. I think we need to take this as a priority for the country, so that we avoid the brain drain.

You spend five years injecting millions of money in training health workers, but we let them go because we are not motivating them well. We would like to thank Dr Epodoi. Right from the time he finished school, he has been a friend, a colleague and neighbour. He has been providing all these services to the people of Teso. May God bless you for that heart you have for the people of Teso, but above all, for being a true Ugandan.

We have made recommendations and proposals here that we need to have a focus. How is the Heart Institute in Mulago Hospital? How is the Cancer Institute? These are facilities that need a lot of resources, but we are not putting much there. Not everybody is able to take their people out when they get situations that require surgery, like for a heart or cancer.

It is the reason we are saying Government should re-focus on our health system so that we do not fly our people out. Even then, how many of us can afford to take our people for medical care outside? 

We need to focus and look at the poor of the poorest. Once we have that in our mind-set, then we can be able to plan for them well. Soroti Regional Referral Hospital, being an example, is in a sorry state. The mortuary – (Member timed out.)

4.58
MR HILLARY LOKWANG (NRM, Ik County, Kaabong): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The surgery on that day was the breaking news of the week. I really would like to join my colleagues in thanking Dr Epodoi and the team for saving lives. 

Karamoja people are also beneficiaries as they are always referred to Soroti Regional Referral Hospital and Kumi Orthopaedic Hospital. People of Karamoja are very happy and grateful to Dr Epodoi and the team. I wish we had ten “Epodois” in this country. We would have a better healthcare system.

We had a similar scenario last year, when a young nurse from West Nile pushed a patient with a wheelbarrow; five kilometres away to the hospital. That action raised a lot of issues. 

This is like when there was Ebola in Northern Uganda, Dr Lukwiya saved many lives and he died as a hero. So, we should recognise Dr Epodoi as a hero as well. Such people need rapid promotions even to supervisory positions, so that they can supervise the health care system, because they sacrifice a lot. Thank you.

5.00
MR COSMAS ELOTU (NRM, Dakabela County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion, and I would like to concur with all the previous speakers on what they have contributed in support of this motion. 

The act that the team from Soroti Regional Referral Hospital led by Dr Epodoi performed can easily be categorised as a heroic act. Indeed, I would like to join the whole country in congratulating them, and really honouring them for such a wonderful act they performed; amidst all the challenges that have been enumerated here. 

I think a lot has been said about what this team has done. I think the onus is really on us to see that the challenges that have been identified and the issues that they face every other day, first as professionals who help us out there and secondly the people that they serve, are fully addressed.

I am happy that the single act that they performed simply brought the candle out on top of the table. I request this House and the whole Government to take this opportunity to not allow this candle to go off. 

In that regard, I would like to share with you an analogy. In the US, in the State of Minnesota, Rochester, there is a clinic called Mayo Clinic. If you go to any international airport, you will get a desk guiding you on how to get in there. If you follow the story of Mayo Clinic located in Rochester, it is very similar to what this great team of Soroti Regional Referral Hospital has done. It started with a Doctor called Dr Henry Stanley Plummer, coming out and performing heroic acts during the time when there was an epidemic in the US. He particularly chose to settle in Rochester, Minnesota. 

Having settled there, he established a clinic that eventually picked up as a centre of excellence in medicine. Up to date, world over, if you check, Mayo Clinic is the number one clinic in the world. 

With that background, I would like to request and plead with this House that this act the team from Soroti Regional Referral Hospital has performed, should then trigger us to declare Soroti Regional Referral Hospital as a centre of – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR ELOTU: Indeed the Local Government of Soroti has given the Ministry of Health - I would like to thank the Ministry of Health for initiating this – They have given Soroti Regional Referral Hospital additional land next to the university. I am happy that the minister is here and we are still within the budget cycle – if we could include this specific activity as an activity to be taken up in the next financial year.

Secondly, the issue of the infrastructure of Soroti Hospital; we have raised this issue a number of times in this House - let this heroic action then trigger the renovation of Soroti Hospital, the blood bank and mortuary.

The hospital does not have a mortuary; if anything happens, the body has to be taken to Mbale and probably when time comes for your burial then it will be picked up from there to any other place in Teso – as Hon. Asamo said –(Member timed out.)

5.05
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I thank you for allowing this motion to be presented in the House. This hospital was started in mid-1920s as a syphilis treatment centre. (Laughter) I am sharing this such that we get to know where we come from.

In 1978, it became a district hospital and in 1996 it became a regional hospital. Unfortunately, everything which is there is as of 1996 and before and that is where the big problem is.

That team has done a wonderful job; I am only praying that the wonderful God in Heaven will bless them systematically and helps them to continue doing the good job as they have started.

In most cases we talk about good things when people are dead but today, we are talking about good things when these super powerful men and women are still alive. Allow me read Galatians 6:9: “And let us not grow weary of doing good; for in due season we shall reap if we do not give up.” That is the word of the Lord. 

These people have done a good job; I now request the Government to play its role, specifically increase the funding of the hospital; fill the vacant posts that are in the hospital - The other thing is that as we speak now, there was no board for more than five years and that is where the big problem was. Even now there is no medical director.

I am a Member of Parliament for Ngora but if the ministry sees it proper, they would appoint Dr Epodoi as a medical director now that he has been there in the history of the entire place.

He is well equipped and has the ability, positive thinking and clear direction in which the hospital is going. Now that Soroti is a city, I propose that the ministry elevates that hospital to a level of a city status such that it becomes a kind of national hospital but located in Soroti.

For us to keep it there, it will be as of 1978 when it was a district hospital which is not helping over three million people being served.

I thank Dr Epodoi and his entire team; may God bless you for a wonderful job you have done and I bring you greetings from my powerful men and women of Ngora County. Thank you.

5.09
DR MICHAEL BUKENYA (NRM, Bukuya County, Kassanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in applauding the team from Soroti for the wonderful work they have done. Madam Speaker, you asked me to talk about the infrastructure.

The committee has been to Soroti many times; there is no structure in the hospital that is up to standard. All of them should be condemned, it was a district hospital that was promoted in the 2000s and it has remained like that – and Hon. Abala has given the history.

Therefore, I support your suggestion that the Minister of Finance brings a loan here – if he does not have money – and we approve in remembrance of this heroic work. 

This is why mainly I want to support the motion; Dr Epodoi is a senior consultant, appointed by the Minister of Public Service on behalf of the President. He is paid slightly above $1,000 a month – that is his net take home.

He works in Soroti where he cannot go to look for extra money like people who go to Nakasero in Kampala. In his contract, the Ministry of Public Service offers him a chauffeur-driven car but that has never been fulfilled for him and about 50 of his colleagues.

They work despite the fact that Government does not fulfil part of its contract. All these senior consultants - they are about 40 - that is not done for them but they continue working, especially those working outside Kampala because they have nowhere to run.

If that operation was done in Nakasero, he would have earned more than his salary of the month in just that. That is how he becomes a hero. 

In a meeting held three years ago, where the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Health were present in State House, the President instructed that a nurse is paid at least Shs 1 million, a medical officer is paid at least Shs 5 million, and a senior consultant is paid at least Shs 18 million. 

However, the Ministry of Finance has failed to raise that money. There are not very many senior consultants - they are not more than 50 – but they have failed to raise that money, irrespective of the fact that the committee on behalf of the House has been recommending. (Interjection) The money they give us is what we have to work with.

I would like to ask this House to support us this time - at least in remembrance of the work of the Soroti team - that all health workers have an increment in their pay based on the President’s directive of three years ago.

The President directs, he goes on the TV and says that it is Parliament failing him and yet it is the Ministry of Finance failing Parliament and fortunately, the minister is here.

Madam Speaker, most of the things have been said but I would like to thank the team from Soroti - I have worked with some of them before and others I have trained. 

I would like thank them for the work well done – but this is a representation of what health workers are capable of doing in the whole country, except that they are not well facilitated and the problem is not with us here.

Last year, we had an unfunded list of Shs 1.3 trillion in the health sector. What has been provided now does not even tackle what we mentioned. I beg that this time when we come back to the committee of supply, they give us a special chance as Parliament to see that we get something for the health sector in this country in remembrance of the work Dr Epodoi and team have done. Thank you.

5.13
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker, I wish to join colleagues as we extend thanks to the team that did wonderful work. What pains us is that we are here every time, crying about the poor state of health and poor health conditions that our medical workers undergo.

Madam Speaker, if Dr Epodoi was from another country as a consultant or expatriate, he would be earning above Shs 20 million or Shs 30 million. However, because he is a Ugandan from Serere, he earns less than Shs 4,000,000, as the doctor has said.

We have good human resource. As Government, we are only failing to manage it. We put money in areas that do not really add tangible value and neglect a sector that is here to save life.

Most of the people here who are former students at Makerere know Pastor Ekudu. He was here in Mulago but they failed to operate on him. They referred him to South Africa. When he reached there, he was operated by his former student who hails from – I think – Kaberamaido; his former student who is now a consultant in South Africa.

Here we are, praising Dr Epodoi. Tomorrow, he will get an offer and we shall be here crying that he has gone. People have been saying here that he should be promoted. My take is that he should not be promoted but facilitated and given money to cater for his deeds, so that he is there to do the work that everybody expects of him and is waiting for him to do.

If he had not done so, some of us would not know. Only Hon. Okupa, Dr Bukenya and Dr Baryomunsi would know. Some of us would not have known this team but it is here. It has done wonderful work. We are here praising them. What have we prepared for them as Government?

Many were here saying that they need a handshake. Madam Speaker, you can give a call to your elder brother; Nakasero is near here. (Laughter) He is good at giving handshakes even to those who have done nothing. These ones have at least done something; they should do something for them.

Above all, Madam Speaker, we need to address ourselves to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Health to improve health conditions. We pass loans here every day that end up being misappropriated. Let us – for once – pass a loan, however big it will be, so that we come back here and say, “We have done something -(Member timed out.)

5.17
MR ROBERT KASULE (NRM, Nansana Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion and I congratulate Dr Epodoi and the team, right up to the nurses – because he is a surgeon; he cannot work alone. 

Some time back – a long time ago – when I was the chairperson of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, I was working on a Bill called “Insurance Regulatory Bill”. There was a part to do with health insurance. Whatever we say today can only be actualised if we get more resources in the health sector. 

If we had started then – ten years ago – we would have the money. We would even have a handshake for every doctor who does miracles. What Dr Epodoi has done, many doctors are doing but in underprivileged hospitals. They are using candles. They are using all means to deliver babies.

What we need, Madam Speaker, is this. We are in the Budget process. We can gift Soroti Regional Referral Hospital with some money. I wish the Minister of Health goes there and visits. 

I sit on the Public Accounts Committee (Central Government). There are many problems in that hospital, not because of accountability issues only but structurally and the machines they must use to implement such miracles.

In the budget, we can help them and gift them because people will come to visit the wonder doctors in Soroti. It is very hard to get good news in the news these days, but when I had about Soroti Regional Referral Hospital, I felt good. I said, “Oh, for once, we have been taking such children to India and elsewhere but now, it is in Soroti”.

Others are going to come. I have seen pregnant mothers here. They are going to deliver them, even with complications. So, they need help and will run to Soroti. You will only find them at the doorstep of Soroti Regional Referral Hospital. We can now help and give some money to the hospital for a facelift and also to help in paying for the allowances of the doctors there.

Madam Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity and we thank the doctors and team for travelling all the way to be recognised for work well done.

5.19
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I happen to be the grandmother of Dr Epodoi – (Laughter) – and I hope that the technicians will be mindful of that. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I am very surprised that the movers of this motion did not highlight something which I considered more scientific and historic than the one we are applauding today. Sometime in June last year – if I am correct – the same doctor carried out what most of you have not heard about but I took trouble to read about and study it. It is called “Intrahepatic pregnancy situation”.

This is where a child is implanted in the liver. This is where this same doctor subjected this lady to a surgery and was able to detach the child from the liver. As I talk now, both the child and mother are alive. Madam Speaker, don’t you think this is more scientific than the one we are celebrating? 

I want to amend this motion to strategically include this one; that in Uganda, we have doctors who can carry out what we call “Intrahepatic pregnancy surgery”. Hon. Elijah Okupa, please allow that amendment to be included.

Madam Speaker, I am talking about the way forward because people have said a lot of things about the dilapidated conditions and so on and so forth. I just want to highlight a few things.

Firstly, can the Ministry of Health come to this Floor of Parliament and tell us what they did with the money which we passed in April and the two supplementary budgets we have passed, which were targeting modernisation and restructuring of the referral hospitals, in preparation for anything that would happen?

For me to see what I saw – which was in the media – highlighting the condition of the hospital where this operation was done, you wonder what happened to the money we passed here.

So, I would want that we allow our committee to go to each and every referral hospital in Uganda, identify the gaps and bring them to us; we discuss it and compel the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to raise the money, so that at least we equip our hospitals. That is one of the issues I would like to bring up.

Madam Speaker, you remember in 2017, Dokolo hosted the Women’s Day celebrations and this was in appreciation of the fact that Dokolo has only a health centre IV. However, we were able to lead in the fight against Hepatitis B. The President promised, in full hearing of the finance ministry, that Dokolo would be rewarded with a district hospital. Up to now, it has not been done. 

Let me hope that the promise we are going to make to Dr Epodoi and his team will not be simply left on the Floor of Parliament and not implemented.
I have seen it personally and I have mentioned it over and over to the Minister of Health and the Minister of Finance.

However, may I give this warning that this is a serious matter? A child of Uganda who has stood up to – All he is saying is, “Instead of taking your patient to India, I am here. All I want is to give me the equipment and I will do what is done in India” and we are denying them the opportunity. Madam Speaker, let us be serious this time. 

I would like to conclude by saying that these people deserve a golden handshake in the first place and not a medal because people have taken them though I have not taken mine. However, these people have saved lives and they must be given medals. I know that one of the distinguished doctors, Dr Acar from Lango, was also awarded a distinguished award recently. These are people we must congratulate, facilitate and give them a golden handshake. May God bless you all.

5.25
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Madam Speaker, thank you for the opportunity and I would like to thank Hon. Okupa for the motion he moved. Let me also start by thanking and congratulating Dr Epodoi and the team.

Being a consultant in a regional referral hospital which is not cared for so much, you would have chosen to move away from there. Very many consultants ran away but you remained there. You value the lives of people more than anything else. This is why we congratulate you and pay tribute to you.

You are going to enter into the record. Leave alone these tangibles, if you are to be rewarded with something to facilitate you but the most important thing is that you and the team have entered into records for excellent performance.

In Gulu, we had the late Dr Lukwiya for fighting Ebola and he was the first person to discover that what was killing people in Gulu was Ebola. To date, we have not forgotten him as he is referred to every time in the communities for work well done. You are going to remain in history together with your team.

Madam Speaker, this is an opportunity and you see people talk a lot about this. It is an opportunity for us to highlight problems in regional referral Hospitals. It is not only in Soroti but even when you go to Gulu. I would like to tell you that in Gulu, not only the consultants run away but even the nurses. To date, they facilitate nurses with consolidated salaries. In this salary, they have Shs 60,000 as lunch allowance for the whole month without tea in the hospital. For somebody working and you don’t give break tea or evening tea for those who work in the night. They are working in terrible conditions as if we are not giving anything.

To me, we should still target the 15 percent of our national Budget going to health because health is life. Our people depend entirely on Members of Parliament. Where do Members of Parliament get all these resources? You have to stay and tie your stomach and serve the people who come to you; for X-rays and everything. The best our people can get in the hospitals is just prescriptions. 

The people of Soroti, you must be very lucky. Some of us in our districts, the best they can get - 

Madam Speaker, these medical workers are facing a lot of problems. Medical supply and equipment - I have a very sick mother and if you are to take her to Gulu Regional Referral Hospital, there is not even a wheelchair to carry her.

If Members of Parliament or leaders are to do everything then what is the Ministry of Health doing? Honourable minister, please help us. Who are the supervisors or directors of these regional referral hospitals? They and even the hospital administrators should be supervised. Where do they send the little money that should buy small hospital equipment? 

We and the medical staff are so frustrated. We need to do better. It is just because of time but we have a lot to highlight. Even the nurses say that in order for them to renew their license, they are trying to introduce a tax. Why tax them when they pay Pay As You Earn and earn something very small? That tax should not come to this Parliament. Let the medical staff be added something instead of removing something from them.

I would like to thank you very much. The problem is real and very bad. Thank you, medical staff.

5.29
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate you for having allowed Hon. Okupa to raise this very important motion. In the same vein, let me appreciate Dr Joseph Epodoi and your team for the good work done. 

I have been searching through the Internet and this kind of operation is the first of its kind. You will never find anywhere where one child died two days ago but the doctors worked so hard to rescue the life of the surviving child. Doctor, we appreciate you for that.

Madam Speaker, the conduct of the medical personnel in Mulago is quite serious. I would like to propose that the Minister of Health comes to the Floor of parliament and tables a report why the medical officers in Mulago behaved the way they did. Additionally, we need to investigate the director in charge of Mulago National Referral Hospital. 

Madam Speaker, it is quite shameful to hear that Mulago national referral hospital refused to work on this patient. This is very serious.

Secondly, we have been appreciating the doctor, his team and medical personnel and we have done it through words. Now we need to act. I would like to propose that the Government puts aside a minimum of Shs 100 million in appreciation of Dr Epodoi and the team. This is very possible.

You will remember that sometime back, Members of Parliament collected funds for Uganda Cancer Institute, Mulago. In the same vein, Members of Parliament can collect some money. If it is agreeable, we can do that. I really propose.

Finally, it is really quite serious that as a country, we normally train well qualified medical personnel but there are other countries that are benefiting from our medical personnel because we are paying them poorly and they are working under hard conditions.

A case in point is when you go to our neighbour; South Sudan. I can confirm that 70 per cent of medical personnel working in South Sudan are Ugandans - Madam Speaker, allow me to conclude. I am saying that about 70 per cent of medical officers working in South Sudan are Ugandans trained by our own money. After receiving better training from Uganda, they hope to go and get jobs outside: Rwanda, South Africa and many countries.

Madam Speaker, it is high time that we started benefiting from our own medical personnel. Dr Joseph Epodoi and the team have shown that we have the best quality and knowledgeable doctors in our country. I beg to support.

5.33
mr francis mwijukye (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to begin by expounding on what my colleague has just said. When Hon. Okupa read, “Since the doctors at Mulago National Referral Hospital under unclear and unfortunate circumstances could not attend to the conjoined twins…” I was surprised that this could happen. You would wish to ask yourself; was this negligence, being unprofessional, unethical or lack of referral services at the National Hospital?

What is a national referral hospital if it has no referral services? What is referral about it?

Secondly, if a minister can stand and say that for you to get services at Mulago, you need to have money – a minister was lamenting here. We were told that the permanent secretary and the minister were just taking pictures with the team and went. They want to be associated with the success and that is all. They are not concerned about what is happening at Mulago.

The minister who is here needs, like my colleague has suggested, to investigate these so-called “unfortunate circumstances.” What happened?

When we were growing up, we were told, “If you want free services, go to Mulago.” Now they will tell you that even in Mulago, there are no free services. What happened? Who took up the services? 

You would be told that presidents then went and got assistance from Mulago. They were treated. However, now even the ministers cannot go there. The President needs a personal doctor even for a COVID-19 jab. He will go for a permanent secretary somewhere. You wonder what kind of world we are in. 

As I conclude this, I would like to thank the team and also propose that there is an investigation into what happened at Mulago. Also, all referral hospitals including district hospitals in Buhweju - for example, because appointment of District Health Officers (DHOs) is left to the district, somebody will wait for a relative or friend to first qualify before they are appointed. This should also be centralised so that it is not misused.

Otherwise, we thank the team and ask Government to do its work. This shames us as leaders and also as a country. Thank you.
 
5.37
Ms lucy akello (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank Hon. Elijah for moving this motion. Above all, I would like to thank you for making sure that this motion is put on the Order Paper and allowing members to speak to it with so much time. 

I would like to associate myself with all the positive attributes that have been accorded to this team headed by Dr Joseph. I would like to say that I am a wife there and I am very proud.

A lot has been attributed but I would like to warn the team that is there. Sometimes when you are praised very much, you forget. My prayer to you is that when you go back, read Zachariah 4.6. It was not by your might but God who used you to carry out that operation. 

There is a doctor in Lacor Hospital, a very serious gynaecologist called Dr Bugga. Before he sees any of his patients, the first thing he would do is to say a prayer. This is what I would like to leave this great team with. Even as you continue to do your work, always remember that it is not your might but God guided you.

As you have heard, the hospital has no capacity. The theatre is terrible. I am a member of the Committee on Health. What Dr Bukenya talked about is true. I went there and almost shed tears. I interacted with a sister doctor who has this great heart. Even when you see her serving, she does so with a love of humanity without discriminating whoever has money and whoever does not.

We are talking about attitude of doctors and medical workers. Some of us go to these private hospitals but I can tell you that if you met some of the nurses and medical workers in the private hospitals on a bad day, they would forget that you paid privately and expensively and they bark at you.

It therefore comes back to how somebody has been trained and loves their job. I thank the great team from Soroti for loving your job and humanity. God bless you. We continue to pray for you.

5.41
Ms angelline osegge (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to equally convey my gratitude and appreciation to the team from Soroti Regional Referral Hospital. 

I must say that a lot has been said and I could not say more. However, there is a lot that we know that we could appreciate them for. 

Given the subject matter to which we are speaking today, I rise to support the motion. I also agree with all the proposals that colleagues have made on this Floor. 

I would like to say that by castigating the Mulago team, we are only looking at the symptoms. A human being will wake up on a day with a different feeling. We are creatures that are influenced by what we go through. You never know what could have happened to those doctors in Mulago Hospital. It is incumbent upon the minister to investigate and see. 

However, I would like to believe that in spite of what those did in this case, they must have done other good things in their lifetime and service to this country.

In this country, we have put a recruitment cap on the health sector like others. We are continually expanding political offices that may not matter as much as what the medical sector, that we are looking at today, does. 

Colleagues have talked about things that we are always looking at. This Parliament is not short of reports on Soroti Regional Referral Hospital throughout the time we have been here. I would like to ask Government to look into herself and consider that there are some offices that we are running that are not as important. Expanding political offices that are only a cost centre and we are not able to service our health sector the way we should, is not going to help this country.

Madam Speaker, we know that even this Parliament is expanding day and night. I do not know whether we need it. We need more doctors, we need doctors facilitated, health centres and hospitals with facilities that can serve this country; we do not need expansion of political offices that are not as useful.

Madam Speaker, like my sister Lucy has said, while we appreciate the team, they need to know that whatever we have proposed in appreciation to them is good. I urge them to seek eternal rewards because what man will give you today, tomorrow they will still be the same - I implore them to continue with that good heart and seek eternal rewards because when God gives, He does not repent on it. Acknowledge that God’s gifts are without repentance. I ask them to continue delivering services to this country and give their hand as long as they have an opportunity; a better reward awaits them. Thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

5.44
MS JUDITH AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. As I join colleagues to congratulate and thank Dr Epodoi and the team for the great work done, I know that the great work was not only from those that are described in the motion moved by Hon. Okupa.

I would like to speak to the proposal that we may use this opportunity to include, in Hon. Okupa’s motion, a suggestion that Parliament resolves that this country especially the Ministry of Health comes up with a proposal or a loan - whatever they want to call it, to enable Government put up referral hospitals, which are not necessarily regional because they exist now. We already have regional referral hospitals, which do not - of course, members have been expressing concerns on how they are dilapidated and all the problems associated with them.

If we could have the equivalent of Mulago Hospital in all the regions of this country such that all doctors who have the ability, even if they do not, we would expand their ability by building their capacities to ensure such surgeries and operations that are required can be done in the different regions of this country.

Madam Speaker, I have been to Soroti because I did my industrial training at Soroti Secondary School, which is almost opposite Soroti Regional Referral Hospital. I was in Soroti last year; the region referral hospital that I saw in 2004 is the same one I saw last year. There is no difference and no improvement at all. However, when you see the kind of work this hardworking team do under such circumstance, definitely we have to applaud them.

I would like to urge as I conclude my point, in Acholi, we have very many ways of appreciating. I heard one of the members say that Africans do not know how to appreciate. In Acholi, we have many ways of thanking individuals depending on what they do. For instance, the likes of Dr Joseph Epodoi and the group, we be appreciated by naming our children after them. For example, every woman in Teso, who gives birth in this season, would name their sons after Dr Epodoi and the Rev. Sisters and all members in the medical team because that way, they would live forever beyond their life in this world. (Laughter) 

Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving out this whole afternoon to honour this team. Also I thank Hon. Elijah Okupa for elaborately bringing up this matter.

5.49
MS ANNA ADEKE (Independent, Female Youth Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the mover and the seconders of the motion. It is such a beautiful coincidence that we are discussing this motion on 7th April, which is also World Health Day as recognised by the World Health Organisation. 

Today, I also join my colleagues to pay homage to you, Dr Epodoi, son of Teso, along with your team and the entire team at Soroti Regional Referral Hospital, which I know may not necessarily be here; we appreciate all of you in your entirety. We appreciate the difficult circumstance under which you work to ensure you deliver and save our mothers. The mothers of Soroti have asked me to tell you that they are proud of you and they request you to keep up with the good work.

Our role now as legislators is to make sure we facilitate your good work. You are a pair of gifted hands, which we are proud of. Our very own, Ben Carson, I am sure very soon, we shall be performing novel surgeries, which the world will come to hear about because God has demonstrated something special in you, Dr Epodoi and your team.

Madam Speaker, we all know the rate of maternal and infant mortality in our country. Dr Epodio has taken specialty in supporting women. Many women, especially in rural areas, know that giving birth is like facing death. We thank you very much, Dr Epodoi. We pray that the Ministry of Health will be able to have this trickle down to the smaller health centres.

We should also not shoot ourselves in the foot. We need to prioritise as Parliament. We passed a loan here to create a specialised hospital at Lubowa but how many Ugandans can go to Lubowa? How many Ugandans can access that facility? I know that healthcare will be very expensive, so we need to prioritise and make sure that if there is any loan that is going to be brought before this House, it should be used for the right reasons –(Interruption)

MR NSAMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Adeke, you have reminded me of Lubowa Hospital. We need the Government to come before us and explain; what happened to the money we passed here? The Minister of Health indicated that instead of us having this hospital, we could have the money to equip regional referral hospitals so that the likes of Dr Epodoi can have the equipment and the necessary staff they need. I needed to give this information to Hon. Adeke that that money for Lubowa Hospital was eaten. It is no longer there.

Madam Speaker, this Government has specialised in building markets everywhere. I wish the same spirit - you know, Hon. Adeke -

THE SPEAKER: But now you are smuggling your contribution-

MR NSAMBA: She was talking about prioritisation. If we have invested in markets, why don’t we do the same to our regional referral hospitals? Thank you very much.

MS ADEKE: Madam Speaker, when the minister comes here to respond, I would really request her to respond to the proposal that we have heard. Civil society has expressed concerns that Government has made a proposal to cut the budget of health by nine per cent. So, what are we discussing here if we are crying about our regional referral hospitals and health centres if they are going to cut the budget by 9 per cent. 

So, what are we discussing here, if we are crying about our regional referral hospitals and health centres if they are going to cut their budgets by 9 per cent? The minister needs to come here on record about the status of the health budget. Thank you.

5.53
MS LILLY ADONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join the House in appreciating this great team that has done our country very proud by doing what was seen to be impossible by the people in the Mulago National Referral Hospital, who dampened the hope. There is nothing worse than losing hope. I believe the parents of the twins, when they left Mulago Hospital, completely lost hope in the Government, in the leaders and they had nowhere to turn to until the team that we are paying tribute to today gave them that hope. 

I would like to applaud the team and tell them that they did not only restore the hope of these parents but the hope of all Ugandans. We still believe that without paying much money or being somewhere with status, we still have people somewhere who can help. I would like to thank Dr Epodoi and the group for being that team that gave hope to Ugandans.

We all have a duty. I know, as we stand in this House, we think the country is very corrupt and that we do not care about anybody. We, however, have a duty to restore that hope by a simple act of respecting everybody and doing our work that we have a duty to do. I believe the team from Soroti has challenged even those in Mulago Hospital and some of us who are sitting here who still want to wait for everything to be given.

Madam Speaker, as they have done it, a lot has been said by my colleagues. I support the proposals being made by colleagues here. We need to put our feet down and ensure that all the regions of this country have got the referral hospital facilitated, supervised and given all the facilities necessary so that people can get services and the doctors who are there can work. 

Madam Speaker, I worked in – (Member timed out.)

5.56
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support this motion. It is very interesting that the surgery Dr Epodoi and team performed in Soroti Regional Referral Hospital actually is the first in the whole world. According to the medical journal, they said this is the only surgery that took place, where one of the twins was dead and the other was alive. 

What should be done goes beyond money. Dr Epodoi, if it was not anything, should be expressly promoted and even given an unconditional scholarship for a PhD so that he leads in this area because certain things that hon. Elijah Okupa did not say that I would need to add to who Dr Epodoi is, is that we are sitting on gold. 

Dr Epodoi is a specialised Urologist. He has two masters’ degrees but he has just recently completed the Master of Science in Urology from Kilimanjaro Christian Medical College of Tanzania. From there, he came out as the best student and he is now a fellow of Urology from the College of Surgeons of East and Central Africa. This is a man who is highly specialised. No wonder, he is leading a team. Many people lead groups but Dr Epodoi is leading a team. You can see that composure. They are one team. 

I wish to pray that the Ministry of Health, just as a way of rewarding what they have done, should make a special arrangement for Soroti Regional Referral Hospital while we wait for the rest. It is embarrassing to think like the Pharisees in the old days that nothing good would come from Nazareth, only to find that Jesus, the Saviour, came from there. 

The name Epodoi itself is an embodiment of someone who works for others. Those who speak Ateso know this. Dr Epodoi an embodiment of a very knowledgeable person who engages on issues of health.

This is a very rare occasion where you talk about the goods that are done when someone is alive and listening. Many people make very good eulogies but today, we are paying this special tribute. I hope the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is listening carefully because these are issues of resources. We shall carefully listen to him when he submits towards the end of the commitment and the forgotten commitment on the issues of health. 

What is going on in this country in this pandemic has caused the Ministry of Health to come on the frontline just like the Ministry of Defence. There is nothing else we can talk about that the Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Health should not be moving at the same level. That is what we expect in the next budget. The health ministry should be securitised to give it priority in expenditure during this pandemic because we do not know when –

You can see how the world is struggling with the vaccines. We urge the Ministry of Health and ministry of finance to speak from their hearts on these matters because Dr Epodoi and team have done theirs. It is your turn, as we conclude this motion that you submit to our full satisfaction. Madam Speaker, I beg to move. 

6.02
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join colleagues in congratulating the team led by Dr Epodoi of Soroti Regional Referral Hospital, upon this motion raised by hon. Okupa.

Just like colleagues have said, what this team has done embodies professionalism, heroism and patriotism. Something that was least expected from a regional referral hospital of Soroti Hospital status. I speak with experience.

There was a time a baby with heart complications was referred from Arua Referral Hospital and the parents were not attended to and they were painfully referred back by the gatekeeper from Mulago National Referral Hospital, to go and die. When I raised this matter with the Minister of Health, she disputed my plea and claimed that I was lying. We had a bitter exchange but these are facts that are taking place at Mulago National Referral Hospital.

I can imagine the pain with which the parents of these con-joined twins left Mulago Hospital, which has been equipped and now referred to as a super specialised national referral hospital and yet it cannot perform what Soroti Regional Referral Hospital performed.

Things can be done. This Government has put in place resources through this Parliament; we approved loans here to revamp the general hospitals. I can with vivid examples mention them here; if you went to Kayunga and Yumbe, you would find facilities that you cannot find in any of the regional referral hospitals. However, what is going to let down the service delivery in those facilities is lack of human resource.

Ministry of Health, why are you allowing our people to die when resources have been put to your use; there is a lack of prioritisation and proper deployment of human resources in the Ministry of Health.

Today, as we speak on this motion, the team from Soroti has demonstrated to us that we have resources, we have the will but the commitment of the supervising entity, which is the Ministry of Health, has failed to play its part.

As I wind up – since time has not been on my side - Members have said that the team here deserves a golden handshake - on a good note, allow me also to appreciate this House for commending the work that was done by our nurse from Arua who wheeled a patient during the lockdown.

This nurse was awarded a scholarship to pursue a diploma and upgrade it up to degree level.  She was also recognised by the National Council for Nurses and Midwives. This nurse was also given a golden handshake, which amount I will not mention here by His Excellency, President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni and the handshake was processed by our former colleague, Dr Omona. 

Therefore, there should be no reason as to why the same Dr Omona should not process something to appreciate this team from Soroti, as quickly as possible. On a personal note, the child that was saved under this mysterious circumstance – who I would like to call “miracle child” has a future. How we secure this child’s future to come and give a testimony, even when we are no longer there is important. 

On behalf of Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Children, we would like to pledge a fund for supporting this child; beginning from May, this year. I will start the fund with Shs 2 million from my personal account. That money can be deducted from my monthly salary in May, in order to start a fund for securing the future of this child; be it academic or whatever. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

6.07
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join colleagues to pay a glowing tribute to Dr Epodoi and team for proving leadership in performing those very complicated high-risk surgeries of separating conjoined twins and delivering a mother whose baby was implanted on the liver.

Most importantly, Dr Epodoi and I come from the same region - I come from the disaster-prone district of Bududa and there are good testimonies made by some of the people you worked on.

There is this disease, which was a neglected tropical disease, Hydrocele. This disease was rampant in that region but courtesy of the effort of the blessed hands of Dr Epodoi, he has conquered and wiped out that condition.  I would like to congratulate you on that.

Madam Speaker, I was perturbed by the honourable minister when he was here lamenting and particularly when he praised and rightly so, His Excellency the President for championing the fight against Coronavirus, successfully. Equally, however, I have an axe to grind with his Excellency for not championing the fight to ensure that healthcare services are improved. This is insincerity of the highest order.

In the Cabinet where they sit, why can’t they speak the truth to power? Why is it that they only come here and think that this is the only right place to address the chairperson but the chairperson in Cabinet, incidentally, by virtue of his office, the President is the substantive minister of finance.

We have Operation Wealth Creation, but health is wealth and this programme has very many sisters; Emyooga, Youth Livelihood Fund, among others. Why can’t we also initiate an Operation Health Creation, in Uganda? If ministers can come to the House and in insincere tones articulate issues which could have rightly and eloquently been articulated before the Head of State - You realise that the dilapidated infrastructure in Soroti –(Member timed out.)

6.10
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join colleagues in applauding Dr Epodoi and his team for their bravery and confidence while conducting that risky surgery.

The relatives of those patients and the patients themselves are very happy and proud of you. I am equally proud of you and I believe all Ugandans are. Thank you very much.

Madam Speaker, when civil servants are posted to rural districts, they stay for a very short time and seek transfers to town health facilities. Some go out of the country to look for greener pastures.

However, Dr Epodoi and his colleagues have exhibited that they are ready to work and save the lives of their brothers and sisters, despite the harsh working conditions. This should not be taken for granted. They should be supported and motivated so that they can save more lives. Let the Government make their working conditions conducive.

I sit on PAC Central and we have been interacting with accounting officers from these regional referral hospitals. Like honourable colleagues mentioned, there are a lot of challenges; ranging from infrastructure, equipment, they lack machines like scanners, MRI machines and oxygen plants. Where they exist, they are broken down. Sometimes, there is no power to run them.

There is also the problem of critical staff. We are told that because of the small pay given to these specialists and doctors, most of them opt to go to the teaching hospitals, where the pay is attractive. Therefore, there is a need to pay attention to these staff in the regional referral hospitals.

Madam Speaker, like Members have said, let Government look for money to revamp our regional referral hospitals and even the lower health units. As we wait for Government to plan for that, let us begin with Soroti Regional Referral Hospital, right from the coming financial year, so that their neighbours learn that good work is rewarded.

Soroti Regional Referral Hospital does not serve only the district of Teso but even us, all the way from Amudat. Recently, some patients from my district were referred to Soroti. Let Government revamp Soroti Regional Referral Hospital so that the referral services can be taken closer to the rural population. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.14
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, you have always done certain things that some people have failed to do. (Laughter) As we sit here, I beg you to do the usual things you do here. Let us decide. If we are going to give money to Soroti Regional Referral Hospital, let us do it. It is our mandate. 

Madam Speaker, you chair this House. We are here to support you. What we need to do is to put what we have spoken into action. This thing of begging the ministry of finance and so and so cannot help. This is the national Parliament.

We have the mandate, moreover constitutional. What else do we need as Parliament? We simply need to sit here and act. Nobody should be making us to beg. Soroti is squatting in terms of what it needs. Do we need to beg anymore? How many committee trips do we need to make to Soroti Hospital so that action is taken? No, Madam Speaker.

For me, it is the right time for us to take action. If we decide to give them Shs 100 billion, so be it because we are the ones who have the mandate. Who else does? We appropriate even for security and for the President. It is our mandate.

Dr Epodoi should now be driving a special car, customised “EPODOI” so that when he drives on the streets, everybody knows that is Epodoi. I can tell you that from today, your calibre, status and everything has changed out of what you and your team have done. 

People will respect you more from today. Even those who did not want to give you a loan would now give you loans. (Laughter) If you were not married, those who did not want to get married to you would do automatically. (Laughter) That is the power of doing correct things. Continue doing good; a reward awaits those who do it.

To Government - the finance ministry is here. Hon. Bahati, you are my friend but deceiving us all the time and telling the people of Teso that you will compensate them for the animals - Today, I know you are going to say, “Madam Speaker, we shall do it” and you will not do it. I am not saying you; I mean the minister of finance.

We will not tolerate this deceit anymore. Madam Speaker, this is the House. We are the ones who appropriate. If we have taken a decision – Soroti has a flying school, which should be elevated to an airport now. Put an airport there by the side, so that flying doctors fly and Soroti is seen.

Dr Ekure in Kumi is doing a wonderful job in orthopaedics. It is like God put a star in terms of - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MR AOGON: It is like God selected Teso to have the brains for medical activity. If you come to Kumi, these people are there. Go to Serere; you have seen them. In Soroti, it is a catchment area for powerful brains. What else do we need to do? Let us applaud these people.

It is time for us to recognise good effort because that is what the Bible says. When we do that, we get blessed and it is a very important thing. I applaud my colleague, hon. Okupa. You now qualify to be a Right Honourable Member of Parliament because of your seniority and you have done a good job.

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

6.18
MS ZAITUN DRIWARU (Independent, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to thank Dr Joseph Epodoi and his team and also the mover of this motion. Madam Speaker, I also thank you in a special way because you have given way for this motion to be discussed.

In discussing this motion, many Ugandans have come to learn that there are some issues at the grassroots, which Ugandans can manage, even under very difficult conditions. 

God was speaking to this country when this doctor sat down, organised himself, built confidence and faith to carry out this surgery, separating a child from a mother’s liver. That is very complicated - something that nobody would imagine that a Ugandan can do under very difficult conditions.

This should tell the Ministry of Health that we have human resource that the ministry is not utilising properly. The Ministry of Health should come up with a strategy to see how they can get to doctors in the grassroots and know how they are working, what work they are doing and what difficulties they are facing in doing their work. I think they should know that they have got yet much work to do.

For example, in Mulago, those people chased away that baby and the parents. We must know that in Mulago, there has been good work done. There are people who come in very difficult conditions and go back smiling. Let us take that specific incident and investigate why it happened so. Those people maybe wanted to communicate to this country that certain things are not easy in Mulago; they needed help.

When you look at the Uganda Cancer Institute, for instance, they give chemotherapy free of charge, yet when you go out of this country, you will get chemotherapy very expensively. I have experience of people who moved out of this country to get chemotherapy. They ended up coming back to the Uganda Cancer Institute. This shows that the Ministry of Health - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude your sentence.

MS DRIWARU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I conclude by saying that health needs to be given attention. Right now, when you go to the North, very many people have got eye problems. I think I am also a victim. When I came to this Parliament, I was not wearing glasses but these days, I wear them. (Laughter)

The Ministry of Health should know that there is a problem at the grassroots. Madam Speaker, thank you for giving me this opportunity.

6.22
MS SARAH NAKAWUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join the House to congratulate Dr Epodoi and the entire team for having done a commendable job of saving the life of that baby - a future, responsible Ugandan.

Our doctors here are capable of doing what doctors in India, the UK and elsewhere can do. A lot of taxpayers’ money is used to take people abroad for medication and yet, we have doctors who can handle such cases well.

If I may ask, why is the Government failing to fund Government Hospitals? The minister is around. Honourable minister, why is your ministry failing to facilitate all the Government hospitals? If hospitals were well funded, there would not be much congestion in Mulago and other referral hospitals.

It was a shame on Mulago management when they rejected the twins. Dr Epodoi may not know how Ugandans here and abroad feel about him and his team. All Ugandans are very proud of Dr Epodoi and his team. Thank you very much for the work well done, Dr Epodoi. Long live Dr Epodoi and team, long live Soroti Hospital. I thank you, Madam Speaker.


6.24
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Dr Epodoi and your members, the people of Moyo have sent me here to congratulate you and sincerely thank you and give you credit for the job well done. You are role models and mentors and you have created a legacy, which can never be rubbed. You have made history in Uganda. Congratulations.

Honourable minister, may we go loud and clear to the powers that be that we should have the following;

    1. Improve the welfare and motivation for all the health personnel across the board in the whole country.
    2. Equip all the hospitals with medicines, x-ray and scanning machines.
    3. Recruit all the newly qualified doctors; there are so many roaming all over and they are jobless and not being recruited.
    4. Let us try to work hard in order to avoid brain drain as most members have indicated.

Let us work hard in order to upgrade most of the general hospitals across the country. We have one in Moyo. Moyo is a general hospital and we will be happy if it is uplifted to referral status. The population in Moyo is increasing because of the refugees and we will be happy to have that. Moyo should be made a referral hospital.

Lastly, we have Muni Techno Science University and Mbarara University - can we have facilities of these universities spread all over like in West Nile we have the Muni Techno Science University, we can have a faculty in Moyo so that we can train as many doctors as possible and have many medical personnel to work on our people. I thank you very much for giving me this chance and I wish a safe journey back to Soroti where you are coming from. May God bless you from now and forever? Thank you very much.

6.27
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank you sincerely for giving this motion enough time. It is a sign that you are r committed to the health of Ugandans. 

Dr Epodoi is one of the professionals we rank highly in Teso. There are so many others but we cannot mention all of them here. However, I would like to thank him for the commitment that he has shown to serve the people of this country and especially Teso. I would like to thank you with your team and most sincerely, your father who is here to witness the work that he did to raise you up. Thank you, Mzee, for raising such a useful Ugandan.

I have interacted with Dr Epodoi. He is a doctor who is down to earth; very professional. He only does not do his work but he loves doing what he does. Dr Epodoi has a clinic he runs in Soroti but there is something exceptional with him. You will never find him in that clinic when he is supposed to be at the main hospital doing his work.  

They will tell you to wait because he is busy and you can only see him at 6.00 p.m. or 8.00 p.m. but you will not get him at his clinic in the normal office hours. That is how professional he is and we appreciate it.

I do not want to castigate Mulago Hospital. I want to thank Mulago Hospital for giving Soroti Regional Hospital the opportunity to show that they can carry out such operations. I want to congratulate Dr Epodoi. Now, we know that the next conjoined twins should be taken to Soroti for Dr Epodoi and his team to operate on. This is an opportunity for us.

Madam Speaker, that means that we need to equip the hospital if we have to do better. If Dr Epodoi was a soldier, by now, he would be a general. What can we do to say “thank you” to appreciate and congratulate him with his team? We can only make life better for people and the rest of Ugandans by equipping our health unit and facilitating the doctors to do their work. Without equipment, there is nothing they can do. Doctors and nurses are very pertinent. 

There is something special about Dr Epodoi. In Teso, we do not worry about prostate cancer; we do not worry and you know how deadly it is. One of my constituents who had a problem and was of advanced age and had been recommended for operation, it is Dr Epodoi who worked on him. He is very normal and healthy after he operated on him. That is how special he is.

Therefore, he is a very good asset. I want to implore the Government; like you said, we have approved a lot of loans here, can we see one coming especially for the health sector to specifically address the challenge of the regional hospitals, because that is the next area that we need to –(Member timed out.)

6.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (LANDS) (Ms Persis Namuganza): Thank you, Madam Speaker for according this motion very significant time for us Members to appreciate our medical team from Soroti Regional Referral Hospital.

When I saw the story of the conjoined twins, it was sad and good. Before I saw the good side of this, I was saddened because I saw heard that one of the babies’ colour had started changing and I wondered what was next, only to hear shortly that our medical team had done a tremendous job. A very big thank you, to the team.

I remembered two common statements we normally use in our casual talk, that the good you do comes back to you and the reverse is true. However, also the other one is that where there is a will, there is always a way. You have shown that. 

I am very sure that when you were going to perform that surgery, many things must have crossed your mind but you said, “Let us do it. If they are to die, at least they will die after they are separated.” You took that firm stand as per your profession. 

We recognise the challenges that hospitals and health centres face. I also join my colleagues to say that since we are the ones who appropriate the budget, let us make sure that our hospitals are fairly equipped and also enhance your salary, which has become a song for His Excellency the President. Now that we all appreciate the role of science, I am sure that in the coming financial year, we shall put a lot more emphasis on the sciences.

Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity for us to contribute. To our medical team, you have done well. Who knows what the future holds for you? May God bless you.
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Public Service, I hope you can respond to the issue of the chauffer-driven cars for the consultants, which have not yet arrived.
 
6.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr David Karubanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving us this time to pay tribute to these patriots from Soroti Regional Referral Hospital headed by Dr Epodoi. I would like to thank hon. Okupa for this motion and colleagues for raising these issues, which touch the Ministry of Health. 

I would like to mainly touch on those issues, which dwell on the human resources, that is to say, the Public Service. As Government, it is true we have had challenges with salary enhancement and harmonisation. However, the ministry got a directive from Cabinet and we came up with a pay policy, which is going to be enhanced in a phased manner. I would like to report that indeed, at the end of the implementation period, the salaries of workers across Government will be favourable.

I would like to say that we have had a phased implementation and prioritisation starting with scientists. As you know, His Excellency the President has been emphatic on this; he wanted to address the issue of brain drain. Members have raised the issue of, especially, the doctors. They are somewhere but we know we will get there.

In line with that, our ministry is carrying out major reforms to address some of the challenges we have. One of them is that we would like to have a National Salaries Review Commission, which will ensure that this national cake from the treasury is shared equitably.

The ministry has challenge to do with workers in the Public Service. Some of them include corruption, attitude and of course, low staffing levels. To all these, as I have said, we have major reforms we are planning and we are going to handle them. 

On the issue of rewards, I have heard colleagues propose and it is good. In the Public Service Standing Orders, we have the rewards and sanction framework. This is a responsibility of all accounting officers to recognise outstanding performance of employees. This can be done; we do not have to wait for Labour Day, Heroes Day or even Independence Day. 

What we have realised is that most accounting officers instead concentrate on sanctions. They do not get to the rewards, yet, in the private sector, you see rewards coming up and recognition of outstanding employees for a month or year being emphasised.

I would like to touch on the issue of the cars. In the Public Service Standing Orders, we have categories of employees who are entitled to certain benefits. Indeed, the standing orders provide for a chauffeur-driven car. However, if the car is not yet available, we provide for mileage.

Therefore, it is the responsibility of the accounting officer to ensure that every entitled officer for that provision is given a mileage allowance in case there is no vehicle.

I would like to thank honourable colleagues for raising those issues that touch Public Service. I can say that slowly, we will be there. Indeed, I would like to thank this team of doctors and other doctors who are not here but are doing tremendous work in other hospitals, in the regional referral hospitals and scientists. Government will make sure that you are remunerated well and you will soon be recognised for the good work.

There is the issue of promotions. Within the service, we provide for promotions, which occur when we have gaps. There has to be a vacancy and the promotion is applied for in a competitive way. I can say that because of your outstanding performance, the eyes of the appointing authorities have seen you and so, you should not lose hope. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank Dr Epodoi and team for the selfless service, distinguished contribution and the spirit of patriotism you have shown in your profession. We are all grateful for what you have done. 

This is not only done to the people of Teso but we are also proud of you as the people of Uganda. As a result, this Parliament has accorded you more than two hours of recognising your contribution. You now join the Hansard of this Parliament for what you did for humanity. We are very grateful.

Many people raised the issues of financing for health. I know the minister has drawn a strategic plan for the next 10 years. We are slowly making steady progress on financing health.

As you have seen and I know you also participated in the opening of the great hospital we put up at Mulago, we have now allocated more than Shs 30 billion to finance the scientists in line with what H.E the President has been talking about, that the future belongs to science. We need to finance science and scientific research. For example, our scientists are working out research in issues of COVID-19 setting up a facility here to do our vaccines and we have provided some resources to work on this.

The budget is here with us. The Minister of Health has made some proposals, we passed them at Cabinet and now, it is within our hands. I urge colleagues to look at this budget. Let us make the painful decisions to make sure that the priorities of this country are financed. I know that when it comes to the Ministry of Health and health issues, Parliament will stand with the proposals that we have put in the budget.

I would like to thank Dr Epodoi and the team for the contribution that you continue to make. I know, even when people talk about medals, money, handshakes and all that, I know that you did this not because you were looking at those things. You did this because you wanted to save a life. I urge you to continue doing that. 

These things might come or might not and that is not an issue. The issue is that we have a Ugandan doctor, born in Teso, an old boy of hon. Okupa, who has made a contribution and a mark in the history of our country. Thank you and may God bless you and bless your work.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, a Member here made an allegation, which we want the minister to confirm or deny that Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has cut the budget of Ministry of Health by 9 per cent. If that is so, it is him, by the time the budget comes to committee or on the Floor unless you are saying we have to make painful decisions and reverse that for us to get to the original budget and possibly, even up it by 9 per cent. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should not leave without clarifying that point.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, the Bible says that there is time for everything. Today is a time to pay tribute to Dr Epodoi and we should concentrate on that. Other issues will come later. Thank you.

6.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to begin by sincerely thanking you for allowing this motion to be tabled on the Floor of Parliament by hon. Okupa. The time that has been accorded shows the importance you attach to this motion. It also shows the passion you have for health service delivery and improvement in the health service delivery. Thank you.

On behalf of the health sector, allow me to add my voice to support this motion to pay tribute to Dr Epodoi and the entire team from Soroti Regional Referral Hospital and the entire staff.

This is the extra-ordinary service that we call service beyond self. This is a clear demonstration of commitment and the level of professionalism that this team has demonstrated to this country.

We are here today to appreciate this team and the entire staff from Soroti Regional Referral Hospital. We are also thinking about very many people who are not being appreciated who might have done similar jobs in this country.

Madam Speaker, this kind of rare condition is what sells most countries out there. This rare extra-ordinary work is what brings out uniqueness of health care services delivery in other countries. 

Today, the fact that Uganda has been listed among the countries that have successfully done such a kind of operation, we call ourselves very lucky and we are proud as a country and we hope this will scale up the country to another level. We should continue with this kind of example.

This extra-ordinary service, which has been demonstrate by this team today, has brought on the Floor of Parliament a lot of debate and discussion on the six building blocks of the health service system. We have talked about service delivery in a holistic manner, human work force, financing of the health sector, leadership and governance, essential medicine and supplies and health information systems. 

Allow me on this note, to thank my colleagues the Members of Parliament for first, appreciating and uplifting the health care professionals today on the Floor of Parliament despite the challenges and the working conditions they go through.

I also want to thank my honourable colleagues for appreciating and recognising such services that have been done in this country. Most importantly, this shows clearly that the health care professionals in Uganda are the best we have; they are competent with all the excellent skills and right attitude among others that have been demonstrated today.

I visited Soroti Regional Referral Hospital twice this year. Indeed, what colleagues have discussed here is true. The infrastructure is old and in a sorry state. I had to stop one of the structures that were meant for rehabilitations. The contractor had been identified. By the time I went, they were supposed to start work but the fact that that structure had been condemned, I stopped the renovation works.

Even the constructed private wing, which had two floors - there was no value for money for the work done. Within a year or two, you see the structure already collapsing. It was poorly supervised and poorly constructed.

I therefore, wish to apologise for the people of Soroti who get services from Soroti Regional Referral Hospital for the state of that infrastructure.

Having said that, previously, when this Parliament gave permission for capital development funds for regional referral hospitals, the ministry of finance was directly dealing with directors of regional referral hospitals to identify projects for implementation using the yearly approved capital development fund. 

Until such a time, referral hospitals were putting in place huge structures that could not get finished. Until last year, the Ministry of Health wrote to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development stating clearly that any infrastructure development at a referral hospital had to go through it. From that time, we called all the directors of referral hospitals and we looked at the existing infrastructure development, region by region and hospital by hospital. 

Some of them were about maternal or child health infrastructures. Others were about accommodation for staff, private wings and interns’ hostels. There were no uniformities and equity. There was no distribution in terms of having similar structures and similar costing.

From that time, we all agreed that the existing infrastructure in all the regional referral hospital should be completed. That is why in the last the financial year and this coming one, all the money has to be reallocated to ensure structures that had been started, the under Capital Development Fund, have to be completed. 

Soroti Regional Referral Hospital, from last year’s meeting, we concluded needed affirmative action because of the structures in there. That means the hospital needed new infrastructure constructed. It is not even rehabilitation as it is happening in other regional referral hospitals. From the last financial year, the ministry took over the issue of infrastructure development in referral hospitals to ensure we have equity in resource distribution, uniform infrastructure and costing so that we have value for money and timeframe for projects’ completion such that we can move from one project to another.

Therefore, I would like to state on this Floor that Soroti Regional Referral Hospital has already been given affirmative action considering the structures currently existing in that hospital. However, the ministry needs to inform the House when this affirmative action is beginning. Are we getting all the capital development funds in a financial year?

Are we getting loans from elsewhere like we did for the structures in Yumbe and Kayunga to have a refurbished state-of-the-art hospital for that region? That is probably what we need to bring to your attention so that you can have the picture of what exactly this affirmative action is all about. 

Having said that, allow me to also echo the issue of administration. Indeed, it is true that there are gaps in administration as colleagues have stated especially in regards to the hospital director. We discussed this matter even when I was in Soroti. I would like to report that my ministry is already sorting this out. We want to ensure we have a substantive hospital director who can really get committed to work for the people wholeheartedly and with love. 

There was the issue of healthcare professionals that is not adequate. This is true. When you look at the scheme of service and the structure of the referral hospitals, you realise they were made many years back. By that time, the population was pretty small but now, the population has increased. 

Right now, we, together with the Ministry of Public Service, we are restructuring. Apart from restructuring, there are structures in the regional referral hospitals, like for senior consultant and consultant special grades of different levels - even when there is provision for recruitment, people are not willing sometimes to take up those positions in the rural or upcountry hospitals. Those are the challenges we go through. 

My colleague talked about the issue of salary, about the working environment - it is true that there are facilities which lack equipment. Our ministry, this time round, is trying to put up infrastructure and also equip the facilities so that the doctors, nurses and anaesthetist or whoever is there can work in a friendly environment. 

Of course, that is not the only thing that can motivate the health workers. Accommodation has been one of the priorities that we have put on our agenda. It will be about how best we can provide accommodation, in a phased manner, for the healthcare workers. Promotion has already been mentioned by my colleague and I would not want to say much on it. 

Important to you, however, is the fact that the Health Service Commission recently advertised positions for all these consultants in the regional referral hospitals. Our prayer is that people take up those positions so that they are posted to those referral hospitals. Even interviews have been on-going last month and this month. We pray that some of the gaps, though not all, can be filled to improve service delivery. 

When I visited Soroti Regional Referral Hospital, as I said, I took some actions. Sometimes, however, I need the support and the backing of politicians. We are talking about infrastructure but there are other preventable diseases that colleagues can support us on. When you enter Soroti Regional Referral Hospital, from the time I went, every boda-boda in Soroti City was parked in the hospital parking and at a fee. The askaris there ask for Shs 1,000. They park their boda-bodas there and go about their work knowing they are safe there, yet there are infection control measures; nobody thinks about these. 

When you enter the hospital, you find bicycles parked in the hospital parking yard. When I took a decision to immediately stop the parking of motorcycles and bicycles at the hospital, I hear behind me, the politicians turned around and defied my directive. They allowed the motorcycles and bicycles to be parked in the hospital parking yard. You would think the hospital is a market for boda-bodas.

When I stopped the construction of the latrine, which was put on an existing structure without foundation, after I left, I heard construction continued because the politicians thought I was doing the wrong thing. When I stopped the renovation of the condemned building, after I left, there was a problem. 

Therefore, I would like to inform the politicians from Soroti and the region that sometimes, we also need your support to speak to your people. There are certain things that are within your means and which you can do to help improve the state of the hospital. We do not want Soroti Regional Referral Hospital to be a market for motorcycles and bicycles. We want it to look like a regional referral hospital, the old structures notwithstanding. 

Concerning the training of health workers, already as – (Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister very much for the information she is giving us. There is a concern you are raising about the involvement of politicians. These politicians are Members of Parliament, LCV chairpersons and others. 

However, I would like to seek some clarification on whether when you were going there; you brought it to the attention of these politicians what was happening so that they could explain to the local people about the importance of having that problem fixed.

MR OKUPA: Thank you. I would also be glad if you could be specific. Is it the politicians at the parliamentary level or the local Government? 

We have very good working relations with you because I remember when I raised the issue of the masks, you acted very fast and we received them. I wish we had shared that information, when you realised that the directives that you gave were defied because we would have been able to work together. For now, just specify those people. Otherwise, we are ready to work with you to ensure that Soroti Regional Referral Hospital is indeed, a regional referral hospital.

There are issues I raised with the Permanent Secretary last week, regarding that hospital and the health centre IIIs about the shoddy construction work. We are appealing to you to send a team. The first work that you gave to Seyani Brothers &Co. (U) Ltd to work on the hospitals was done very well. However, these days, I do not know how you recruit. When I brought it up with the district, they said that these were sent from the ministry. We need to sit down and see how to resolve these issues.

THE SPEAKER: We need to conclude. Otherwise, this delegation needs to go back to Soroti.

MS BETTY AOL: Madam Speaker, the honourable minister talked about the new storeyed building private wing, which is shoddy work and in two years, it will not be of use. 

It is not enough to say that you want to apologise to the people of Soroti. Who is accountable for that shoddy work? Are you just going to leave it to go like that? Can you make the people who did the shoddy work to account? It can only reach the IGG, if you people send it. Who should be accountable? Thank you.

DR MORIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. For the shoddy work, I passed information to the responsible people and they are trying to investigate. I brought it out because of what is happening in Soroti. 

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

DR MORIKU: There is a lot of work taking place in terms of construction. Under JICA, we have construction in Arua, Lira, Gulu Regional Referral Hospitals. The other hospitals have other construction works on-going. We will make sure that there is value for money.

Lastly, the issue of Mulago National Referral Hospital, as my colleagues said - certainly, we will need a well investigated report on this issue. As of now, I cannot just give information without clear evidence why they did not work on the child. What I know is that already, a report has been asked for. 

Madam Speaker, it is on the record that so far that three surgeries of conjoined twins have been performed in this country. Two were previously done in Mulago, one was a referral from Kagadi and the other was referred from Kole District. It is only that the level of the conjoined, physiology, structural attachment varies. Otherwise, it is on record that the country has performed surgeries on three sets of conjoined twins.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, among the ones you are talking about, was one of the babies dead? For this particular case, the specialist said that one twin was dead for six days. Were the three, you have talked about alive? 

DR MORIKU: The one from Kagadi, when I visited Uganda Heart Institute that time was still alive. I have not yet followed it up but at least the last one I visited - 

THE SPEAKER: We are saying that this is the first time they performed an operation, when one of the twins is dead and the other is alive. That is the difference.

DR MORIKU: Yes, that is true. As I conclude, on the issue of District Health Officers as you know, the local Government Act mandates local Government through the District Service Commission to recruit them.

The Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Health has written several times to them to recruit substantive people in these positions. We will not get tired since we have not yet centralised the position. We will continue to put pressure for them to put substantive people.

As I sit down, allow me once again to thank these healthcare professionals for this very extra-ordinary work. This is a source of motivation, inspiration and total commitment that they have demonstrated. I hope this work will inspire many other health workers to improve on competence, skills and right attitude in handling patients with love.

On our part, we pledge as the Government to ensure the working environment is improved for these healthcare professionals, especially the equipment and infrastructure. God bless the team from Soroti. Long live Dr Epodoi and the team. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, minister. I hope that the next time you are going upcountry, please, inform Members of the area so that they go with you and assist with the local politicians.

DR MORIKU: I will do that. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, originally, we had only planned for 30 minutes but paying tribute to 16 professionals is not an easy job. This is why we decided to use this day to honour these 16 people. Hon. Ogwal has something small to raise.

7.08
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I stand here to move an amendment to the motion, which we have just discussed so that we highlight the key areas for implementation. Before I do that, I want to register the power of God in this situation. They say every bad thing happens for good. I think the conjoined twins are going to bring a revolution in the health sector.

After hearing what the Minister of Health has stated in this House, which is on record and listening to what the minister of finance said that there is time for everything, this means that now is the time of action and implementation. I acknowledge it and hope that the record will remain permanent so that we call you accountable for these statements.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move the following amendments: 

One, in the preamble statement, after the words “recognising that…” - maybe I read in full so that those capturing information can follow.

“RECOGNISING THAT the operation was highly risky, owing to the babies being conjoined around the stomach area and sharing a liver, a number of ribs and major artery and was further complicated by the fact that one of the conjoined twins had died.”

Madam Speaker, I would like to amend as follows: 

“AND FURTHER RECOGNISES that the same Dr Epodoi and his team successfully carried out a rare and risky intrahepatic pregnancy surgery in June 2020, saving the foetus and the mother.” That is the first amendment.

The second amendment is after prayer No.3. I would like to add that “In acknowledging and appreciating this remarkable and heroic surgery in a dilapidated theatre, Parliament compels or instructs the Government to consider, in the immediate term, to rehabilitate the theatre of Soroti Hospital and provide appropriate and modern equipment to facilitate the dispensation of their professional expertise.”

The third amendment, following prayer No. 3 is That Parliament tasks the Committee on Health to inspect all the facilities in all referral hospitals in the country, with a view to identify serious gaps for budgetary purposes.

The fourth is that the Ministry of Public Service tables before Parliament, within two weeks, the salary structures for all the strata of medical workers.

Finally, Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Health investigates the negative attitude to work of the Mulago Hospital staff and advise Parliament accordingly of the appropriate action taken.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move the above amendments.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if there is no objection, I put the question that the motion be amended, as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that this House do pay tribute as proposed in the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Now, the Clerk is instructed to extract the tribute:

    1. To send to Soroti Regional Referral Hospital, together with the Hansard.
    2. To extract the tribute for each of the 16 members of this professional team, together with the Hansard.

Thereafter, the final tribute is to be given to Mzee Dominic Etelu. When he heard that the team was invited to Kampala, he did not believe it. He said, “I am going to Kampala to see whether the tribute is real”. So, for his attendance, we also give him a copy of the tribute, as well as the Hansard so that he can keep it in his house.

I think that will be all for now. Thank you very much, honourable members.

7.14
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, on a special note, I want to thank you. I took note of the time since we started the debate on the motion and we are grateful to you that you have been able to accord four hours and eight minutes to the debate. (Applause) This is unprecedented.

I would thank my colleagues for all the support that you have given to the motion. Thank you, hon. Ogwal, for the amendments to strengthen the motion and also to be specific. 

We wait now to see action from the Executive arm, the Minister of Health, hon. Bahati of the ministry finance, honourable Minister of Public Service – that as you are implementing the President’s directive regarding payment and facilities for the health workers. - you said you are going to stagger them.

It is my request that the vehicle that was meant for Dr. Epodoi - You could start with Soroti as you stagger the distribution of the vehicles for consultants and the team because there is also another consultant doctor from Soroti; Dr Rev. Sr Ajiko from Soroti. We will definitely follow up for others. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, we want to say thank you very much. May God bless you and may we see better things happen in Soroti and Uganda. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, House will reconvene tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. Thank you very much for your staying capacity in the deliberations. I think these Ugandans deserved our time to honour them. Thank you.

House adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow.

(The House rose at 7.16 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 8 April, 2021 at 2.00 p.m.) 
