Wednesday, 6 April 2016

Parliament met at 2.54 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, the Vice-President, the deputy prime ministers and members of the Cabinet, honourable members of the Opposition – I do not see the Leader of the Opposition – and all of you, Members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting.

I will amend the Order Paper to permit the Opposition to lay their alternative policy statements. I am also happy to announce to the House that our representatives to the East African Legislative Assembly are in the country to carry out consultations and sensitisation of the public about the process of integration. They are going to meet the business community and the private sector. If there are Members who would wish to interact with them, they are going to be here from the 3rd up to the 23rd of April. You can, accordingly, speak to them about the issues of integration.

I am excited to see that the Government has finally responded to our demands for treasury memoranda. I see a number of them on the Order Paper. I would like to thank the Prime Minister and the Government side for starting that new chapter in our work. Thank you very much.

In the gallery, we have students of Uganda Martyrs University. Could you, please, stand up? (Applause) They are represented by hon. Bbosa Kiyingi and hon. Sarah Temulanda from Mpigi District. I will let you know the other people when I get information about them. Hon. Fungaroo had something to raise and I will give him two minutes.

2.56
MR KAPS FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. There is what I call “post-election domestic violence” in Obongi County. You could call it “post-election violence” but this particular case is different from the one you know or have seen from Kasese. This one is right at the family level. Women in Obongi constituency, particularly those who supported Fungaroo, are being chased away by their husbands. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, in a village called Achimari Central in Ewafa Parish, Aliba Sub-County, we have a woman called Ramula Draka and her husband is called Adam Dramundu. The husband chased away the wife with two children. The woman is a fishmonger. The man poured all the woman’s fish in the bush.

The other victim is called Sylvia Bunia from Achimari East. Her husband is called Tom Mawa. She was beaten and chased away from the home but she refused to go.

Another victim called Samasa Viko from Achimari West in Ewafa Parish, Aliba Sub-County was beaten badly. The husband is called Kasim Olega.

Another case involved a man beating his son in Lomunga Village, Lomunga Parish in Gimara Sub-County. The man is called Tusu and the son is called Umar. 

Another victim is a woman called Leila from Kilembe Village in Gimara Sub-County and the husband is called Wusubiga. The list is long and I have tried to share this with the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development. 
	
Madam Speaker, maybe some Members of Parliament have the same experiences like mine. When these people come to me, I cannot take them back to their homes. Even if I try to help, I cannot take back a woman to her home when she has been chased away by her husband because of political reasons.

I would like to appeal to the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development to help. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, a family is the base of stability of a society. Things which we are seeing in Kasese are very bad but the ones in rural areas which are neither seen nor reported are destroying happiness. There are people plotting against each other as well as cases of witch-hunting. I appeal, through you, Madam Speaker, that Parliament and Government try and organise a healing process and protection for my voters. 

If that can happen to a woman, what about the plot against Fungaroo himself? It can also be bad. I also feel insecure because if my supporters are beaten like that, should they get the opportunity to harm me, they will definitely do so. However, because I am also a security person – Shadow Minister of Defence and Security – I have my ways of protecting myself.

Madam Speaker, I request that Parliament goes to Obongi and restore peace and harmony in the society so that people live in their families peacefully without any fights between father and son, mother and son, husband and wife. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Fungaroo. We would request probably the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs or the Electoral Commission to do continuous civic education so that people know why they have elections, and how to conduct themselves during and after elections. I also appeal to the men of Obongi not to chase away their wives for political reasons.

3.03
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): In addition to your ruling, Madam Speaker, the Member concerned should have asked the victims to go to the police because these are cases of assault and not the question of election. If the woman is aggrieved, then she should report to police. That is the only path any logical person should have taken. That is my advice. (Laughter)

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2016

3.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2016” be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded by a number of the Members of the Cabinet.

MR BAHATI: It is accompanied by the Certificate of Financial Implications. 

THE SPEAKER: It is sent to the Committee on Budget for perusal and report back.

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING)(Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the following:

A list of accounting officers for central and local governments for the financial year 2016/2017

Treasury Memorandum on special reports of the Committee on Public Accounts  on the Office of the Prime Minister for financial year 2011/2012, Haba and Rhino Investments, Beachside Development Services and Dura Cement Limited.

Treasury Memorandum on the report of the Public Accounts Committee on Auditor-General’s findings on the health institutions for the financial year ended June 2010.

The treasury memorandum on the report of the Public Accounts Committee on the Auditor-General’s findings on the Ministry of Health and Mulago Referral Hospital for the financial year ended 30th June 2010.

The treasury memorandum on the report of the Public Accounts Committee on the special audit report by the Auditor-General on Presidential Initiative on Market Vendors and Small Business Operators for the Financial Year ended June 2011/2012.

Treasury memorandum on the report of the Public Accounts Committee on the Auditor-General’s findings on Uganda Industrial Research Institute for the financial year ended June 2011/2012.

The treasury memorandum on the report of the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises on Auditor-General’s report on the accounts of Uganda Coffee Development Authority for the financial years 2009-2012 and 2008 special audit report on UCDA, joint venture operations.

Request by Government to borrow $200 Million from the Eastern and Southern African Trade and Development Bank (Commonly known as the PTA Bank) shortfalls for the financial year 2016/2017

Madam Speaker, I beg to clarify on this one. We had already submitted it and it is with the Committee on National Economy. It was a mistake to include it on the Order Paper.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Treasury Memoranda are now available to the House. Members can read them and the relevant committees can take an interest to see how the Government responded to our recommendations. Thank you, very much.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY TO CONSIDER THE ADDENDUM ON SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULES 1, 2 AND 3 OF THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015

THE SPEAKER: As the minister comes, I would like you to join me in welcoming students from Kyambogo University. They are here to observe the proceeding of the House. They are represented by hon. Fred Ruhindi and hon. Nabilah Naggayi. You are welcome. (Applause)

3.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I move a motion that the House resolves itself into a Committee of Supply to consider the Addendum on Supplementary Schedules 1, 2 and 3 of the financial year 2014/2015. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded by Members of the Cabinet. Honourable members, I put the question to the motion that the House resolves itself into a Committee of Supply to consider Supplementary Schedules 1, 2 and 3 of the financial year 2014/2015. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

3.11
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Last time, we presented the majority report of the Budget Committee on Supplementary Schedules 1, 2 and 3 for the financial year 2014/2015. That report had a minority report attached and we were tasked by the Speaker to go back and harmonise the issues that arose in the minority report. Therefore, this is an addendum to the report that we presented earlier on these three schedules.

Introduction

During the consideration of both the majority and minority reports of the Budget Committee on the Supplementary Schedules 1, 2 and 3 on the Floor of Parliament, the Speaker directed as follows: 

The figures be harmonised to comply with the Budget Act provision that the supplementary expenditure should not exceed three per cent of the approved annual budget.

The issues raised in the minority report be harmonised.

The committee has complied with the Speaker’s directive and wishes to report as follows:

Methodology

We held meetings with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, Cotton Development Organisation; Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives were invited with AGOA Secretariat but they were unable to attend.

Now, the issues where we had disagreement included the following:
Issues relating to re-allocation between MDAS,
Medical and fuel expenditure on UPDF in South Sudan,
Issues relating to treasury operations; that is, external debt, interest on bond, treasury bills and loans,
Orders of mandamus, particularly, on the outstanding court awards,
RDCs’ facilitation,
Expenditure on the AGOA Secretariat,
The Cotton Development Organisation,
Rebuilding of Uganda’s image in US Congressional caucus.
Madam Speaker, we held meetings on these issues. I would like to lay on the Table the minutes of the meetings that were held on this subject; the minutes of the Budget Committee meeting held on 24 November 2015 in Room 220 and the minutes of the Budget Committee held on 18 November 2015. 

Observations 

On the evidence of consultations prior to reallocation of funds, Section 12 (3) of the Budget Act states, “Any re-allocation of funds shall be made in consultation with all the affected ministries, departments, institutions or organisations.” 

The committee was informed that before any supplementary expenditure is made, Cabinet has to grant the necessary approval. 

The committee was further informed that all ministries, departments, institutions or organisations are adequately represented in Cabinet. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, therefore, submitted that consultations made at Cabinet level should suffice for the requirements of Section 12 (3) of the Budget Act, 2001. The minister tabled evidence of Cabinet consultations to that effect. 

The committee was, however, divided on this matter and requested the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to secure necessary legal interpretation from the Attorney-General. By the time of writing this report, this interpretation had not been obtained.

The committee recommends that in future, Government will be required to present written evidence of consent from the affected ministries, departments, institutions or organisations on re-allocations from their respective Votes. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to report that as I was coming in here, I checked my pigeon hole and found the long awaited interpretation. This interpretation clarifies – I do not know if I should read the whole interpretation. 

THE SPEAKER: I think it is important. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: “Interpretation of Section 12 (3) of the Budget Act 2001.” This letter is addressed to hon. Matia Kasaija, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

“Reference is made to your letter, dated 29 March 2016, on reference PBD86/107/03 on the above subject, where you requested for a legal interpretation on Section 12 (3) of the Budget Act 2001. The section briefly provides that any re-allocation of funds shall be made in consultation with all affected ministries, departments, institutions or organisation. 

The interpretation of the above provision is that presentation of budgets to the various relevant parliamentary sectoral committees to Parliament and Cabinet is the responsibility of the respective sector ministers with the input of the accounting officers. 

Similarly, if a re-allocation of funds is to be made, the sector ministers should be consulted as required under Section 12 (3) of the Budget Act. It is the responsibility of the ministers to liaise with their respective accounting officers to inform the process. 

Consultation with the minister, therefore, fulfils the requirements of Section 12 (3) as long as it is not done unilaterally, by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.” Signed Fredrick Ruhindi, MP, Attorney-General.” 

This letter is copied to the hon. Deputy Attorney-General, Minister of State for Justice and Constitutional Affairs, all ministers of state for Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Solicitor-General and the chairman of the Budget Committee of Parliament.  This letter is dated 6 April 2016. 

If I may assume, from this interpretation, our recommendation here is automatically amended. 

The Status of Forces Agreement with South Sudan
Madam Speaker, the committee scrutinised the relevant agreements between the Government of Uganda and the Government of South Sudan. It noted that the host Government, South Sudan, was responsible for meeting fuel and medical expenses to the visiting forces, in this case, UPDF that were on a mission in their territory. 

The committee was informed that whereas the Government of South Sudan was liable, this money was not readily available from them to pay for the medical bills and fuel for soldiers who were already deployed in the field. 

Accordingly, the committee recommends that the expenditure amounting to Shs 1.2 billion and Shs 2 billion incurred on UPDF for fuel and medical expenses respectively be approved as supplementary expenditure for 2014/2015. 

The committee further recommends that Government is directed to recover the money as a war debt from the South Sudan Government.

Payment of Court Award with Order of Mandamus
The committee received the required documents from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Members noted that there appeared to be no clear criteria or policy for paying court awards hence the punitive mandamus orders. Members called for a streamlined Government policy to clear outstanding court awards now amounting to over Shs 400 billion to avoid future occurrences of similar court orders. 

The committee recommends approval of payment of Shs 78.144 billion, which was the amount for verified claims with order of mandamus and not Shs 80 billion as reflected in the schedule under Vote 130. Shs 1.855 billion was not paid out and will be deducted from Vote 130 supplementary statutory provisions. 

Vote 130- Treasury operations, specifically on the issue of external debt, interest on bonds, treasury bills and loans.

These are issues that we are picking from the minority report. The committee was informed by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that the expenditure in question was statutory expenditure stipulated in Section 41 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. 

The committee noted that expenditure had nothing to do with the Bank of Uganda capitalisation as presented in the minority report. The committee was informed that the expenditure was for treasury operations. Treasury operations under this supplementary expenditure include the settling of loan obligations like matured principal loans, interest on domestic debts and pressures on meeting the donor refunds. 

The committee, therefore, agreed to recommend approval of Shs 390.951 billion for treasury operations under this supplementary expenditure. Shs 10.3 billion, which was refereed to donors for ineligible expenses is not recommended by the committee for approval as the relevant accounting officers fail to provide adequate accountability for it. 

Escrow Account 

The committee received a reconciled statement of the escrow account from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development confirming a zero balance. This confirmed that the account was completely depleted and could not be used to pay outstanding Umeme bills incurred by some ministries, departments, institutions or organisations. 

The committee, therefore, recommends approval of payment of electricity arrears due to Umeme incurred by Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC), Uganda Police Force and Uganda Prison Services as presented under Schedule 3.

RDCs’ Facilitation

Shs 2.4 billion was provided under Vote 001 - Office of the President for facilitation of RDCs and their deputies to conduct monitoring of the Government projects. 

The Minister for Presidency submitted that the directive to facilitate them for sensitisation purposes was issued in the middle of the financial year and hence the supplementary.

Members noted that this was a foreseeable activity and should have been budgeted for. They also observed that the expenditure did not constitute an emergency and agreed that it should not be approved.

AGOA Secretariat

The minority report sought clarification as to whether the envisaged payment of Shs 0.3 billion was meant for Fine Spinners, which is a private entity. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development confirmed that the payment was to cater for the funding shortfall relating to the outstanding obligations, under AGOA through the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives.

The committee was informed that Government did not have any plans of closing the AGOA secretariat at this stage, since the AGOA initiative had only been recently renewed. The committee, therefore, recommends the approval of Shs 300 million to the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives for the purpose as described above. 

Cotton Development Organisation 

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries informed the committee that the Buffer Stock Fund was a condition for the Fine Spinners Limited to invest in Uganda and is contained in the Memorandum of Understanding signed with the Government of Uganda.

Buffer stocks would guarantee availability of cotton lint all year around to avoid stock outs and eventual factory closures. This is a policy position, which Government adopted as an incentive to attract Fine Spinners to operate in Uganda.

Uganda’s incentives to Fine Spinners Limited were to ensure availability of cotton lint throughout the year. The objective is to promote value addition and to boost our exports in AGOA and other markets.
The committee visited Fine Spinners in Bugoloobi and appreciated the work so far. The Buffer Stock is procured by Cotton Development Organisation from ginners and is accessed by Fine Spinners after paying for the volume of supplies needed.

The funds are paid directly to the Consolidated Fund via the Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS) and the accounting officer, who is the managing director of CDO manages it as per treasury regulations. Members acknowledged the arrangement and recommend the supplementary expenditure on this item for approval by Parliament.

Legal Opinion on Supplementary Funding for 2014/2015 

The Speaker tasked the committee to ensure that the figures being harmonised should comply with Budget Act, 2001 provision. The supplementary expenditure should not exceed three per cent of the approved annual budget.

However, the committee received evidence of legal opinion by the Attorney-General relating to the period during the transitional financial year 2014/2015, when the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 was passed.

According to that opinion, a) legally and practically, supplementary funding for financial year 2014/2015 could not have been drawn from the contingency fund under the Public Finance Management Act 2015, since this fund was not yet established.

b) Government had to continue to operate and c) the supplementary budget may, therefore, be charged directly on the Consolidated Fund pursuant to Article 156(2) (b) of the Constitution and should be laid before Parliament within four months after the expenditure.

The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development informed the committee that the provision in the Constitution does not stipulate a limit and that is why the expenditure went slightly above the normal limit of three per cent, previously imposed by the Budget Act,2001.

It is in view of the foregoing that the committee recommends that the House also approves supplementary expenditure that went beyond the three per cent, during the financial year 2014/2015.

The committee notes that this particular problem was subsequently resolved by the Public Finance Management (Amendment) Act, 2015, for expenditure beyond 2014/2015. Amendment restores the limit of three per cent previously under the Budget Act, 2001.

Overall Committee Recommendations
The total amount that was requested which now combines all the three schedules is amending the overall recommendation made in the majority report. The total amount that was requested for appropriation in schedules one, two, three amounts to Shs 533.520 billion, which translates into 3.37 per cent of the approved budget of financial year 2014/2015.

	In the appropriation table I below, the committee is proposing to off-set this figure by Shs 14.812 billion, which has been found to be ineligible expenditure. 

	The amount that qualifies for appropriation, therefore, is Shs 518.708 billion, detailed by expenditure Vote in table 1 below. This figure translates to 3.27 per cent which is the total approved budget for financial year 2014/2015.

	The committee, therefore, recommends that a sum of Shs 518,708,589,767 be approved by the august House as a supplementary expenditure for the financial year 2014/2015. This figure is broken down between Shs 364,054,529,737 of recurrent expenditure and Shs 154,654,060,030 as development expenditure. Details of expenditure votes are contained in table 1 below.

The  total statutory provision in the schedules for 2014/2015 amounts to Shs 588.83 billion. This figure has been offset by Shs 10.337 billion considered by the committee as ineligible expenditure and Shs 1.855 billion, which the committee found out that it had not been paid out as court awards. 

	Thus, the committee, therefore, requests Parliament to note the statutory provision of Shs 576.64 billion. Details are in table I, below. The table is presented on page 7 and this is the table we are recommending for approval by votes and to supply accordingly. It is broken down in terms of votes. The institutions are affected, the amounts that we recommend for approval in terms of recurrent and development expenditure and totals thereto; the final column there is on the amounts that we are not recommending for approval. The table continues on page 8, where we also present statutory expenditure and the amounts that we are not recommending for the statutory revision.

I would like to conclude, Madam Speaker. The committee has considered the matters referred to it for reconsideration by the Speaker. I beg that this House approves the supplementary schedules for the financial year 2014/2015, as have been amended and recommended above. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable Chairperson.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, may I lay on the Table a copy of this report?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Chairperson, you said there was a minority report.

MR LUGOLOOBI: I have not yet received a copy of the minority report. I only received a notice about one hour before I came here.

3.35
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Cecilia Ogwal): Madam Speaker, I was in the office of the committee Chair and found him writing the report together with the clerk about an hour ago. The Chairman informed me that he did not have the report but requested me to get a copy of the report from the committee clerk. 

When I went to the committee Clerk, the committee Clerk informed me that the report was being worked on by the Chair. Later on, the Chairperson sent one of the staff of Parliament with a copy, which he had earlier claimed he did not have.

Eventually, I got the copy from the Clerk. As I talk now, the Chairman kept his phone off. However, my minority is ready and I have already submitted a copy to the Clerk, to you, Madam Speaker, and a copy for the committee Chair is here with me. 

However, the minority does not differ very much from what was submitted in September. There are just a few highlights based on the parliamentary instructions that we harmonise both the minority and majority report. Therefore, there is no way that the majority report can come without the minority report since that was a direct instruction from Parliament that the two reports be harmonised because there were pertinent issues contained in both reports.

Madam Speaker, I am ready with the minority report, a copy of which you have; the chairman’s copy is here if he is ready to receive it, and I can lay it on the Table. I do not know but I am seeking your guidance, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: You said you had given notice to the committee?

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Yes, I did.

THE SPEAKER: Present the highlights of the minority report.

MS OGWAL: I gave notice to the committee and I also wrote to the Chairperson. I am not a lawyer but I am also very realistic. This afternoon, I wrote a notice to the chairperson to inform him that if there is no agreement on what was discussed in September, I am ready with my minority report and he has that letter addressed directly to him, copied to the Speaker, Deputy Speaker and the Clerk to Parliament.  I am ready with the minority report and I would like to proceed in reply to what he has presented. 

THE SPEAKER: Just give the highlights. You said you were in agreement with the bulk of what he has said except a few areas. Pick those areas.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: There are fundamental areas of divergence, Madam Speaker, if you allow me, I should lay it on the Table.

I would like to put it to this House that the reason we normally labour to prepare minority reports is to put the image of the institution of Parliament in the right light because many times, people think that Parliament is a rubberstamp. Therefore, where we have stumbled on matters, which touch on the law or against the normal practice of public finance and management, we need to bring it to the attention of Parliament before we take our decisions.

Following the September meeting in Parliament, where the Speaker directed the committee to go back and harmonise, Madam Speaker, no meeting was convened from September. However, that can be understood since most of the Members were campaigning in their respective constituencies.

However, I wrote a letter to the chairperson on the 10th September drawing his attention to the areas of divergence. I requested the committee chairperson to harmonise the figures on areas where there were no serious divergence. Madam Speaker, I did not get any response from the committee chair but if it is necessary, I lay the letter on the Table.

Since I did not get any response and no request for a meeting, I wrote a second letter on the 16th December also drawing the attention of the chairperson on the same matter since it was a direct instruction from Parliament - and that would have a negative impact on the committee if we did not comply with the instructions. 

I also did not get any response from the chairperson. However, I highlighted the areas, which we needed to focus on, on which even Parliament agreed with the minority report because of the legal nature of the issues I raised.

Again on the 9th of March, out of desperation and aware that Parliament would be convened for this matter, I again wrote the fourth letter to the chairperson and finally, a meeting was called and we met. However, after the meeting, I wrote another letter on 30th March asking the chairperson that there are some issues that needed clarification.

Madam Speaker, this committee should work for the interest of the institution of Parliament. When we looked at the submission I made in September, we agreed that the three percent was legally binding baseline and, therefore, we needed to comply with that legal position. I am now surprised that the gap, which we had identified of 0.037 percent has not been deducted from the report. I would like the chairman to clarify as to why he did not deduct it. 

Madam Speaker, that is on the minimum three percent, which is allowed. The law is very clear. I am just drawing the attention of the House that based on the figures that we have accepted, there is a gap of 0.037 percent, which needed to be deducted and the main committee did not deal with it.

 Madam Speaker, the second issue – I do not like to read the entire report – concerns the re-allocation of resources. The law is very clear. This particular supplementary is based on the Budget Act, 2001. It was agreed that there was no other way that this particular supplementary would be managed under the new law. Therefore, if we are to go by the Budget Act which is even made tighter by the new law – Section 12 (3) of the Budget Act, 2001 requires that, “Any re-allocation of funds shall be made in consultation with the affected ministries, departments, institutions or organisations”. 

I would like Parliament to take note of where ministers meet in the Cabinet meetings and agree that money be re-allocate, for instance, from the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to the Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports. We do not know whether we can accept the decision of the Cabinet and if we are to accept the decision of the Cabinet, the Cabinet must attach the evidence of consultation between the two affected ministries, departments, institutions or organisations. 

Madam Speaker, those minutes as evidence of consultation were not brought to Parliament and, therefore, let this Parliament approve the figure brought to Parliament knowing that we are doing it illegally. That is the only information I would like to bring to the attention of Parliament.

I am not a lawyer, I am just a lay person trying to understand the law and if the Attorney-General so agrees with Parliament, so be it, but let nobody accuse Parliament later that we  are rubber stampers.

The untimely payment of court awards - this matter was debated in this House in September and we did realise that the issue of mandamus is an issue of the last resort. 

Where the victim or the person who won the court award would have made the first demand, second demand and by the time court awarded an order of mandamus, it means that there was no positive response. We have asked for that evidence and we have said it is important that people who have to be compensated, must be compensated but it must be captured in the budget. 

We do not understand why every year round they bring the baggage of this commitment to Parliament and expecting us to pay through the supplementary budget, when actually this matter should have been budgeted for because the courts have clear records and those cases are with them. Our fear is that payments are being done selectively and when you even look at the list which they gave us, Madam Speaker, it leaves a lot to be desired.

If the main committee so decides, and if the House agrees with the main committee that we approve this supplementary budget to settle people who obtained  an order of mandamus, then we should agree that this Parliament will be blamed for selectively paying court awards because we have not heard clear details of the report as we requested in my minority report.

Madam Speaker, the other issue is the deployment of soldiers in South Sudan. This should not be a debatable matter. In September - and it is uploaded on our iPads - I submitted a copy of that agreement which is very clear. It clearly requires the host country to pay for fuel and medical expenses. To my surprise, instead of maybe the Ministry of Defence coming to us and say, “South Sudan has failed to pay”- then there should have been a way of making request of that money.

We have no evidence to prove that the host country has not paid for the fuel and medication and we are going ahead to pay under supplementary budget, expenses which should have already been paid by another country, which is the host country - South Sudan.

Madam Speaker, this is a matter which Parliament must address itself to and if we so decide and we eventually find that there was double payment by the host country, and payment through the supplementary budget, then we will be asked to answer.

We have asked the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to provide evidence that the host country did not pay, and if they did not pay, what actions were taken, which will require Parliament to now take on the cost of fuel and medical expenses. 

I do feel very emotional about Ugandan soldiers being deployed in foreign or neighbouring countries, it does not matter what they are doing. It is our responsibility to make sure they do not suffer. But let nobody take advantage of that and come to Parliament and say, “Don’t you know these are our children? Don’t you know they need medication?” However, can you tell me that South Sudan has failed? Where is the evidence so that Parliament can sit down and deal with the matter? 

Madam Speaker, that has not been done and that is a very high cost of Shs 3.2 billion, which we are going to give. We do not know whether it is going to the targeted area, because we are not sure whether the payment has not yet been done; there is no evidence. (Interjections) I have asked for it but it has not been given.

I am being told it is classified expenditure - even if it is classified expenditure, it was very clear in the agreement. Then they should have said it is paid. Okay, if it is classified expenditure and it has not been paid, tell us that it has not been paid and we want evidence to prove that it has not been paid. We do not know whether it is paid to an individual or to an institution but we must know. If classified expenditures are not supposed to be brought before Parliament, then why do you bring it at all? 

We saw the agreement, which demanded that the host country must pay for only those two expenses. All we want from you is evidence that the host country did not pay and you take the appropriate action to cause Parliament to make fresh payment. This is what I am demanding from the Government.

The third issue, which is very disturbing, this Parliament passed a law against homosexuality and it was overturned in the court and we are now being told by Government that they need Shs 614 million to clean our image in the USA, through the congressional caucus for having passed a law, which we thought Ugandans needed.  Now we need to spend Shs 614 million to clean the image of Uganda and -(Interjections) - Madam Speaker, protect me from the mob.

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. These are issues, which I need to raise before Parliament because Members may not know. I have asked for evidence where were the conferences? Where did they take place and how did you clean the image? Did you tell them that we will never repeat our sin again, to pass another law against homosexuality? What happened? What did you discuss? If it is also classified expenditure, they should tell us.

Madam Speaker, on AGOA - it is a very interesting matter. The committee met on the 18 November under minute 3.6 of the committee and it was agreed that the ministerial policy of last year clearly stated that the Shs 341 million, which was given to AGOA Secretariat, was specifically for winding up. 

Parliament discovered that we are spending lot of money on these AGOA activities and Ugandans are not getting anything from it.

Madam Speaker, I am now being told that because the American Government renewed the law on the 29th June, the budget which was for the previous year, we are now asking for a supplementary although the law was passed in June and we just got it. If it was passed on the 29th June, I believe we also either got the message through internet.

I do not know whether they wrote to us officially or whatever, but a supplementary budget has already been applied for of Shs 341 million. We are saying for what activities when AGOA was supposed to wind up. 

If there are fresh activities, can those people responsible for the AGOA come to us and discuss with us what those fresh activities are so that Parliament can discuss it and decide whether AGOA Secretariat can continue to operate or not.

Madam Speaker, the issue of cotton, which has been mentioned by the chairman in the main report about the Cotton Development Organisation, is a very controversial matter. I would like us, without any pinch of politics, to address our minds to this issue. It touches on a matter which concerns the lives of the poorest of the poor in this country and that is cotton.
I come from a cotton growing area and many of you too. You realise that cotton production has diminished in the last 10 years from almost 300,000 bales of lint down to 80 or less yet this Parliament has been passing through the budgetary lines money for operations of Cotton Development Organisation.

Cotton Development Organisation gets revenue through self-levy and by selling inputs, which they import. From the money that we appropriated to them in the budget, whether pesticides or farm implement or spray pumps, they sell them. It is not indicated anywhere that the very Cotton Development Organisation whom you give money annually is also declaring how much revenue they have collected from the sale of those inputs.

Madam Speaker, this would be recklessness on the part of the legislators, if we ignore this fundamental matters, which touch lives of the ordinary peasants. The most disturbing issue is that the Shs 10 billion being requested for is for one company called Fine Spinners. This is a private company, which came here as an investor and the committee was given a memorandum of understanding which - you as a lawyer know a memorandum of understanding is not legally binding. There is no agreement but a memorandum of understanding between the Fine Spinners and Cotton Development Organisation.

The agreement is that Cotton Development Organisation gets the Shs 10 billion, buys cotton and makes sure that Fine Spinners is assured of supply of cotton as long as they operate in Uganda. If we are Ugandans and legislating for Ugandans, I would expect this Shs 10 billion, if it is a revolving fund, to go for the cotton sector so that any industrialist, businessman or any ginner involved in the cotton production can access that money. How come the money is specifically just for one investor? There is no commitment as to how this money will ever be returned to us. The agreement is just a memorandum of understanding. There is no agreement.

I am surprised that Ugandans who are seated in that committee approved that the Shs 10 billion be given to Cotton Development Organisation. I am now coming to a higher court, which is the entire Parliament and I would like to see that Parliament agrees that Shs 10 billion from the poor man’s pocket be given to one investor for the purpose of ensuring that as long as they operate in Uganda, they must be assured of the supply of cotton.  Madam Speaker, I would like this Parliament to state its position on the matter.

Finally, I would like to beg this Parliament to understand our duties. Yesterday, I was working in this institution up to 10.30 p.m. and I am told a few Members of the Budget Committee met up to about 7.00 p.m. and the Clerk to Parliament can testify to this. I did not get any notice neither by SMS, telephone or any circular letter telling me that there would be a meeting. However, I have got an extract of the people who attended and are here and passed this report, which has been tabled before us. 

Madam Speaker, I have no intention of strangulating Government. If they operate well, it is good for me and for the people who sent me to this House. However, it is very important that whatever we do in this House, must be in accordance with the law and in the interests of the people whom we represent. I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, both the chairman and the mover of the minority report. Honourable members, do you have any comments?

3.58
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairman of the committee and the mover of the minority report for making very good submissions. I agree that the law must be properly followed when we are approving the supplementary budgets. I would like to thank Government because, time and again, they have tried to work within the provisions of the law in ensuring that supplementary budgets are properly approved.

However, Madam Speaker, there is some clarification, which I would like the mover of the minority report to give to this House. Supplementary budgets are financed by different means among which is reallocation and budget cuts. Therefore, the clarification I would like from the mover of the minority report is, if the supplementary budget is not financed by reallocation, what happens? 

If the law, as per the Budget Act,2001 states, that consultations shall be made between Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the affected ministries, departments, institutions or organisations, what do we require as Parliament? What evidence do we need to be presented to this House proving that consultations have been made? I believe MDAs are represented in this House by various ministers. Unless the ministers are telling this House that consultations have not been made with them, we would buy the idea in the minority report. 

However, if this is not the case, I have a feeling that the most important and fundamental issue to guard against is the provision of three per cent that is within the law. Otherwise, I would like to appeal to my colleagues to support the majority view and go ahead with prayers that we supply as the law requires us to do. I thank you. (Applause)

4.02
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and the chairman of the committee. I start from a note as a Member of Parliament representing people of Bugungu Buliisa where for the last three weeks, 820 families  have been rendered homeless after a disaster. I would like to ask, what makes an emergency? What makes unforeseen, if such a disaster cannot find resources? 

As you know, the disaster office does not have a single penny for a blanket or a tarpaulin for the homeless families; and people of Buliisa will not understand when I am here supporting Parliament to appropriate money for non-emergencies and unforeseen issues. I would like to request the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development before we pass this money to find some money - I am sure it is not only in Buliisa; there must be other disasters elsewhere - for disasters because it is disasters which qualify to be in a supplementary. If that is agreed, then I can debate the other area.

Secondly, for the last 10 years that I have been in this Parliament and the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs – (Interruption)

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, my colleague is talking about a disaster that has just happened but we are considering a supplementary for 2014/2015 resource, which resources we have already spent. There is no way he can finance an emergency that has just happened on condition for passing this supplementary.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, my concern was to the Prime Minister and the Leader of Government Business. We have a contingency fund which we passed in the Public Finance Act - the 15 per cent, which is supposed to go into this sector is not there. I have been to the Office of the Prime Minister several times.

However, on the substantive matter, for the 10 years I have been in this Parliament, Parliament, through the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, has been trying to prioritise court awards. I suspect those who are using the shortcut of an order of mandamus in court to be failing that process. How are we going to ensure that those who did not know of the shortcut of an order of mandamus but have been waiting for 10 to 20 years will also get their awards? This is what the committee had achieved to set first in, first out. We seem to be shooting our earlier achievement.

On the question of South Sudan, I entirely agree that if our forces have been there and there are issues to do with medical and other bills, as Parliament, we cannot be seen not to support our forces. However, last week we discussed Uganda traders’ money not being paid by the same Government of South Sudan. 

About 40 years ago, we were “liberated” by the Tanzanian Army and we have been paying bills to Tanzania. I would like to request that these bills also be paid back by the Government of South Sudan. We cannot be liberators when our traders are being punished, our boda bodas are being chased and our people are being arrested when they demand their money. We need reciprocal treatment from South Sudan because we have done quite a lot for them but we are not being paid in the same currency as is required bilaterally.

Madam Speaker, I would like to support the main report of the committee but I request that matters of emergency and unforeseen disasters that have befallen Buliisa be considered urgently. The people I represent should not see us as insensitive dealing with other issues when Government cannot even send a minister with a blanket or even a tarpaulin for those who are homeless. I thank you.

4.07
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the minority report and part of the main report. It is unfortunate the person who said, “As usual when he lost the election....” It was very unfortunate – (Laughter)- I am rising on a minority report because I have evidence on court awards – (Interruption)

MR RUHUNDA: I would like to be on record and inform my colleague that I am an elected Member of Parliament from Fort portal and I won the election.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, as usual, I always tell people what I believe is right and that is why I am called, “Prophet Nathan”. I told people here that the outcome might be bad and it happened. However, if you survived, you are lucky but it is wrong to make comments that are not right. I won my opponent with a difference of 16,000 votes and it cannot be a minority. 

Madam Speaker, I am rising to support the minority report and I will start with two issues. The details of the court cases paid out of Shs 80 billion supplementary for the financial year 2014/2015. I will lay it at the Table.

A total of Shs 78.144 billion was paid as supplementary and much of this was done as fast as possible yet there were other deserving cases which were never paid but they went for this. I would like to name the lawyers who are involved:
Bashasha & Company Advocates - Shs 1.6 billion; 
Bashasha & Company Advocates, Joseph Kananura - Shs 2.3 billion; 
Bashasha & Company Advocates, Annet Zimbiha - Shs 7.1 billion; 
Bashasha & Company Advocates, Moses Ocip and others - Shs 24.5 billion; 
Bashasha & Company Advocates, Moses Ocip Shs - 3.2 billion; Kampala Associated Advocates - Shs 647 million; 
Kaahwa Kafuuzi - Shs 573 million; 
Kaahwa Kafuuzi - Shs 514 million, that was farm estates.
Moses Ssali - Shs 480 million; 
Ndyomugabe & Company Advocates - Shs 2.3 billion; 
Byenkya, Kihika & Company Advocates - Shs 23.3 billion; Kariisa & Company Advocates – 

Madam Speaker, having heard the names, you will discover those involved in this matter. Unless we take a decision as Parliament that an investigation be done in this matter, we are finished. People have been in courts and have won cases but have not been paid. However, if you want your money to be paid, then you need to go to Bashasha & Company Advocates and it will take you a day to be paid.

Let me also add this case of Kihika, which I have read about. This is how it was paid; it took a day – (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and Mr Nandala-Mafabi. I would like to add to what hon. Nandala-Mafabi has stated about how unfairly other people are treated, including us. We won a case where we are supposed to be paid Shs 239 million; it is now over 10 years and we have never been paid. I have even tried my colleagues on the front bench to help me but nothing has been done.

THE SPEAKER: Go to the Bashasha & Company Advocates – (Laughter)    

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I hope hon. Okupa now knows that he should go to Bashasha & Company Advocates. I will give you extra information on that. Recently –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Information from the Attorney-General; he is the custodian of the awards.

MR RUKUTANA: I thank my colleague, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, for giving way. The information that I would like to give as a lawyer who has practiced for the last 30 years [Honourable members: “From where?”] from Mwesigwa Rukutana & Company Advocates.

In litigation, lawyers have areas of speciality and the business community is very prudent and alert. Once they come to know that you are a lawyer specialised in this field, almost everybody will come to you. If you succeed in a matter –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the minister has talked of speciality. Is it in order for the minister to tell us that it is the people with such names who only excel and specialise in such cases in a country of 37 million people?

THE SPEAKER: I cannot rule on that matter. Please conclude, minister.

MR RUKUTANA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. It may not be anything strange to find that one firm is handling mandamus cases. If any member of the business community hears that a particular firm has succeeded in getting a remedy for their client, then prudently, they will go to the firm. There is nothing strange about this.

I would like to use this opportunity to inform this House that contrary to what – (Interruption)

MS OSEGGE: I thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I think that the minister is trying to divert the attention of this House because what we are talking about is the fact that many people have deserved payment for a long time and they have not been paid. 

However, you will realise that there are just a few people who have been identified under particular companies. It is not about the law firm winning the case but the Ugandans who deserve that kind of payment. Is it procedurally correct for the minister to deviate and trivialise the matter that we are talking about as Parliament?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think there have been several recommendations from our Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs that the earlier awards should be satisfied before the new ones. The main concern of this House is that the old ones have been abandoned and the new ones somehow get paid. 

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, I was still giving information. It is not true that writ of mandamus is a short cut. On the contrary, one can say that it is a long cut. You only seek an order of mandamus when you have a judgement against Government and Government has not paid.

Therefore, that being the case and considering that the court awards are over Shs 400 billion, your economy, honourable members, cannot afford to clear that amount at a go. Those who are prudent rush to court to get this writ and –(Interruption)

MS OSEGGE: Madam Speaker, I do not desire to do this to the honourable minister. I would have proposed that we quote the rule that restricts him from speaking further. However, would the minister like to tell us if these were the first to be awarded and so have been considered before any other? Is he in order to insist when we have made it categorically clear that there are many who were awarded first but have not been paid by the Government?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think you should leave that matter and just conclude.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, there could be people who have not been paid for a long time and it would be our desire that court awards are cleared as and when they arise. The point that I was making is that our economy does not afford the amounts that are awarded by the courts to be paid as and when they fall due and for that reason, there are arrears.

Those who are prudent rush to court and get mandamus and mandamus, by its nature, compels the Government in a sort of arm twisting manner to satisfy the payment and that is how it happens.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, court awards are foreseeable expenses and the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs has full details of those court awards. This Parliament is asking about the beneficiaries of these court awards. When did they win the case? When were the first, second and third demands for payment made before it culminated into the order of mandamus?

I am rising on a point of procedure. This minister is taking advantage of some of us who are not lawyers and placing things and making us feel as though he is talking sense - (Laughter). I have addressed my mind to this issue and even though I am not a lawyer, I went to the bottom of it.

I have told this House that we are not against paying the order of mandamus. However, why should certain companies and individuals have priority over others? Can this Parliament be told why court awards cannot be captured in the budget so that as Parliament, we can play our role because these are our people? If they have not been paid for 15 years and then somebody who won the case five years ago is being paid.

I have raised this issue as a matter of national importance to draw the attention of Members of Parliament. Some of you may think it is about politics but there is no politics at all. Some of your relatives are suffering the same problem. I would like guidance on whether the minister who has just been on the Floor is right to confuse us legally when we actually know the facts. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, please conclude.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, if you knew the gravity of the matter that we are raising, none of us would have agreed on the supplementary. I will give an example of Byenkya, Kihika & Company Advocates; they got Shs 23.2 billion for Victoria General Repairs and Shs 6.12 billion for Picfare.

He wrote a letter asking for the money on 12 May 2015. It was received in the Ministry of Finance, Panning and Economic Development on 13 May 2015. On 14 May, they wrote to the Registrar of Courts to confirm the court order. The letter was written by Mr Semakula. On 15th May, the registrar replied, verifying the orders. On the same day, Shs 23.2 billion was paid out. That is express! 

If you walked to Bashasha & Company Advocates, their claims would not take more than three days before they are paid. Even the one of UEDCL - the former staff of UEB who went to UEDCL - the court has not authorised payment but he put the money on his account from which he is deducting his pay. There are cases which have been won and they should be listed every financial year indicating the amount to be paid. 

This would help us to know, every time we come here, who we are going to pay. What is happening is that the current cases, which were not even genuine but because they involve the Office of the Attorney-General and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, they are paid within seconds. That is why the people of Uganda are suffering. The dangerous departments in Uganda are three now; you saw the Supreme Court. The people who are involved in the cases include the Judiciary, the Attorney-General and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Unless we cause an inquiry, for those who are coming back in May for the Tenth Parliament, this is an area you must deal with immediately. However for now, I suggest that we discount this money that you paid out as a supplementary until we deal with that investigation, because it is one of the dangerous areas which have been mismanaged.

Lastly, supplementary budget approvals are now areas of abuse. They know we are tired because most of us have come from an election and we need to go urgently. The only genuine supplementary is for salaries. They know many people have not got salaries including, Members of Parliament and so, they bring it faster saying that if we do not approve it, then we are in problems.

Madam Speaker, even if it includes our salaries, I propose that we approve those concerning salaries and allowances of Members of Parliament and others. Those that need our scrutiny, we shelve them because Parliament is not ending. The Tenth Parliament is coming and we will deal with this matter. They have already spent so the best we can do is to handle the culprits at an appropriate time but not now when we are in a hurry.

The minority report has important issues which are good for all of us. Recently, I went to Mbale Hospital and I got a patient on the floor of the ward. There are no mattresses and if you manage to get one, it has a hole because it has overstayed. The beds are for Amin and Obote’s time. It is very bad, why should one person come and take Shs 80 billion while the owners of the money are suffering?

We should take action now and this will go on your record to say, “The Speaker rose and dealt with matters where criminals were involved, as Parliament was winding up.” This country is ours and whoever believes it is not ours is making a mistake. If it is ours, we should not be in a hurry to do things for a few individuals to finish us. Uganda must remain as it is today, tomorrow and for generations to come. 

I would like to lay on the Table these documents such that I am not held liable. Madam Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table the list of Shs 78.2 billion where the majority beneficiary is Bashasha & Company Advocates and others. I would like to lay a list where a one Semakula processed money for compensation within two days. Madam Speaker, I would like to also give you a copy. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.34
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Uganda is a wonderful country where God gave us fertile land. We don’t use fertilisers, we don’t use Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs) and we get some of the best products in the world.

This country used to flourish on cotton and it is one of the items needed around. Today Egypt produces some of the best cotton in the world. When you go to the shops around the world and you want to buy a cotton shirt, the price for 18 stitches of cotton is not less than US$ 300. 

We have had a cooperative system, which my good friend on the other side knows very well. We had a cooperative system and we had cotton industries. Uganda used to produce a lot of cotton even from Busoga - Kamuli and we used to make a lot of money. The cotton industry died and our people are suffering. I am even shocked that this Government gave a one Guo Dong US$ 1 million to take over Lira Spinning Mill. The man removed the machinery and there is nothing happening in Lira Spinning Mill.

Madam Speaker, we heard of Shs 10 billion being given away to an individual and the farmers in Busoga, Kamuli, Mbale, Sironko, Bukedi and Soroti are not being aided. This is very unfair to the taxpayer and to this country. If we could revive the cooperative and encourage our people to produce cotton, which is a commodity needed everywhere, then we shall have helped our people.

However, when I read the minority report, it is very painful –(Member timed out.)

4.37
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the minority report especially on matters of cotton. I think that the 10 billion that we intend to give to a company, if that is true, should not feature in the supplementary but go to the treatment of Hepatitis B or if it is going to the cotton sector, we should use it to buy seeds if there is urgency and give them to cotton farmers.

I come from a cotton growing area and believe me, during the cotton harvesting season, if you are campaigning in the cotton growing areas, no farmer will even ask for money from you. Therefore, if somebody says that the cotton sector is not profitable to farmers, then we have a problem. In Ghana, one of the reasons why their economy is very stable is that the Ghanaian Cedi is almost one dollar. This is because of the quality of cotton and the value addition that they have given to cotton.

Madam Speaker, a supplementary in relation to soldiers whether they are in Sudan or Somalia or here, should be supported only if we can ask ourselves that the amount of money we normally appropriate and give to our soldiers in Somalia is the amount which is refundable by the UN. This is so because under the UN peace keeping mission mandate, the money that any Government spends on its troops on a peace mission is always refunded. In 2013/2014, we gave out almost Shs 165 billion. In 2014/2015, we gave almost over Shs 170 billion. Is this money paid back to Government –(Member timed out.)

3.39
MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on the question of the Shs 10 billion, which is being sent to a private company by the name Uganda Fine Spinners Limited. I really would like to appeal to the Government to take this matter very seriously. 

We used to have the Uganda Development Corporation as the investment arm of Government. We have talked about re-instituting the Uganda Development Corporation (UDC) whereby if we need to make investments in some key areas of industry, we have an arm that we can use. Why we got rid of the Uganda Development Corporation, yet Britain that has the Commonwealth Development Corporation has kept theirs and today the Commonwealth Development Corporation owns Umeme, dfcu Bank and many other assets. Originally, dfcu Bank was partially owned by the Commonwealth Development Corporation and the Uganda Development Corporation. We cannot keep on giving private companies resources which we never realise.

In the Eighth Parliament, we dealt several times with the Uganda Garment Industries Limited, where money was also given to boost the cotton industry and it has not happened. Can we, as a country, seriously take investment in important sectors of the economy and work on that basis? The CDC has - (Interruption)

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to give information to my honourable colleague that recently, we passed a Bill to reinstitute the Uganda Development Corporation. 

I also wish to inform him about the Shs 10 billion; that this money that is being talked about is for buying cotton, which is buffer stock. The Government comes in to buy cotton from the farmers and it is kept in the stores, from where ginners and spinners buy this cotton because many countries are doing this.

If you leave this cotton to be bought anyhow, in a few months it will have been finished and your industries will not survive because they will not have cotton to continue the whole year. Therefore, Government gets this buffer stock and the ginners and spinners buy the cotton; and this money goes back to the Consolidated Fund.

THE SPEAKER: There were two pieces of information from the ministers of agriculture and finance.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I would like to clarify on the Shs 10 billion for buffer stock. The impression which was created is that the Shs 10 billion is given to Fine Spinners Limited. This is not true because it is given to the Cotton Development Organisation, which buys the buffer stock. Fine Spinners Limited pays for the cotton it uses and anybody who has contrary information should lay it on the Table.

MR AKENA: Thank you for the clarification. However, if this buffer stock is for Fine Spinners Limited alone, I think that creates a larger problem. Previously, we had mechanisms which included the cooperative bank and the cooperative unions keeping that buffer stock and the funding went through that aspect. 

The important issue I was raising about UDC - and they changed the law in Britain in 1997 to allow these parastatals and private involvement and they were using social security funds that are privately owned to handle many these investments where they have been able to buy parastatals in Uganda and across Africa and the whole of South Asia. It is okay for Britain to consider this for their people but as Ugandans, we must consider Ugandans first.

If everything is being done in this unclear way and the safeguards are not there for the interests of the Ugandan citizens, we are losing track.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have heard the main and the minority reports. There are areas of convergence and divergence. I think we should go to the Committee of Supply.

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

Vote 001 - Office of the President

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 13,607,134, 136 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2014/ 2015.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 003 - Office of the Prime Minister

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 4 billion be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2014/ 2015.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 004 - Ministry of Defence

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 151,944,606,400 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2014/2015.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 006 – Ministry of Foreign Affairs

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 2,711,685,083 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2014/2015.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 007 – Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 19,777,319,728 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2014/2015.

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, this is where we have concerns and there is no way we are going to approve this when Ugandans are being unfairly segregated against. I propose that that money, which is meant for the court awards be transferred to Hepatitis B – (Interruption)

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chairperson, this is not the money that he is referring to. The money he is referring to is under Vote 130 – Treasury Operations because it was on order of mandamus.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put that a total sum of Shs 19,777,319,728 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2014/2015.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now this is development expenditure for the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 7,080,000,000 be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for Financial Year 2014/2015.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 008 – Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 9,058,780,093 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2014/2015.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Development expenditure for Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 25,919,380,900 be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for financial year 2014/2015.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 010 – Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 17,674,731,191 be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for financial year 2014/2015 -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the procedural issue I am raising -

THE CHAIRPERSON: On agriculture?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, before we go to agriculture. We do not see some of these figures and it seems deliberate. It seems the Government has decided to move these figures – the ones on compensation – under different ministries.

The procedural issue I am raising is that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should help us to identify that Shs 78 billion first. He might have split it and now wants to load it elsewhere. Otherwise, we might accidentally approve it. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, where is the Shs 78 billion?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. The Shs 78 billion is going to come under statutory expenditure on page 8 under Vote 130 – Treasury Operations.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think we should wait until we get to Vote 130.

On development expenditure under the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries the question is that a total sum of Shs 17,674,731,191 be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for financial year 2014/2015.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 011 – Ministry of Local Government

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 1,416,000,000 be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for financial year 2014/2015.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 013 – Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 14,465,666,474 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2014/2015 -

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, the problem is that when you are reading and guiding us by Vote, it is very difficult for us to relate the details to the two reports presented. For the ministry of education, as a committee I am surprised that we have not correctly put it on this Floor of Parliament that we had a problem on the Africa Development Bank funded projects. I do not know whether this is a different one.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chairperson, can I inform the honourable member that the matter she is presenting is coming in the next presentation of Supplementary Schedule 1 2015/2016.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 14,465,666,474 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2014/2015.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Development expenditure for Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 3,440,000,000 be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for financial year 2014/2015.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 015 – Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 7,043,310,022 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2014/2015. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 016 - Ministry of Works and Transport

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the procedural issue I am raising is that I recall the chairperson mentioned that the RDCs had a nugatory expenditure. Where did we end since we are about to come to the end of this financial year? Was it under the Ministry of Works and Transport - (Interruption)

I am saying the chairperson said the RDCs’ expenditure of Shs 2.5 billion be deducted because it was not allowed expenses. Therefore, I would like to ask my chairman, hon. Amos Lugoloobi, to help me. Which vote is it under?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. I will help my colleague and I believe he has a copy of the report. If you were following carefully, under vote 001, there is a column there: amounts not approved are Shs 2.5 billion. It means that was deducted from that supply.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Ministry of Works Development Expenditure. Honourable members, the question is that Shs 1,086,271,298 be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for financial year 2014/2015. 

I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 1,086,271,298 be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for financial year 2014/2015.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 018 - Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development
THE CHAIRPESON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 3 billion be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for financial year 2014/2015. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 021 - Ministry of East African Community Affairs

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 2,186,207,537 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2014/2015. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 102 – The Electoral Commission

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 20 billion be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for financial year 2014/2015.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 119 - Uganda Registration Services Bureau

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 6,073,341,916 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2014/2015.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 120 - National Citizenship and Immigration Control

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 20 billion be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for financial year 2014/2015.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 122 - Kampala Capital City Authority

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 7 billion be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for financial year 2014/2015. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 123 - Rural Electrification Agency

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of shs 20 billion be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for financial year 2014/2015.
(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 131 – Auditor-General

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 5,492,323,118 be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for financial year 2014/2015.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 136 - Makerere University

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 2,650,000,000 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2014/2015.
(Question put and agreed.)

Vote 141 - Uganda Revenue Authority

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 25 billion be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2014/2015.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 144 - Uganda Police Force

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 30 billion be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2014/2015.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 145 - Uganda Prisons Service

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 24 billion be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2014/2015.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 146 – The Public Service Commission

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 93,318,000 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2014/2015.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 155 - Ugandan Cotton Development Organisation

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 10 billion be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2014/2015.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, I raised an argument on the Floor of this Parliament that the Shs 10 billion, which is being approved here is going to be used by CDO to benefit one investor  and not the sector.

Madam Chairperson, my recommendation in the committee and I am also pleading with Parliament that Fine Spinners Limited, who want buffer stock to ensure that this business does not collapse, can go into a Public/Private Partnership (PPP) arrangement. However, why would they use public money to cushion their individual business?

I stand here to not only oppose but condemn it, hoping that we take care of the interests of the poor, who grow cotton in this country. 

If the Government wanted to create stock, the Shs 10 billion should have gone directly to farmers to generate more production of cotton. It would be better than giving this money to Cotton Development Organisation (CDO) without a specific agreement - a non-committal agreement of Shs 10 billion to benefit one individual. Madam Chairperson, I oppose this particular item. 

MR KAKOOZA: From the report of the committee, I assumed this money was going to be given to CDO and the reason is specified in No. 3.9. This agreement was signed and Government must have an intervention to invest with other companies. The buffer stock would ensure a guaranteed availability of cotton all year round to avoid stock-outs and eventual closure of factories. This is a policy position, which Government adopted as an incentive to investors. This is the explanation from the report. 

I would imagine that this is the money they have requested for. The moment you go against the agreement, which is a policy of Government, it will be disruptive and cause other implications. 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The explanation given by hon. Kakooza is pertinent and right. However, I would like to add that this intervention helps the farmers too. The cotton prices originally went down because a few farmers were buying at liberty. Due to this intervention, there is some type of competition that has been created -(Interruption)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, this arrangement is between CDO and one individual company. How can the minister confuse this House? He has said the intervention to create excess stock for one individual company has improved the production of cotton in this country. Our argument is that the Government intervention should improve cotton production. This money should go to farmers so that they can grow more cotton which the industrialists can benefit from. 

This particular fund is going to CDO and yet CDO is managing this fund for the purpose of buying cotton for one individual investor. How can the minister say it has improved? Is it in order for the minister to confuse Parliament? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, he had just started explaining. He had not completed his point. I do not know how he was going to wind up. 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. This cotton is bought by Fine Spinners Ltd. The main agenda of this programme is to keep the cotton in stock for the whole year. In fact, I would like to say that it does not stop at Fine Spinners only; even if it was Ssebagala and sons, they would continue buying from the same stock and continue buying until the stock gets depleted. 

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, we thought this was seed that was going to be bought. This money was supposed to be given to an individual to complete the value chain because he is not the one who is going to grow the cotton. 

Secondly, isn’t this supplementary for 2014/2015 financial year? If it is for 2014/2015, hasn’t this money been spent? Are we looking for money for the future or we are carrying out a supplementary for money already spent?

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is for money already spent.  

MR TIM LWANGA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. It is true this money has already been spent, but in actual sense it has not been spent; it is a revolving fund. They are continuously buying cotton from the farmers, year in year out. It is actually encouraging production. There is ready market to buy the cotton from the farmers, stock it and then buy more. Thank you very much. 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Madam Chairperson, I rise on a point of order. Is the honourable colleague in order to confuse the House? There is no improvement in cotton at all. Uganda has not benefited at all from the Americans under the African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA), which was extended to African countries. Ever since that Act was introduced, Uganda has managed to export only one container. 

I was even embarrassed that the head of state of this country went to whisk off only one container. Is the Member, therefore, in order to confuse the House that there is growth of the cotton sector when Ugandans are suffering?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, if this money was spent in 2014/2015, maybe it would be hard to assess the impact it left. Let us hear from the chairperson of the Budget Committee.  

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chairperson, cotton operates in a value chain. In this particular case, Government wanted to add value to the export of cotton in this country. We have been exporting cotton in a raw form. This intervention is intended to add more value to the cotton that we produce in Uganda.

This country has been suffering from a problem of a negative trade balance for a long time; we import more than we export. This intervention is intended to reduce that imbalance by adding value to cotton. This is what Fine Spinners Ltd does –(Interruption) 

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, the Minister of State for Agriculture in his presentation told us this money was for bumper stock. The chairperson of the committee now says it is for value addition. Are the two Members in order to confuse buffer stock with value addition? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, it is possible that both of them are not aware of the facts. Let me ask the Minister of Finance, who is the owner of the supplementary, to tell us what this money is for. Is it for value addition or stocking? What is the use of this money?  

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, the buffer stock is procured by CDO from ginners and is accessed by Fine Spinners after paying for the volumes of supplies needed. Therefore, Fine Spinners pays CDO -(Interjection)- It is value addition because Fine Spinners is adding value. 

Madam Chairperson, for the first time, as you saw the President launch this; Fine Spinners has been able to produce shirts to export to European markets. For the first time we are producing shirts here and we are exporting them – (Interjections)- If you object, we can go to Bugoloobi and see what is happening.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Is the minister in order to tell this House that this country is exporting cotton shirts to the West? As far as I know, under AGOA, this country has been able to export only one container and have never done anything more than that. Are you in order therefore, to tell us that Uganda is exporting shirts to the West?  

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we know that there is a factory; perhaps we shall ask the minister to bring a shirt and lay it on the Table, so that we know that we are exporting shirts.

MR BAHATI: The ginners buy cotton from the farmers. They remove the seeds and sell to CDO, which in turn sells to Fine Spinners Ltd. Fine Spinners Ltd then buys from them and processes for export. If this is not value addition, what is it then? If we do not want to add value to the cotton our farmers are producing, what do we want then?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. For your information, the best cotton in the whole world is grown in Namulesa in Busoga. Research has confirmed this. Unfortunately, it is no longer being grown because of such interventions which are not right.

The agreement is between CDO and Fine Spinners Uganda Ltd. We had NYTIL which became Picfare; ATM which died; UGIL - you know what happened when hon. Rukutana was the Minister of State for Finance, General Duties.

If these are interventions, we should send these people in UDB –(Interjections)- The problem is that you just came recently to this House. (Laughter)  If the agreement is between CDO and Fine Spinners Ltd, it is not right. What should be done is that – if CDO manages this fund, they should make it a requirement that everybody who benefits should come for a recommendation and money is put somewhere and they get it. However, the moment you say CDO and Fine Spinners Uganda Ltd, it means that the money had been got for only a single entity, not the whole sector.

The argument is that this is a good intervention but the money is being secured for only one entity. If we have an intervention, let us put this money somewhere for everybody who is a spinner to benefit - it could be in Bank of Uganda or wherever.

Madam Chairperson, in this regard, I would like us to –(Interruption)

MR BAHATI: I think we should not really confuse this matter. This is also about value addition. Fine Spinners Ltd is buying our cotton from Cotton Development Organisation, which is a Government organisation. It is helping the investor to make sure that there are no stock-outs. 

Anybody can access these buffers if they want to process their cotton. However, we are facilitating an investor to make sure that there are no stock-outs –(Interjections)- Madam Cecilia Ogwal, if you want, I can give you more details about cotton.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Hon. Bahati has given me information; I do not want to allow my mother to disagree with him. On the issue of value addition, even ATM, NYTIL, Tri-star, Phenix and Lira Spinning Mill were all adding value. Therefore, Madam Chairperson, until we understand who is behind Fine Spinners Uganda Ltd and until even the shirt you have asked for is brought, let us put this money aside so that -(Interjections)- Where did you go? We have refused to agree with you because you went on our behalf and never brought anything- not a shirt or a dress.

I have got the agreement here; God is great. This is a memorandum of understanding for utilisation of cotton lint buffer stocks between CDO and Fine Spinners Uganda Ltd. It is dated 14 January 2015. It was signed by the Managing Director of CDO and a one Jasvinder Bedi on behalf of Fine Spinners, for USD 10 million. 

This was money that was given to an individual company, not the people of Uganda. The date is 14 January 2015 and it is going to be laid on the Table immediately for purposes of –(Interjection)- Hon. Bahati, you are not aware and you do not have a copy. Do you want me to read the contents? Madam Chairperson, will you allow me to read this memorandum?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you going to read the entire agreement?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Let me summarise. “Whereas CDO is a Government of Uganda agency mandated to monitor the production, processing and marketing of cotton in Uganda, with the aim of promoting the distribution of high quality cotton seed and generally facilitating the development of the cotton subsector; 

Whereas the company is an investor in the textile sector, which has established a textile spinning mill located at Bugoloobi Kampala, with the objective of adding value to the locally produced cotton in Uganda and also to create employment opportunities; in order to realise these objectives, the investor has requested the Government of Uganda to secure a constant supply of cotton lint bales throughout the year.”

For your information, Bugoloobi is where Tri-star was and now this is another one coming up in the name of Fine Spinners. Remember when we destroyed it, we lost Shs 100 billion. 

“Whereas the Government of Uganda undertook to establish a revolving cotton lint buffer stock under the National Textile Policy, the essence of this initiative is to increase competiveness of local textile millers/spinners relative to the other world operators, including enhance value addition to locally available cotton lint and ensure that the vertical integrated textile mills can access cotton lint all the year.

This memorandum of understanding witnessed and hereby agreed as follows:
That the company expressed its desire to the Government of Uganda, through Cotton Development Organisation (CDO), for support in order to secure a constant supply of cotton lint bales throughout the year, given that Uganda’s cotton marketing season takes place between the months of January to June each year.

That the Government of Uganda shall provide funds during the fiscal year 2014 for the provision of buffer lint stock bales for the company.

The company shall identify local cotton processors/ginners, who have ready stocks of lint bales and negotiate a quantity and quality required as well as applicable purchase price. 

Upon a successful conclusion of the negotiations, the company shall accordingly inform and advise CDO to enter into sales contracts with the ginners; CDO shall make payments directly to the ginners and the payment terms in the sales agreement for the procurement of the cotton lint bales shall be based on payments upon delivery - piecemeal delivery and payment acceptable…” - (Interjection)- I think you are not listening.

“e. CDO shall hold a cotton lint -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order!

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we know why hon. Lwanga has to clap because his job is ending on 17th of May and he needs another job; so he has to clap. (Laughter) 

“CDO shall hold the cotton lint bales so procured in secured ware houses and contract a collateral manager…” –(Interruption)

MR TIM LWANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been in this House for many years and I have been on the political scene since I was 18 years. I do not have to say that; but I am a historical! We are in the same profession with my colleague and he knows a lot about me. He also knows that I would not do anything just because I have lost a job, because I do not need any. Therefore, is he in order to state on record that because I am running out of a job on the 17th –(Laughter)– I have to clap?

THE CHAIRPERSON: He is out of order. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you have been very useful to this House. You have explained the background to this issue. Honourable members, let us look at it in another way. First, the factory is in Uganda, it employs Ugandans, the cotton is bought from Ugandan farmers; what objection do we have to that?

I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 10,000,000,000 be provided as supplementary recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2014/2015.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 156: Uganda Land Commission

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 20,475,000,000 be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for Financial Year 2014/2015-

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we have no problem with Uganda Land Commission. However, this compensation is not reaching the people who are asking for their monies.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Which one?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The Uganda Land Commission is supposed to compensate people in Kibaale and other places. Many people have won cases and complained about their money, but they have not been compensated and yet they are the beneficiaries.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, this is development expenditure for Uganda Land Commission

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It is the same. It is the one that binds them.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Development?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Maybe I need to understand it better. This is the money they are using to compensate. What are they going to develop?

THE CHAIRPERSON: What compensation? What I have is development expenditure for the Uganda Land Commission

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, let him clarify what the Shs 20,475,000,000 is for. This is because their office is with Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development – a small place where they all sit. So, what are they developing? Do they want to buy chairs in that office or something else?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Maybe they are squatting in that place and they want their own office. Where is the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: If the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development is not here, then we cannot pass it since we do not have sufficient explanation. I beg that we move to the next item and stand over this one – (Interjection) – You can come up later because you cannot hold us at ransom. Let him bring it at the end.

Vote 159: External Security Organisation

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 800,000,000 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2014/2015.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 161: Mulago Hospital Complex

The CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 3,000,000,000 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2014/2015.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chairperson, I rise to provide information on Uganda Land Commission.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, let us finish; we shall come back to it.

Vote 201: Uganda Mission at UN, New York

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 4,224,710,311 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2014/2015.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 1,540,089,943 be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for Financial Year 2014/2015.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 211: Uganda Embassy in Ethiopia

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 54,756,584 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2014/2015.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 216: Uganda Mission in Tripoli
THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 234,690,000 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2014/2015.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 11,886,000 be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for Financial Year 2014/2015 - 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Madam Chairperson, the mission in Tripoli was closed and relocated to Tunisia. So, what is that money for? There is nobody operating from Tripoli, therefore there is no need for a supplementary. The building in Tripoli is at a standstill; there is no need for that supplementary.

THE CHAIRPERSON: If they are in Tunisia, does it mean that they sit under a tree?

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: This is development expenditure; it is not recurrent expenditure. Tripoli was closed.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is the mission actually in Tunisia?

MS OSEGGE: Madam Chairperson, I think it is right for us to know if it is for Tunisia. Why wouldn’t the minister say that it is for Tunisia? Why would he say it is Tripoli when there is nothing in Tripoli? If somebody is going to account for that money, you are going to account for something that is not there. Let us change the narrative and say it is in Tunisia and then we supply. What is so difficult with that?

THE CHAIRPERSON: But we do not have a mission in Tunisia.

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, I think we can only provide for the recurrent expenditure. If it is development expenditure, maybe we need to be informed whether there are buildings. We relocated and we have not said that we shall not go back to Tripoli; so it can only be recurrent expenditure. However, if we are talking about development then we need clarification.

This morning we were with the Minister of Foreign Affairs in the committee meeting; it is the recurrent expenditure that is provided for but not development.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Supposing they want to buy chairs in Tripoli?  Minister of Foreign Affairs, don’t we have a mission? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, this money is given to accounting officers and I am sure today we got a list of the accounting officers. If the mission is closed, it means there is no accounting officer. The moment there is no accounting officer, even if it is capital development then the person who will hold it will be the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. If the mission was closed, there is no way we can make a provision. Maybe let them tell us who is the accounting officer in Tripoli? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can we defer this until we get an explanation.

THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER FOR EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Mr Ali Kirunda Kivejinja): I can give a proper explanation. He was under me and he knows how Ministry of Foreign Affairs works. 

Yes, there was a problem in Tripoli. We never closed but we shifted our activities to Tunisia. However, that does not mean that if the conditions go back to being okay, you do not repair your house. This is a different matter -[Hon Okupa: “Are we going back”]- Of course, we shall have to go back; leave it to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. I do not want you to manage Government –(Interjections)- It is the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and I am the Prime Minister anyway, so I know what Government does.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, our Constitution says that Uganda will have a Prime Minister, who is also the Leader of Government Business in Parliament. I know that the one we approved was Dr Ruhakana Rugunda. Is hon. Kirunda Kivejinja in order to claim he is the Prime Minister when we know he is a Deputy Prime Minister? Worse still, he just came recently after December - he came in January. He should be arrested for impersonation. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, he is a Deputy Prime Minister. However, on a serious note, I would like to know whether there is anything we are doing in Tunisia. Who is sitting in Tunisia on our behalf? We want to know where this money is going.

MR TIM LWANGA: Madam Chairperson, we are talking about supplementary expenditure; it is money which was spent in 2014/ 2015. We can only refuse to give them money if they had moved from Tripoli by that time. However, if they were there at the time when the money was spent, there is no reason why we would not approve it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: When did they move - for the record? Let us defer this for now. Let us go to Paris.

Vote 224: Uganda Mission in Paris

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 344,711,000 be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for Financial Year 2014/ 2015.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 225: Uganda Embassy in Germany, Berlin

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 22,610,000 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2014/2015.

(Question put and agreed to)

Vote 200: Other Missions’ Additional Funding

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that a total sum of Shs 6,267,193,872 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2014/2015 - I have to put the question first then you can say what you want.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, I would like to know where these additional missions are because it is not specified. The rest have been specified and their votes are there. However, for this, they have mentioned vote 200 but it is not specified; they just say “other missions, additional funding”. Can we get clarification on this before we supply.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. As clarification is given, we would pray that more details also be given because when you are following for accountability, you need to know what went where. They cannot just lump them and say, “Other missions” - How many missions, which missions, are they going to get an equal measure, who is going to get what?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chairperson, usually when we have a long list of missions, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development when submitting the schedule gives you other missions and then they provide the detail later. If you give me time, I will go to the schedule which was submitted by Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We know what he is talking about. Madam Chairperson, the moment you talk about a vote, there must be an accounting officer. If you say the vote is 200, we must know the accounting officer for vote 200. Is there an accounting officer for “other missions”? You can see for Germany, we had Shs 22.6 million and we passed it. 

Is this chairperson of the Budget Committee, hon. Amos Lugoloobi, in order to come and lie to us that vote 200 is for other missions and yet he cannot specify what missions and then he asks us to appropriate?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Lugoloobi is presenting what came from the Minister of Finance. Can I invite the Minister of Finance to table the list of those additional missions here, so that we approve the money? Okay, can we defer this for now – 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: If the Minister of Finance has failed – (Interruption)

MR BAHATI: No, we have not failed, but we can defer it and in a few minutes we shall have it.

Vote 610: Buhweju District

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 173,666,580 be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for Financial Year 2014/2015. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Wage Shortfall across Votes

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, we are coming to the same problem - wage shortfall across votes. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chairperson, the schedule which the Ministry of Finance laid on the Table gives a lump sum to which they attach a detail -(Interjection)- I do not have the schedules right now, but that is information we can provide. That detail was considered by the committee; we cannot write every detail in the report. 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, there is something hon. Lugoloobi needs to appreciate; this money is being appropriated here and it is going to be accounted for. Therefore, when you say “across votes” –(Laughter)- honestly speaking, you have not appropriated because we appropriate per vote. Each vote should know what it is getting straight away from here.

Madam Chairperson, we are not operating from schedules nor are we considering them. Schedules are additional information. Maybe if he would like to say that he had limited time in the committee and would like to ask for more time -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to give information to my colleague in the profession. It is very unfortunate that a whole chairperson for five years comes here and talks of schedules. It shows he was not doing his work. 

Shortfall across votes – some have no accounting officers! The chairperson of the Budget Committee should have done far better by analysing these figures and attaching them to votes so that we are able to appropriate the money according to those votes, instead of coming here to say –(Interjections)- He is getting angry with us because of his failure. He wants to fight us on the Floor -

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, hon. Nandala; the Budget Committee comprises of the chairperson and vice chairperson, who are both responsible for commissions and omissions, and not only the chairperson.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Hon. Lugoloobi is fighting us; he is the one responsible.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, my prayer is that we give hon. Lugoloobi time to go back and stipulate these monies across votes including the missions abroad. He should be able to spread what has been given to him and attach it to votes, so that we know who is going to account for it and who is taking what. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I find this difficult as there is no vote attached. I do not know where we were sending this money without a vote. We defer this. 

Did I see the Minister for Lands? The Uganda Land Commission got development expenditure of Shs 20,475,000,000 and we are wondering what they are doing. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: There is information in the report. This figure comes from a report which was circulated to you. That is the first record, then the minister will supplement. 

Madam Chairperson, the question asked on vote 156, Uganda Land Commission, was: what is the 20,475,000,000 for? The answer is on page 23 of the main report and the justification is that it was for an additional requirement by the Uganda Land Commission to compensate Kampala Archdiocese for the land at Entebbe under Civil Aviation Authority.  

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Chairperson, I would like to confirm the report of the chairperson of the committee. (Laughter) The Catholic Church Kampala Archdiocese has been pressing Government to pay for that land in Entebbe. When the Pope was visiting and work had to be undertaken at Namugongo, Government was under extra pressure to provide funding for that work. A decision was taken that the Catholic Church be availed that money which came in form of a supplementary so that it could be used for work on Namugongo and a release was made to that effect. I confirm the submission of the chairperson.

Vote 156: Uganda Land Commission

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 20,475,000,000 be provided as supplementary development expenditure for Financial Year 2014/2015.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have two areas that we have deferred. One is vote 200, other missions additional funding. We have deferred it as we await the list. We would also like to know the details about the Uganda mission in Tripoli- how and where that money was spent? The other one is the wage shortfall across votes, which has no vote and therefore no accounting officer. We want details. We shall complete this after we have got that information.

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, when I raised this issue, my senior colleague, the Third Deputy Prime Minister, stood up and said this mission was shifted. I would like to refer you to the policy statement. It is not even here in the policy statement from the Ministry Foreign Affairs, vote 006, of 2016/2017. So the chairperson should take note of that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: This was money spent in 2014/2015. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, based on the submissions that I made today to the House concerning the escrow account regarding payments to Umeme, I suspect it should be under vote 144 on page 1, that is, Uganda Prisons Force and vote 145, Prisons Service.  They are two different votes, but all under prisons.

Madam Chairperson, I raised concern that the escrow account is being misused. We had requested the ministry to give us the bank reconciliation statement so that we could analyse how the money has been utilised for the purpose of payment of the energy services. Unfortunately, up to the time of presenting the minority report, I have not got any convincing bank reconciliation statement. However, I got a schedule of an empty list showing the names of companies and how much they were paid. The list, however, does not give the bank reconciliation, which would show how the escrow account is being utilised, so that we can see if what is being asked for by Uganda Prisons Service as payment to Umeme is genuine or not. 

Even under those, Madam Chairperson, there are no details. I do not know whether the chairman of the Budget Committee can convince this House that he had details with regards to Uganda Prisons Service under votes 145 and 144. This is because the escrow account issue has been hidden and it has not come out. Can you give me the information in case you did not give it to me like the last letter you got?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why don’t we go to the statutory expenditure; we have stood over the appropriation.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, before we go to the statutory expenditure, we would like to seek clarification. The escrow account is an account where Government deposits money for purposes of dealing with Umeme issues. I would like to ask the minister from which vote we get the money that goes to the escrow account, so that when we get to that vote we are able to deal with it. 

Madam Chairperson, I am raising this issue because I suspect that it is being hidden under Treasury operations. If it is there, we must deal with it under the Treasury. If you look at the next item, which is statutory expenditure, you will see item No.7 has court awards amounting to Shs 6,000,000,000. However, when you go under Treasury operations, you will get more court awards. 

The issue here is that we must find out how the Ministry of Finance is managing our accounts. They might have created a ghost account like Treasury operations to siphon public money. I would like to get help from you as a professional accountant and a Minister of Finance.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, the committee requested for a statement on the escrow account and we provided this detail to them, and hon. Cecilia Ogwal is a Member of that committee. Now hon. Cecilia Ogwal is asking for a bank statement, which we can provide tomorrow.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, by the time the minister sent to me this list, I had requested for a bank reconciliation statement in writing and this is the list I got; it is not a bank reconciliation statement. I actually thought it would be a shame for me to table such a document here. That is why I am still insisting that before we move on, can we have a bank reconciliation statement and not a list like this one?

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, we need your guidance regarding the leadership of the Budget Committee because the chairperson of the committee wrote to us and we replied to the chairperson. A member of the committee is now telling us on the Floor of the House that she needed different information. So, to whom should we answer?

THE CHAIRPERSON: You deal with the chairperson who communicates officially.

Vote 005: Ministry of Public Service

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 37,480,190,863 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2014/2015. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 007: ministry Of Justice And Constitutional Affairs- Court Awards

THE CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that Shs 6,000,000,000 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for Financial Year 2014/15 – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Before we move on, Madam Chairperson, I would like to know where the minister put the Shs 78,144,841,000 which was for court awards.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, I think that matter has been answered twice; it is under Treasury operations and we are coming to that.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the reason as to why I am asking is because the court awards are the responsibility of the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. Why should it be under Treasury operations? Why isn’t it under Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs?

THE CHAIRPERSON: We shall find out when we get there. They will have to tell us why the money is sitting there. I now put the question that Shs 6,000,000,000 be provided for as supplementary or recurrent expenditure for 2014/15.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 102: Electoral Commission

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Shs 10,000,000,000 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for 2014/2015. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 103: Inspectorate of Government

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Shs 874 million be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for 2014/2015.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 130: Treasury Operations

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that a total sum of Shs 389,095,885,902 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for FY 2014/2015 -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, in addition to Shs 12.192 billion which was disallowed, we would like to add Shs 78,144,841,000. Therefore, the disallowed amount would become Shs 90,336,841,000. So, we can approve Shs 310,951,044,902. The justification was raised long ago.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, the former Leader of the Opposition knows that this money – Let me first say that we are working with the Office of the Attorney-General to draw up a strategy on how to resolve this issue once and for all. We have court orders amounting to over Shs 400 billion in arrears. Our strategy is to have a plan over four to five years and start paying first in, first out. On that, we agree with Parliament. 

On this issue of mandamus orders, however, which actually means an order to the Secretary to the Treasury, the lawyers manoeuvre and get these and we have no control over them. We cannot start disobeying court; so when the mandamus order came, we paid through the Treasury operations because this was an order to the Secretary to the Treasury. The pressures come from all over, - hon. Nandala-Mafabi knows this - including from that cooperative union -(Laughter)- and we honour them. They come and we pay them. I would like to suggest that – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, it is true that we got compensation for Bugisu Cooperative Union –(Interjections)– Why don’t you get for West Mengo? The Minister for Trade and Industry is here and he knows that the compensation money for Bugisu Cooperative Union went through the Ministry of Trade and Industry and not the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

The argument we are trying to put across is: why should the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development get involved in payments meant for the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs? We are not refusing the supplementary request but we are saying, please, let us crosscheck the Shs 78 billion - did it follow the normal procedures? Was it first in, first out?

I am happy that the Attorney-General raised the issue that mandamus orders may be rejected because the Government may not be in position to pay all the money at once – (Interruption)

MR KASULE: He is my Member in the committee. May I seek information from hon. Nandala-Mafabi on whether we should resolve as Parliament that sectors and ministries always budget for their court awards and not the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Hon. Robert Kasule is my chairman in the Committee on Finance and I know he is very intelligent. We are saying that court awards are for the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the Government lawyer is the Attorney-General.

Madam Chairperson, we are saying that in order for us to be able to move forward, we should remove the Shs 78 billion, allow the other amount to go through and we move on. The Attorney-General will come back and deal with this Shs 78 billion. That is all. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, we are open for any investigations. However, I think that the issue of saying, “Why did you pay this first?” has been explained. It is a mandamus order and it was paid from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development because we had to protect the Secretary to the Treasury.

I would like to convince hon. Nandala-Mafabi that we can go ahead and pass this but institute an investigation, if we want. We are open to this. However, the money has been paid. The Secretary to the Treasury was put at “gun point” by the mandamus order – (Interjections) – “Pay or you go to prison.”  How would we have solved this issue?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. By the grace of God, the Speaker of the Ugandan Parliament is a lawyer who knows that we operate a dual system. By virtue of the Government Proceedings Act, the legal representative of Government is the Attorney-General. Therefore, when you have a matter against Government, you sue the Attorney-General. When judgement is issued, it is against the Attorney-General. The office that is supposed to pay for and on behalf of Government ordinarily is the Attorney-General.

However, I said that we operate a dual system. In the event that the Attorney-General delays, neglects or fails to pay, a judgement debtor has another option called a writ of mandamus. The writ of mandamus is a writ issued against the Treasury officer of accounts. It is a binding court order. You go after the “pocket”, after the person who controls the purse. The person who controls the purse in this case is not the Attorney-General but the Treasury officer of accounts.

To suggest that we deduct Shs 78 billion would be to suggest that as Parliament, we sit here and tell Government not to obey court orders. That would be unconstitutional – I am trying to find parliamentary language to describe it; since I am expiring, I may have forgotten parliamentary language. (Laughter) It would be rude and not advisable for us to constitute ourselves into an organ that advises Government that it can neglect a court order. Strictly put, the Government cannot choose whether or not to obey a court order. We have only one option, which is to obey a court order. Whether Parliament can constitute itself into an organ to investigate the validity of a court order is another matter. (Interruption) I will take that information. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, this Government is very interesting. The information that I would like to give hon. Odoi-Oywelowo is that we do accept that there was a mandamus order at work on some of these. However, a majority of these cases did not result into mandamus orders – [Ms Cecilia Ogwal: “And he is a lawyer.”] Yes, I am a lawyer and he knows it. I am not an advocate but a lawyer.  

The reason as to why we are talking about this is because a majority of the payments of big amounts were not due to mandamus orders. One of the documents that I gave you was just a court order asking for confirmation. They wrote a letter without mandamus orders but in two days, a payment was effected.

Madam Chairperson, although my brother may be right, we are saying that some of the cases do not result into orders of mandamus. This is why we said that we should stay the Shs 78 billion and confirm what I am saying. We have even discovered that Bashasha was not supposed to be paid as part of an order of mandamus. Therefore, they were using these mandamus orders just for the sake of it.

The information that I would like to give my brother is, even if it is mandamus orders, you charge the account of the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. This is the reason why we are asking about the circumstances that led to this. At an appropriate time, this money will be approved because it has not been written off. However, can we check it further? That is all we are asking for.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: I thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. Whether or not all the payments that constitute the Shs 78 billion were as a result of mandamus orders is a matter that is lost. Madam Speaker, you know for a fact that we have the Office of the Auditor-General; when Government expenditures are made, they are subject to audit as a post-mortem issue. The Auditor-General will investigate this account and render a report to this House and the House will still have occasion to deal with it. 

I beseech my brother, the learned Nandala-Mafabi; there is no lawyer worth his salt who can recommend to this House that the Government should not pay. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, are you saying that this entire sum was as a result of orders of mandamus?

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I think hon. Nandala-Mafabi did us a favour by laying some two letters on the Table. This one is in respect to the fourth case of Shs 24,433,321,714.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is Moses Ocip -

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Yes. The third last is Shs 23,117,478 - those ones have letters. The other one is the one of James Rwanyarare. The rest do not have letters and that is what I am asking for, Madam Speaker. 

The essence of the minority report on this particular subject is that we are not refusing to allow the mandamus orders to be paid but we are saying, can we have our documents in order. Can we have the mandamus orders?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Oh, you want the writ of mandamus to be brought here? 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Yes; that is the reason why I have been insisting that yes, we can allow but we should back ourselves up. Otherwise, people will ask, “Why did Parliament approve under mandamus when there were no letters?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, I am a member of the Budget Committee. The Budget Committee requested the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to provide evidence of the mandamus orders and the ministry provided evidence to the committee. The chairperson is there; we sat as a committee and we went through the evidence.

MR KAKOOZA: After listening to what hon. Odoi-Oywelowo has submitted and what hon. Nandala-Mafabi is saying, I would like to say that all this is public money and it is subject to audit. Section 18 of the National Audit Act says, “Audit of public monies in private organisations and bodies 
The Auditor-General may inquire into, examine, investigate and report as he or she considers necessary, on the expenditure of public monies disbursed…”

If this money was disbursed and it can be audited and it is found out that something was wrong, Parliament will be privy to the report showing that the money was not disbursed in the right way.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chairperson, we inquired into this matter in detail and hon. Cecilia Ogwal has actually been attending these meetings. We actually went to the extent of inviting the Treasury department to the committee meeting to show us how they paid the money and they showed us the details. That is why we deducted the Shs 1.8 billion, which was reported earlier, from the Shs 80 billion. 

We went further to write to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to give further evidence and they provided it. There is a letter from the Attorney-General to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. This letter is dated 13 June 2013 and the title is, “Settlement of court cases with mandamus orders against Government of Uganda.” 

In the above letter, the Attorney-General presents as follows- this was Peter Nyombi-: “Following the Government delay to pay various decrees and orders of court, the High Court has since issued various mandamus orders directing the Attorney-General and the Secretary to the Treasury to pay the following judgement creditors…” and they all listed here. Unfortunately, they differ from what he gave you. His list contradicts what we have here. The list I have here includes the following cases:
1. 	Kakyomya Farm and Tea Estates v. the Attorney-General and the Secretary to the Treasury. 
2. 	Hon. Sitenda Ssebalu v. the Attorney-General and the Secretary to the Treasury. 
3. 	Ocip Moses v. the Attorney-General. 
4. 	Kananura Joseph and others v. the Attorney-General. 
5. 	Lt Ben Kachope and others v. the Attorney-General and Uganda Wildlife Authority. 
6. 	Amos Bakeine and others v. the Attorney-General and Uganda Wildlife Authority. 
7. 	A.K.P.M Lutaaya v. the Attorney-General. 
8. 	Tumusiime Fidelis v. the Attorney-General. (Interjections) These are the orders of mandamus; you were not listening. 
9. 	Yovan Bwambale v. the Attorney-General. 
10. 	Vichard Misalaru v. the Attorney-General. 

I am reading these because they do not match with what you presented there. You were presenting a non-authentic document. 
11. 	The Attorney-General v. Senkaali George. 
12. 	Annet Zimbisa v. the Attorney-General - (Interjection)- Let me finish my submission. You allowed him to submit his. I gave you this information, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, in writing. I wrote to you about this information and you are not adducing it. Instead, you chose to give information that we have not shared in the committee.
13.	Walusimbi Wilberforce and 6,367 others. 

This letter was signed by hon. Peter Nyombi. There are others relating to the compensation of Dr James Rwanyarare; the former Ankole ranching scheme; Mr Charles Berwanaho v. the Attorney-General; and Victoria General Repairs East Africa Limited v. the Attorney-General. 

Therefore, Madam Chairperson, we probed into this matter in detail and this is what we received. I shared it with the Opposition Chief Whip in writing and I have not received any objection. I am, therefore, surprised that she is coming here to present alternative evidence. I thank you.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, I want to remind the chairperson that when we discussed this matter, I wrote a letter to you indicating that under the committee minute 3.4, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was requested to provide to the committee the orders of mandamus and receipts as evidence of clearance for the cases considered in the supplementary schedule 1. Those are the cases you are now reading. We have this list but what we are saying is, can the minister provide to the committee the mandamus orders with all these details? I put it to you in writing.

Madam Chairperson, no orders of mandamus and receipts were presented to the committee. I would like the chairman to tell the truth in the Name of God, the Creator of Heaven and Earth. No orders of mandamus and receipts were presented to the committee. I requested in writing and it was contained in our minute 3.4. Instead, the ministry provided to the committee letters to the Attorney-General and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development requesting for the settlement of cases. That is the letter that was given to the committee. 

Can you please tell this Parliament the truth so that we decide based on the truth? Do not distort the facts because you would have dented the image of the institution and that of the committee. I am under obligation to defend the image of the institution and that of the committee because I am a member there. I do not care what interests you have. What I am trying to tell you is that what we asked for in the meeting is in the minutes of your committee and my request has not been replied to. The minister is here to confirm this.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I am happy that hon. Cecilia Ogwal, the Leader of the Opposition, has put the case forward. What we are trying to put across is simple. I know he is not a lawyer but court orders are court orders. There is an order instructing Government to pay and that is a court order. Mandamus orders are of a different nature - (Interjection)- The problem with hon. Amos Lugoloobi is that he wants to be very intelligent when he is really not. What we are trying to say is that a court order, which can say, “Nandala, you have won a case, this is the amount you…” -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I do not know whether it has been customary to present the writ of mandamus here. Maybe we can agree that in the future, if the judgment and the order are accompanied by a writ of mandamus, I think that writ should also be presented.

That list by the Attorney-General is just a list. Where is the actual writ because each case has got a writ? Attorney-General, can we agree that the writ should be brought?

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Chairperson, as you can see, I am really quiet on this matter. As you all know, the mandate to settle court awards falls under the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. However, the settlement of the writs of mandamus, according to the Government Proceedings Act, which are always directed against the Secretary to the Treasury, are against him. 

If there are any other payments, which are not covered by writs of mandamus- I know there could be a number of them; for example, if there was an agreement where an order has very high interest rates, Government is going to suffer and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development can negotiate with the decree holder, they could do so in consultation with the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. In this case, we would settle to save Government from further costs. I know that some payments have gone through that way and have been settled by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development without necessarily going through the Ministry of Justice and Constitution Affairs but with our concurrence.

However, I want to say that for the future, it should be clear. Settlement of court awards should remain the mandate of the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. However, because orders of mandamus are directed against the Secretary to the Treasury and he is the one who knows where he can get the money, whether it is appropriated or not, whether he is seeking a supplementary or not, he can settle them himself. We can rectify the matter and say that for the future, unless there is a writ of habeas corpus, all settlement of court awards should be the preserve of the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.

I also agree that where the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development settles a court award, they normally let us know but for the purposes of this House, they should tender in evidence of a mandamus order.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much. Honourable members, now we know what to do for the future.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, he has spoken well but the future starts today. We have people in Teso who have suffered. We shall allow this later but let us put aside the Shs 78.144 billion for now so that we compare- Who did this? Where was the mandamus order? Why did you leave out X? 

We are forgiving you for the future but we can only do that when we have got the culprit. Otherwise, Madam Chairperson, Shs 80 billion is a lot of money. Let us scrutinise the Shs 78 billion and see where exactly the orders of mandamus are? If we do not do this, impunity will continue and this has been going on. If I had referred you to the Hansard, you would read that the recommendation of the committee was that compensation should be first in, first out. 

We have got the culprit and this is the first time. We should deal with it. If they bring the evidence tomorrow, we shall clear it next week. However for now, we should park it so that we can move on and approve the remaining ones. We are not saying that we have rejected it. At an appropriate time, it will be dealt with.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, I have listened carefully to both sides and I want to agree with hon. Nandala-Mafabi. If we are saying that we need an investigation into this matter, this is the beginning point. It is very clear that the circumstances and the intent under which this expenditure was made are certainly doubtful. If we approve it, we will have regularised this expenditure. 

I am of the view that we do not approve it so that we do not regularise it. By doing so, we would have helped the Auditor-General, whom hon. Kakooza was talking about, to query this and subject it to further investigation. Therefore, Madam Chairperson, I would like to appeal to you that we take hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s proposal and we approve with the exception of the Shs 78 billion. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR KAKOOZA: The chairperson of the committee reported to this House that they verified certain amounts of money and some money was not approved. I think we should go with what was verified or where they are sure that they received a record. Where they have not received a record, we should not regularise the expenditure. 

They are saying in their report that they requested for Shs 400 billion but there was no money. The committee went and verified and found out that it was Shs 78 billion instead of Shs 80 billion. They deducted Shs 1.855 billion and the other monies were not approved by the committee. I think the amount provided for was based on the evidence, which was provided in the committee. They cannot provide money where there was no evidence.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Whoever gave you that information was not correct. The information, which came to the committee, is what is contained in the report. We were given only the figure of Shs 78,144,841,000 and that is what is here.

Madam Chairperson, to reinforce what has now come up on the Floor of Parliament, it is not good for a person listening out there to hear that this Parliament has approved payments for orders of mandamus without letters, receipts or the orders. In addition, if I were to read the list of the lawyers who are responsible, it is embarrassing. We should not even record them on the Hansard of this Parliament. They are all from the west, apart from Omara Atubo who was given the smallest of the figures. In any case, he was a former MP. It is very embarrassing and shows that something wrong is going on. To make it worse, even the Attorney-General you are talking about also comes from the west. Should we put it in the Hansard? (Laughter)

Madam Chairperson, would it be correct for the image of this institution? It is not proper. Let us find a way of whitewashing it. We know the mess has been done but let us do it smartly and not so bluntly.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the Attorney-General got up and explained and I would like to support him for saying Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should not do what they are not supposed to do. He has been a bit objective.

To help hon. Kakooza, the Public Finance and Accountability Act is very clear on how to account; I think he is reading it upside-down. What hon. Musasizi raised was the best option. We are saying we have not rejected the Shs 78 billion but let the process begin.

MR OGWANG: Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank hon. Cecilia Ogwal and hon. Nandala-Mafabi. However, I would like to make one observation. With due respect to the debate going on, there is a certain sectarian statement, which we are beginning to make in this country. Whatever we are discussing here is about the orders of mandamus. Those law firms are owned by people of high integrity; so they should be treated as law firms without us westernising them. If not, we are going to plunge this country into a situation which we might fail to handle one day. If you westernise this, isn’t hon. Musasizi, who has supported a proposal by hon. Nandala-Mafabi, from the west? This is a personal observation.

What we are taking into account here is a good idea but I would like to appeal to our senior Members such as my mother, Imat - I call her my mother because my mother is a strong supporter of UPC to date and she always talks about hon. Cecilia Ogwal. I would really like to appeal to our senior Members to stop tribalising everything. I thank you.

MR KWIZERA: Madam Chairperson, I am a nationalist and I do not have a tribe. What is important is if a payment reference is made to a document, the document must be available. Therefore, when we are talking about mandamus orders informing the process of payment, those documents must have been seen in the committee. If we did not see them in the committee, we cannot pay because we would actually be regularising an illegality. 

The chairman is here and he said that he has minutes of the meeting. In the minutes of the meeting, we must have those mandamus orders reflected. Therefore, refer to the documents and put them here so that we total up how many orders add up to Shs 78 billion and we clear that. If the amount is less, then we do not. That is why we have minutes of the proceedings of the committees. Can we refer to those documents and we see how much money is quoted? Thank you.

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, for us to move forward as one Uganda with steady progress, I propose that if this information can be got tomorrow, we should allow the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Attorney-General to come back with a reconciled position and we can conclude this matter tomorrow.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Chairperson, I am made to understand that the entire amount of Shs 78 billion was payment arising from cases where there were mandamus orders. If that is so, then the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development paid with our concurrence, as contained in a letter addressed to them on 13 June 2013. In this letter, we said, “Do kindly take note that the amounts arising from the above-mentioned cases are statutory and charged directly on the consolidated account and do not require appropriation by Parliament. The mandamus order, in essence, mandates the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury, who is the custodian of the consolidated account, to pay the judgment creditor least contempt of court proceedings be initiated against him.” 

This is consistent with what I said earlier. Wherever there is a mandamus order, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development can pay from whatever source without even referring to the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs because the order is directed against the Secretary to the Treasury. Since the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has affirmed that the entire Shs 78 billion arose from cases where there were mandamus orders, then -[Mr Nandala-Mafabi: “Let me give you information, Attorney-General. I have the letter.”]-

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let him finish and then you can rebut.

MR RUKUTANA: Unless evidence to the contrary is brought here, I pray that we pass this. This is because I consulted with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and they said that the entire Shs 78 billion was derived from cases covered by mandamus orders. As I said, we agreed with them - Actually, we did not agree with them; we requested them to settle those orders. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I am privy to the letter dated 13 June 2013. I am going to compare both and you will know what we were saying. Kakyomya Farm and Tea Estates is not among those that they are talking about. The amount of money here is $52,534. That is about-

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where is that? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It is in the letter that he is talking about, which is annex 4. 

Fifty-four is not here and if you multiply this by the then rate of Shs 2500, it is about Shs 125 million. However, what we are talking about are billions.

The second one is Ocip Moses and others v. the Attorney-General. The amount of money is Shs 44,760,000,000. I want to see the Shs 44 billion here.

The next one is Kananura Joseph with Shs 372 million and it is on both sides. The other one is Kachope and others. Kachope is not included in what we are raising. The next ones are Amos Bakeine, A.K Lutaaya and Tumusiime Fidelis. Vichard is also not here.  Annet Zimbisa -

Madam Chairperson, what we are raising are cases like Picfare, Kaliisa, Victoria - mention it. These are the big amounts of money. Therefore, I want to tell the Attorney-General that he could be right in saying that some of the small figures could be here but we are looking at the huge animals. That is why we are saying, since you have raised this, why don’t we put it aside for purposes of us moving forward? We can deal with this matter at an appropriate time. We can move on with what we agreed while the next process is undertaken. It is for the good of all of us. 

I would like to correct the impression made by my young brother, hon. Peter Ogwang. We are not tribalistic. I have not raised anything on tribalism. Even my brother, hon. Musasizi, has not talked about tribalism. I am one of those who cannot talk about tribalism –(Interruption)

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, hon. Nandala-Mafabi just a few hours ago read the list of lawyers insinuating that from their names – Bashasha, Babadisi- you can tell where these people come from. Now he has turned around saying he is not tribalistic when everybody knew that this is actually where he was pointing. Is it in order for a leader, the Secretary-General of FDC, to stand on the Floor of this House and be tribalistic the way he has been?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the tribal sentiments have been identified in our contributions. Let us move on. What do we do about this money?

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, we have two options. The first one is that you could allow us to bring all the evidence tomorrow that these were mandamus orders and that will be cleared. We do not want to create any impression that we fear any investigation. 

Secondly, you can instruct the Auditor-General, who is our officer, to look at it in three days and then we will have a report about this issue.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Therefore, in principle, we defer completion of the whole supplementary budget until tomorrow or three days later? What do the Members think? Is tomorrow feasible? You know it is coming to 7.00p.m.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Chairperson, what would we like to achieve? Are we doubtful that the Shs 78 billion, assuming that some of it was not covered by mandamus orders, was not properly expended? 

As I told you, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, whenever they are paying or settling a court order, consult with us. It could be true that some of the items are covered by mandamus orders. It could as well be that there was a reason as to why the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs asked the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to settle a particular differential amount –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I have high respect for my brother, hon. Rukutana, and I always remind him of the issue of transferring NSSF to Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and he knows this. 

He has said that the mandamus orders are directed to the Secretary to the Treasury and the others to the Attorney-General’s Chambers. When they come to you, you could say, “Yes, you have consulted us, remit this money to the accounting officer of the Attorney-General’s Chambers.” Therefore, is the minister in order to take us back to what he said, that mandamus orders are directed to the Secretary to the Treasury the others to the accounting officer of the Attorney-General’s Chambers? Is he in order?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, the background to this is that our Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs has reported several times that they are not satisfied with the selective settlement of cases. There is a suspicion that it may not necessarily be the orders of mandamus that are causing these payments but selective decisions; for example, paying the Karimojong and leaving out the Baganda. That is the background to this matter.

Members do not believe that the sequence of these payments was done in a justifiable manner. That is the feeling of this House. The minister said he wants three days and we can give him three days.

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, the minister who paid the money has conceded. I do not find the relevance of the Attorney-General who did not pay the money -

THE CHAIRPERSON: They are partners in payment. (Laughter)

MR OKUPA: Are they partners in crime or partners in payment? Remember in the beginning he was saying that sometimes the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development do not consult them so they are the ones who pay. Let us go with what hon. Bahati has proposed. If they can provide the evidence by tomorrow, well and good; if they cannot, the Auditor-General can handle it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The minister has requested for three days to have the Auditor-General look up the documents and present them to this House. We shall complete this after we have received those documents. Therefore, we defer this matter. Thank you very much, honourable members. Let us defer the issue of Treasury operations, pensions and gratuity. Thank you, Members. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, since the minister is going to come back tomorrow, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that he looks at something in the schedule which has no vote number? Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that you advise him to insert a vote? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, let us leave all these issues because even the one of pensions and gratuity has no vote. Look through all your submissions and attach votes to them so that we know who the accounting officer for this fund is before we appropriate. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, we now have the schedules, which you requested for earlier on- missions abroad, wages and pension. However, it is a long list. I do not know whether we should - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us defer it. You will distribute those to the Members so that when we meet next time, we will all have the information. You only have one copy. 

MR BAHATI: We only refer to the schedule; we do not read everything. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Just issue the schedule for the missions, pensions and wage shortfalls. Honourable members, let us stop here for now. Let us give the minister time.
 
MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply do report thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

6.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered supplementary schedules 1, 2 and 3 of the Financial Year 2014/2015 and passed some items and deferred others. I beg to report. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

6.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of Supply be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

MOTION THAT THE HOUSE RESOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY TO CONSIDER THE SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO. 1 FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2015/2016

THE SPEAKER: It is coming to 7.00p.m. How long is that report? It is a big report; let us handle it tomorrow. The House is adjourned to 2 o’clock tomorrow for completion of the issues on the Order Paper. 

(The House rose at 6.58 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 7 April 2016 at 2.00 p.m.)

 





