Thursday, 21 April 2016

Parliament met at 3.04 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I am delighted to see the reports on the Order Paper. I hope that we can deal with them all today and then send them to the Budget Committee.

I also have some good news. We have had an addition to the Parliamentary family. Hon. Jacqueline Amongin gave birth to a baby boy in the last few days. She sent you greetings and asked me to inform you. Thank you.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE INSURANCE BILL, 2016

3.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Insurance Bill, 2016” be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: It has been seconded.

MR BAHATI: It is accompanied by a certificate of financial implications.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. I do not know whether to send it to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs or the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Okay, it is sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I would like the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to give them support where necessary. 

Honourable minister, we are winding up and this Bill may be one of those that will feature as unfinished business because it has come at this stage. However, I will send it to the committee anyway.

PRESENTATION AND CONSIDERATION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2016/2017

3.08
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Dr Sam Okuonzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to lay on the Table the minutes of the committee meetings on the ministerial policy statement for financial year 2016/207. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, before we come to the figures, I would like to draw the attention of the House to the attachments because there are a lot of issues there. The first annex is a list of international organisations to which Uganda is a member. The second one is on Uganda’s properties abroad and their current status. There is also an update on them but because of time, we will not go through these.

I would also like to draw the attention of the House to the report of Ugandans detained or imprisoned in the United Arab Emirates. This matter has been on this Floor for quite some time. Annex IV is a report from the Embassy of Japan concerning one Ugandan who was tortured and has been coming to Parliament for almost three years. That report gives a highlight on some of the issues that affect Ugandans abroad. Annex V gives a list of 127 Ugandans imprisoned or arrested for drug smuggling in China. Annex VI is a list of protocols and treaties of the East African Community. Finally, there is a list of protocols and treaties of the United Nations and their ratification status by Uganda.

Madam Speaker, the report on the ministerial policy statement of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for the financial year 2016/2017 appraises the ministry’s budget performance for 2016, the challenges that the ministry has faced and its plan. The overall total budget that was sent to the House for approval was Shs 147.6 billion for this current financial year. For the coming financial year, 2016/2017, the overall budget is Shs 179.454 billion.

Allow me to go through some of the highlights of this ministerial statement. The main issue we found was that there was overall inadequacy in the performance of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs regarding plans. 

On page 10, we have a list of unfunded priorities. Madam Speaker, it is a fallacy to say that the budget has got unfunded priorities, but that is the term that has been used. We have decided to use the term “budget shortfalls” and these are the items that have disturbed us. We have decided to remove five out of the 10 unfunded priorities and recommend them to be included in the 2016/2017 budget. I would like to go through some of the unfunded priorities briefly: 

a) 	The Northern Corridor project and its coordination. The total budget is reflected on page 10 of the report of the Committee on Foreign Affairs. It was uploaded on your iPads.

b) 	Opening of new missions in Lusaka, Brasilia, Dubai, and a liaison office in Arusha and in Goma. 

c) 	Commercial diplomacy pilot project. 

d) 	Arrears on contributions to international organisations.

e) 	ICGLR post-summit activities. 

f) 	Travel abroad for summits, state visits, conferences and symposia. 

g) 	Loss on poundage for missions abroad, that is, the money that gets lost as a result of foreign exchange, is Shs 20 billion. 

h) 	Foreign Service allowances. 

i) 	Education allowance. 

j) 	Joint Cross-Border Cooperation Commission (JCBCC) for the Uganda-Tanzania border. 

k) 	Universal periodic review of human rights. 

The total amount of money that is being discussed here is Shs 89,301,320,643. The committee considered how this matter could be resolved and we agreed generally that all these could not be funded in one year. We have recommended that at least the following five items need to be included in the 2016/2017 budget:

1. 	Opening new missions in Lusaka, Brasilia, Dubai, Arusha and Goma. Brasilia was included because in the whole of the South American continent, we do not have any mission, and that is now an economically strategic region for the whole world.

	Lusaka was included because Zambia is a very important area for us and currently, it is being manned from Dar-es-Salaam. Dubai was also included because a lot of trade activities are going on there and we do not have an embassy in Dubai, therefore we need a consulate there. Arusha was included because, again, there are many activities taking place there. Goma in Congo was included because the western part of Congo is about 3000 kilometres from the east and a lot of activities with Uganda take place in the eastern side of Congo. Therefore, we need a liaison office or a consulate in the eastern part and Goma is a strategic position for this consulate. 

2. 	We have the commercial diplomacy pilot project. The ministry intends to pilot its new commercial mandate of promoting trade and tourism and mobilising resources from abroad. This is going to start with an amount of Shs 2.3 billion. Opening of the missions will require Shs 8.5 billion. 

3. 	The loss on poundage for missions abroad as a result of exchange of currencies. This is Shs 20 billion. Basically, this is a problem that should be directly addressed by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development but it now falls under the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. We have made recommendations that this money be availed; otherwise, the money that is being sent will have no meaning to the people who use it.

4. 	There is also the Foreign Service allowance component. Madam Speaker, our members are poorly paid and I think this has been said many times. Therefore, we are recommending that Shs 6.491 billion be allocated to enhance, to some extent, Foreign Service allowances. 

5. 	The same issue above applies to the education allowance, which will be Shs 2.6 billion.

The key highlight of this policy statement is that we are requesting, within the current resource allocation but also from new resources, that a total of Shs 40 billion be added to this budget because of these unfunded priorities. The rest of the unfunded priorities can be staggered over the next two to three years. As I have said, from page 10 up to page 11, there is a list of unfunded programmes that the ministry intends to undertake but cannot do so because the National Budget Framework Paper has put a limit on the activities that they can do.

I would also like to say that we have ensured that this document is aligned to the National Development Plan II. We also have a report, which shows that this document and the ministry’s performance are in line with gender parity and equity requirements. 

Let us go to the last page, which is the conclusion; the committee recommends the approval of Shs 179,454,053,000 for the financial year 2016/2017 to enable it deliver its mandate. The details are: For the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, we bring to the House for approval Shs 31,469,745,000. For missions abroad, we bring to the House for approval Shs 147,984,308,000. So the grand total is Shs 179,454,053,000. Madam Speaker, I beg to report. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. If there are no comments, we send it to the Committee on Budget. However, personally I am delighted to hear that finally we shall have a consulate in Dubai. I think we have been the only country missing, and of course, also in Brazil. 

Honourable members, today we have many guests. We have students and teachers from Mwanga Child Development Project. They come from Bukooli North and are represented by hon. Baka and hon. Justine Lumumba. You are welcome to Parliament. (Applause)

We also have Kawempe Muslim Secondary School. They are represented by the Imam, hon. Latif Sebaggala, and hon. Nabilah Naggayi. You are welcome. (Applause)

We also have students and teachers of SOS Children’s Village represented by Prof. Gilbert Bukenya and hon. Seninde. You are welcome. (Applause)

In the same Gallery, we have students and teachers of Progressive Secondary School, Kitintale in Nakawa Division represented by the Attorney-General, hon. Fred Ruhindi, and hon. Nabilah Naggayi. You are welcome. (Applause)

3.26
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I was equally very excited when I heard the news about the opening of a new mission or consulate in Goma, Congo. Honourable members, other than Uganda, the rest of the countries within this region already have consulates in Goma. The UK, France, USA and all other countries except Uganda have consulates there and yet we are the nearest. This should have been done yesterday. Unfortunately, for that sector, this is an unfunded priority. It is, therefore, very important that we are very clear and serious to ensure that these two missions are opened immediately. 

You all know what is happening in Dubai. The other time when problems befell many women from the African continent, many countries rushed to that place and took their girls away but Ugandan girls are still there. Many Ugandans, especially business people, have problems in Dubai and they do not have anybody to assist them. It is, therefore, very important that money be availed to fund this unfortunately unfunded priority. If it is a priority then why is it not funded?

Secondly, it is imperative that we bring it to bear on the Ministry of Foreign Affairs that about Shs 15 billion has been put aside for the last three years specifically to develop properties in our foreign missions. Unfortunately, we have lost very prime properties or land for that matter. In Addis Ababa, we were given two and half acres of land and we paid money worth Shs 800 million but we lost that land to private developers. What happened? We need to ask some of those questions.

In Juba, we lost Shs 1 billion. We paid money that was supposed to develop a huge property and we do not know what happened. We lost another prime plot in New Delhi. We were given free land but failed to develop it and it was taken away. In Abuja, it is the same story. We have lost prime property in central Beijing - the most prime area. We were given almost free property and we just had to pay little money; was it $5 million? We failed to pay this and now we have to rent that same property. It is very unfortunate.

Finally, Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs should prioritise some of these issues with regard to getting property in some of the areas. At the end of the day, all of us are proud to go to an area like Kigali where we have fantastic property. We feel very good. In Pretoria, until recently, when you visited your property, you felt good. In Kenya, we are still struggling with a court case for our own property, which we cannot develop. 

I think the Ministry of Foreign Affairs needs to pull up their socks. This House should come out very strongly to ensure that we get them the necessary resources, especially with regard to opening of new missions in Dubai and Goma. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.31
MR MOSES BALYEKU (NRM, Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As we move to establish new embassies and missions, we should also be able to allow them earn some income. We do not issue visas in our embassies at all and yet there is too much congestion in Entebbe. When planes land, the visa queues are so long. Let us empower our embassies to earn some income. Look at the figures mentioned for each mission and embassy; they do not have any substantial income apart from money from accreditation of documents, and that is in the Arab world. Therefore, we should allow our embassies to issue visas. 

This will also help us to know what kind of investors are coming to our country. We have investors who do not have investments in their pockets but are coming here to get investment. They come as investors but in actual sense they have no capacity. Our embassies would be able to help us ascertain whether they are good investors with capacity. They would be able to do due diligence, instead of people coming to Entebbe and lining up in long queues. This will also make a lot of economic sense and even the ambassadors can have some petty cash. 

Sometimes these embassies are totally broke and cannot even afford fuel. There is a time we were in Paris and the embassy did not have any money. It is a shame for an embassy with an accounting officer not to have finances. If they had some money coming from visa issuance, it would make work a little easier. I thank you.

3.32
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee. I would like to add to what my colleague, hon. Byarugaba, said. 

You may recall that we had an embassy in Belgium but it was condemned and razed to the ground due to lack of maintenance. Secondly, Government spent huge amounts of money on a market in Juba- not on Ugandan soil. We raised our voices asking why that money was not on a Ugandan property. The same foreign affairs ministry objected and constructed the market in Juba. However, I am surprised that in all the subsequent reports, nothing is mentioned concerning the Juba market. Taxpayers spent Shs 4 billion constructing a market in a foreign country. We leave our own and construct for others while ours are condemned.

Madam Speaker, at least Idi Amin was able to get these prime properties for Uganda. You know, he is being vilified everyday but at least he had some positives. We who are educated nowadays are the ones looking on as our properties are going to waste –(Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On a trip to the United States of America, particularly to the United Nations (UN), I was introduced to Uganda House, opposite the United Nations headquarters. I entered in to greet and register my presence to the ambassador and Ugandans there. 

I found out that first of all, the building was inaugurated by Amin. Secondly, on the issue of vilifying Idi Amin, I found that attempts had been made to cut off the name of Idi Amin from a building that was inaugurated by His Excellency General Field Marshal- rubbing off the good deeds of a good doer, Idi Amin. Thank you for bringing that up here. That is the information I would like to give you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Fungaroo, I am sure you are happy that the attempt failed.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I think we need an explanation as to where we put the Shs 4 billion that was meant to nurse South Sudanese in their own country while our properties are being condemned.

In addition, we are seeing an increment of the budget from Shs 147 billion in 2015/2016 to Shs 179 billion, which is good progress. However, we need to be told what these additional monies catered for if all the other priorities are not funded. 

Also, how can we be in arrears of Shs 46 billion in our contributions to international organisations when Uganda has been the head of the UN General Assembly? Our own hon. Sam Kuteesa, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, has been the President of the UN General Assembly and up to now, we have not been given a report on his contributions to the UN. What we are only seeing are arrears of contributions. What did he do there? (Laughter)

Lastly, Madam Speaker, there are Ugandans stuck at the Uganda-Kenya border allegedly because they do not have yellow fever cards. We are here passing the budget of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and nobody is talking about these Ugandans who cannot cross and do business; they are hindered. We can remove restrictions but once your own countrymen and women are stuck - we are under the East African Community and yet there are restrictions; hundreds of Ugandans are being stopped at the border as we speak and Government is not coming up to explain this. How can we go ahead yet our very own are not settled? (Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, hon. Ssekikubo. I rise to provide information. It is true that there are some Ugandans who are being denied entry into Kenya, especially. I also received a phone call from a journalist when I was entering Parliament because he did not carry a yellow fever vaccination card as proof that they have been vaccinated against yellow fever.

Madam Speaker, there is a resurgence of yellow fever in Africa, especially in Angola, the eastern part of DRC and also in Uganda. We have confirmed cases of yellow fever in Masaka District in the two subcounties of Buwunga and Mukungwe. One case has been confirmed in Rukungiri District in Kebisoni Sub-County. Five cases were confirmed in Masaka; two people have died and three are hospitalised in Masaka Regional Referral Hospital.

Due to this resurgence, many countries have raised a red flag and require a yellow fever vaccination card before you can enter those countries, including Kenya. In Uganda, we have been releasing statements to the public that in order to travel outside the country, you need proof that you have been vaccinated against yellow fever. Also, in order to enter into Uganda, you must provide proof.

We are going to liaise with the Government of Kenya to see how Ugandans who are stuck can be assisted. However, it will be a requirement and they have three options. One is for them to come back and get vaccinated; the other is to be vaccinated and they are quarantined for 10 days; or they are vaccinated and allowed into the country and they are followed up for 10 days.

Yellow fever is a very serious illness and we cannot compromise public health requirements. However, we have taken note of the issue and we shall liaise with the Government of Kenya to see how they can be assisted to carry out their businesses, but they should strictly follow public health requirements.

Let me also add that we have four centres in Uganda where one can get vaccination for yellow fever, namely KCCA, Norvik Hospital, Kazuri clinic at Entebbe International Airport and The Surgery. However, at the moment the Ministry of Health is consulting with the World Health Organisation (WHO) and other experts to bring in vaccines to carry out massive vaccinations in the affected districts, namely Masaka, Kebisoni in Rukungiri District and areas within a 20-kilometre radius around Kebisoni, so that all those who are at a risk from the age of six months upwards will be vaccinated against yellow fever.

We encourage Ugandans to undertake yellow fever vaccination. If one is to travel outside the country, it is a requirement that you should have been vaccinated. With respect to the information, we shall liaise with the Kenyan Government to see how we can assist Ugandans to cross into Kenya but strictly follow public health regulations and requirements. I thank you very much.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for this information. However, arrangements should be made for these Ugandans and it should be done in advance. You should not always come up to fight fires. You have bureaus; inform Ugandans that as they board the bus here, they should go for inoculation, so that people are not stuck like they are being hunted down. They look so miserable and nobody is explaining the issues to them –(Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I would like to give hon. Ssekikubo information. Even if the bureaus are there, the minister has said that there are only four yellow fever immunisation centres. This means that if I am in Mbale, I must come to KCCA to be vaccinated against yellow fever and then I go wherever I want. Surely, if I have only Shs 40,000 to go to Nairobi or Kisumu, where will I get more money to come to Kampala? Why don’t you put these centres everywhere so that we all get immunised? 

Let me inform you that for one to be immunised at KCCA, you will need Shs 60,000. Why can’t the ministry come up with a policy to avail yellow fever vaccinations throughout the country free of charge like all other vaccines?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do something more interesting for Ugandans. Make it available. If I am in Amudat or Kisoro, I should be able to get yellow fever vaccination without having to come to Kampala.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Internationally, there is a shortage of yellow fever vaccines but more are being manufactured in light of the resurgence of the epidemic in Africa. 

Like I said, the Ministry of Health’s technical officials are right now having a meeting with WHO and the other agencies to study the epidemic and vaccinations will start in those affected districts.

Plans are also being developed for Ugandans to access yellow fever vaccination. So we should take the advice seriously. We shall make every effort possible to ensure that yellow fever vaccination services are available in the countryside. Thank you very much.

Let me also use this opportunity to clarify because what I said last time, Madam Speaker, was distorted in the media. The media was awash with statements that portrayed me as insensitive to cancer patients, that I said cancer patients have to die anyway. The beauty of Parliament is that the statements we make here are recorded in the Hansard. 

I did not say that. I only responded to hon. Alaso who had said that because the cancer machine in Mulago broke down, patients had begun dying in big numbers. I said, “No, we are doing everything possible to ensure that cancer patients are not disadvantaged because the machine has broken down.” Therefore, I just would like to clarify that I did not make the statement, which was all over the media, insinuating that I am insensitive to the plight of cancer patients in Uganda. I am a medical doctor, trained to save lives and not to make people die. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I would like to end with an observation from page 5. The committee reports that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs continues to promote public diplomacy, including enhancement of Uganda’s image abroad. It goes on to say that Uganda’s successful chairing of the 69th Session of the UN General Assembly, - for which we demand a report about our presidency- the presentation of Uganda’s human rights reports to the 54th Ordinary Session of the African Commission on Human and People’s Rights, Uganda’s participation in the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), and South Sudan’s entry into the East African Community, among others, have raised the country’s profile internationally.

Madam Speaker, AMISOM remains an enigma; it is a puzzle. You are aware that the UN cut its funding to AMISOM and the burden is now being shouldered by Ugandans. We needed a detailed report about what is happening there, chairman of the committee. Yes, we are gaining international fame but at the expense of our daughters and sons in Somalia. We are carrying the burden and it is a bottomless pit. Therefore, to that extent, Madam – (Member timed out.)

3.44
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairman for his report, in which he has outlined a number of issues that have not been worked on by the ministry.

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs is one of those important ministries in any Government. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs is a window to the outside world. I have never seen a country that does not pay attention to their Ministry of Foreign Affairs like Uganda. It is only this House that can help the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

Hon. Byarugaba, who was once the chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, commented on a number of issues. Hon. Ssekikubo has also commented on very important issues, which affect the country. Members of this House have travelled abroad and have had the chance to visit our missions; what we see in our missions is terrible. Look at some countries that are smaller than Uganda, when you see how they facilitate their missions and the people serving in their missions, you wonder if Uganda is indeed the Pearl of Africa we talk about. Uganda talks big but when you see our missions abroad, it is very shameful.

Madam Speaker, I would like to talk about property. Countries acquire property abroad and when you have your own property, you do not pay monthly rent. This is a very simple thing. That means if you have your own property, you save on rent. We have told the Government many times, “Can we acquire property and save the taxpayers’ money?” This has landed on deaf ears; nothing has happened. 

The allowances our Foreign Service officers in missions get is meagre. Even poor countries, which I do not want to mention here, look after their Foreign Service officers very well. The houses in which our Foreign Service officers live are terrible, but Government has done nothing about it. 

Look at the education allowance paid to the children of the Foreign Service officers suffering to represent Uganda – the Government recently said this is an unfunded priority, but they are giving them only $2,500. Madam Speaker, China pays $30,000 for a child in an English-speaking country, but Uganda pays only $2,000. So, you can imagine what these officers have done; they leave their wives and children in Uganda and they stay there alone as the women are here suffering. This is indeed pathetic and disgusting. Officers are suffering and it is terrible.

Madam Speaker, on recruitment in the service, we know that the President has got the prerogative of appointing ambassadors. However, we have always said, leave the career people who have joined the service to attain the rank of ambassador so that they go through the system. However, today, we see that even third secretaries, second secretaries, consulars are appointed by the President and they are all in missions. When you visit the missions and you talk to these people, they cannot even perform. Their level of performance is very low and embarrassing to Uganda. When they attend functions, they hold big titles but they do not know anything. This is very shameful to this country.

Opening up missions is fine. We had a mission in Lusaka but it was closed sometime back. However, Madam Speaker, when we open these missions, let us make sure that we facilitate them; let us fund them, instead of opening them up and we cannot pay for electricity. We know that in Europe winters are very cold. We heard about what happened in France; people are suffering because their houses are cold since we cannot pay for the heating and we cannot pay local staff. Why should we rush to open up missions when we cannot even fund them?

Regarding contributions to international organisations, it is very shameful that we carry drafts when we are going to the UN or the AU and other international organisations instead of paying in advance. The chairman did not mention the outstanding contributions to international organisations. Meanwhile, we want to look for jobs in international organisations; but if you have not paid your contribution, how will your people apply for these jobs? It is very shameful when you have been put on the Order Paper at the UN and they say, “Sorry, Uganda, you are not going to speak because you have not paid your contribution.” What a shame to the great country called Uganda. 

All this is done by Government. All this is because we have not paid attention to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, which is very important. Actually, all countries take the defence, finance and foreign affairs ministries seriously. However, for this country, Ministry of Foreign Affairs is a disaster. 

Therefore, I request you, Members, to please help those people because they are working for this nation. They are promoting trade and commercial diplomacy, they are looking for aid for this country, but what they take home is nothing. Please, help the Ministry of Foreign Affairs; help them so that they can pay for the children of these officers. Otherwise, these children are suffering. 

The officers are de-motivated. They are seated here at the headquarters and they cannot be posted to the missions because all ambassadorial posts – even the No. 2’s - have been taken up by political appointees. The officers who are career diplomats, who have spent very many years working for this country, are seated here very frustrated and yet the ones in missions are doing nothing; their performance is terrible.

Madam Speaker, can you imagine an officer in a mission carrying a file from the Uganda Embassy and going to the embassy of a neighbouring country to seek for assistance! This is unheard of in diplomatic service. When I heard of this, I said, “Look at Uganda; these are the people you are appointing to missions and they do not know what to do.” What is done in a mission is secret– it is between your country and that country to which you are posted. However, because these people do not know what to do, they carry files from the mission and walk to other missions to seek for assistance. This is what we are going through. Therefore, Parliament, please, let us assist the ministry by finding money to make – (Mr Mwiru rose_) - I will take the information.  

THE SPEAKER: No. Honourable members, we need to close because we have many other reports. Please, conclude hon. Wamanga-Wamai.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: I would like to request this House - we keep travelling abroad and we want to talk big at international conferences; let us do something for our missions. Let this Government allocate enough funds so that our officers are motivated and they can work because they bring a lot of money into this country. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The report is sent to the Committee on Budget. Further debate will ensue when the Committee on Budget comes to report. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I am very sorry; I would like to raise a procedural issue. You may recall that you directed the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to present a report in a specific period of about two weeks. I recall that the minister, hon. Oryem Okello, was seated here and he said that we should give them 30 days. The issue was to do with properties that we were about to lose, properties that needed repair, staff issues and many others, which were clearly indicated, and he asked for 30 days to bring a report here.

Madam Speaker, the procedural issue I am raising is: have you got the report? With all these issues we are raising, institutional memory will become a problem. Thirty days expired long ago and yet we do not have the report. We have lamented and hon. Byarugaba has again raised the issue. Madam Speaker, would it be procedurally right for us to go away and leave this issue without these people submitting?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if that report has not come by the time the Appropriation Bill is being handled, we shall not give them their money. (Applause)

Honourable Chairperson of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, if you are not ready, can we go to the next report. Let us invite the Committee on Presidential Affairs so that hon. Benny Namugwanya can settle down a bit.

PRESENTATION AND CONSIDERATION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2016/2017
 
3.39
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS (Col (Rtd) Fred Mwesigye): Madam Speaker, before I present the report, I beg to lay on the Table a copy of the report and the minutes of the committee. The report is uploaded on the Members’ iPads.  

This is a report by the sectoral Committee on Presidential Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and proposed budget estimates for the Financial Year 2016/2017. I will highlight the salient issues of the report as directed and guided by the Speaker.

In accordance with Articles 90 and 155 (4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, section 13 (4) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and rule 177 of the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure (2012), sectoral committees are mandated, among other things, to:
1) Examine and comment on policy matters affecting ministries and departments under their jurisdiction;
2) Examine Government recurrent and capital budget estimates critically and make recommendations on them for general debate in the House.

In line with this mandate, I now take this honour to present the report of the Committee on Presidential Affairs. The committee considered the following votes:
1. 	Vote 001 - Office of the President;
2. 	Vote 002 - State House;
3. 	Vote 003 - Office of the Prime Minister; 
4. 	Vote 107 - Uganda Aids Commission; 
5. 	Vote 112 - Ethics and Integrity;
6. 	Vote 159 - External Security Organisation; 
7. 	Vote 122 - Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA). 

For each sector, the report highlights the following:
    i) Sector mission, vision and mandate;
    ii) Performance of the previous budget for financial year 2015/2016;
    iii) Achievements in the sector in the financial year 2015/2016;
    iv) Planned activities, projects and programmes for the financial year 2016/2017;
    v) Proposed budget allocations for the sectors for the financial year 2016/2017;
    vi) Unfunded priorities; 
    vii) Committee’s observations and recommendations.

Madam Speaker, I now have the honour to present for your consideration and adoption the report of the Committee on Presidential Affairs in respect to the policy statements and budgetary provisions for the financial year 2016/2017. 

Vote 001 - Office of the President

The Office of the President consists of five votes, namely Office of the President, State House, Uganda AIDS Commission, Ethics and Integrity and External Security Organisation. These are supported by:
    a) Economic Policy Monitoring, Evaluation and Inspection;
    b) Cabinet Support and Policy Development;
    c) Government Mobilisation, Media and Awards; and
    d) Policy, Planning and Support Services.

	Observations and Recommendations 

Resident District Commissioners (RDCs)

The committee observed that some RDCs engage in partisan politics and do not pay adequate attention to their core mandate. The committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendation that RDCs should concentrate on their core mandate. They should separate administrative from political issues. They should be vetted before being deployed or be rotated after every two years and appraised annually to check their performance. 

Madam Speaker, it is perturbing when you hear some colleagues narrating sad stories of how they were harassed by these RDCs while they were campaigning. That is why we made this strong recommendation.

Presidential Advisors	

The committee observed that the 18 new presidential advisors are appointments on ministerial terms but have not been provided for, and they require Shs 5.931 billion to maintain them. The committee recommends that funds for the newly appointed presidential advisors be provided. 

State House

The committee observed that the non-wage recurrent budget for vote 002 - State House - has suffered a budget cut of Shs 1.8 billion, which was meant for gratuity in financial year 2016/2017.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should restore the State House budget for gratuity to avoid further supplementary budget requests.

Uganda AIDS Commission 

The committee observed that Government tabled in Parliament a list of accounting officers for financial year 2016/2017. However, the accounting officer for Uganda AIDS Commission was not re-appointed for the financial year under consideration due to poor accountability and management of donor funds at the Uganda AIDS Commission.

The committee recommends that the appointing authority expedites the process of appointment of an accounting officer for the Uganda AIDS Commission and further recommends that funding should be strengthened in order to execute the commission’s mandate.    

Ethics and Integrity 

The committee observed that there is rampant moral decay in society despite having a law in place. The nudity of underage girls on television and other entertainment centres is of great concern and should be addressed very soon. The committee further observed that certain TV programmes are an embarrassment and should be scrutinised before being transmitted on air.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Ethics and Integrity makes use of the existing anti-pornography law and apprehends the culprits especially those who engage in sex in public places. This requires the combined efforts of the public, police, media and judiciary. 

There was a proposal to purchase software and an anti-pornography detecting machine but it was not provided for. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should expedite the release of funds to the Department of Ethics and Integrity, amounting to Shs 2.6 billion, in order to purchase the software and the anti-pornography detecting machine.
  
External Security Organisation (ESO)

ISO and ESO Accumulated Arrears

The committee observed with great concern the persistent accumulated arrears of the security organs that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has adamantly failed to give priority to despite constant recommendations by the committee over the years. The committee was perturbed by the laxity portrayed by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development over such a sensitive issue. 

The committee recommends that as a matter of urgency, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should heed to the committee’s recommendations and clear all the outstanding arrears owed by ISO and ESO. The committee further recommends that the Presidential Advisory Committee on Budget seriously considers prioritising the accumulated arrears of ISO and ESO.

Vote 003 - Office of the Prime Minister

The Office of the Prime Minister comprises the following vote functions:
Vote 1301- Policy Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation
Vote 1302- Disaster Preparedness, Management and Refugees
Vote 1303- Management of Special Programmes
Vote 1349- Administration and Support Services
The Prime Minister is assisted by the following ministers to provide political guidance for the above votes:
1. 	Second Deputy Prime Minister/Deputy Leader of Government Business;
2. 	Minister for Karamoja Affairs;
3. 	Minister for General Duties;
4. Government Chief Whip;
5. 	Minister for Information and National Guidance;
6. 	Minister for Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees;
7. 	Minister of State for Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees;
8. 	Minister of State for Luweero Triangle;
9. 	Minister of State for Northern Uganda Rehabilitation;
10. 	Minister of State for Karamoja Affairs;
11. 	Minister of State for Teso Affairs; and
12. 	Minister of State for Bunyoro Affairs.

The committee observed with concern that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development had removed the budget for monitoring and evaluation of PRDP amounting to Shs l.33 billion from vote 003 Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) for FY 2016/17.

The committee strongly recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development reinstates Shs 1.33 billion, which had been meant for monitoring and evaluation of the Peace, Recovery and Development Plan (PRDP) investments in northern Uganda. 

The committee recommends that the information contained in the Government assessment reports should be used by the oversight institutions in carrying out the work so as to ensure transparency and accountability in the use of public resources. 

Disaster Preparedness
	
The committee observed with concern the increasing disasters in the country, which are not receiving the prompt response required. The committee further observed that the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 under section 26 (5) created the Contingencies Fund with an amount equivalent to 3.5 per cent of the appropriated annual budget of Government for the previous financial year from which responses to natural disasters would be funded to the tune of 15 per cent of the fund as provided in section 26(5). However, for financial year 2015/2016, no such funding was provided by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development despite the widespread occurrence of disasters, which greatly frustrated timely and prompt responses to the affected communities across the country. 

The committee further observed that the Department of Disaster Preparedness under the Office of the Prime Minister is not sufficiently staffed, financed and logistically equipped. The committee strongly recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should promptly make available funds from the Contingencies Fund for financing responses to natural disasters as and when they occur. 

The committee recommends that the Department of Disaster Preparedness should be expanded to a full-fledged ministry, sufficiently staffed, financed and logistically equipped in order to fully face challenges of disaster as they occur in the country. 

Information and National Guidance

The committee observed that despite being a national television, Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC) remains the poorest in terms of transmission capabilities compared to other television channels. Therefore, the committee recommends that Government should consider recapitalisation of UBC to enable the national broadcaster compete favourably to sustainable levels. In the meantime, UBC’s annual subvention of Shs 1 billion from the Ministry of Information and National Guidance should be increased to Shs 2 billion to cushion it against revenue fluctuation.  

The committee further recommends that the Ministry of Information and National Guidance should expedite the process of finalising the National Guidance Policy and should be an independent ministry detached from the Office of the Prime Minister. 

The Prime Minister’s Service Delivery Unit

The committee observed that there is a newly established Prime Minister’s Service Delivery Unit under the Prime Minister’s Office, which is charged with overseeing and implementation of strategic priorities of Government and assessing progress of implementation. This unit will report real-time performance of Government programmes for immediate remedial action by the Prime Minister. On-spot checks will be performed to ensure timely service delivery. 
 
The committee recommends that the service delivery unit should be given adequate funding but should not conflict with the overall Government’s monitoring and evaluation system coordinated by the Office of the Prime Minister. 

Resettlement of Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) from Bududa to Kiryandongo  

The committee recommends that the Department of Disaster Preparedness should give this project the urgency it deserves because the IDPs have suffered enough. Short of that, punitive measures should be taken. 

Department for Bunyoro Affairs 

The committee observed that the Ministry of Bunyoro Affairs has not performed and promoted development as was expected. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Bunyoro Affairs be allocated enough funds so as to implement its strategic priorities. The Office of the Prime Minister should fast-track the finalisation and approval of the Bunyoro Integrated Affirmative Development Plan (BIADP). 

Vote 122 - Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA)

The Minister of State for Kampala and Metropolitan Affairs

The committee observed that it is becoming practically impossible for one minister to adequately pay attention to all the issues for the presidency, Kampala and metropolitan affairs without the help of a minister of state.   

The committee, therefore, recommends that as a matter of urgency, a substantive minister of state for Kampala and metropolitan affairs should be appointed with adequate structures in place-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whose telephone that is but I think it should be arrested and placed here because it has no owner. It is somewhere in that general area.

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: The committee, therefore, recommends that as a matter of urgency, a substantive minister of state for Kampala and metropolitan affairs should be appointed with adequate structures in place under the minister who should work hand in hand with the Minister for Presidency.

The committee observed that since inception, KCCA has operated without a public accounts committee, absence of which has continuously limited the internal oversight functions of its operations. The committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that a public accounts committee should be constituted with immediate effect.

Implementation of Kampala Infrastructural Institutional Development Project (KIIDP)

The committee observed with concern the slow pace at which KIIDP is being implemented. This is likely to delay the timing of envisaged economic benefits from the acquired loan facility for KIIDP.

The committee recommends that KCCA should devise efficiency measures in the implementation of KIIDP to ensure timely service delivery. 

Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority

The committee observed that KCCA has not constituted a metropolitan planning authority, which would serve to remove physical development plans problems currently being experienced in metropolitan planning.

The committee strongly recommends a metropolitan physical planning authority should be constituted and the Act be fully operationalised with a five-man committee.

The committee observed that there is a policy mismatch between KCCA and the Local Governments Act. The committee recommends that this mismatch should be dealt with in order for KCCA not to be self-regulating and providing its own shock absorbing but rather have a local government character. 

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, the Committee on Presidential Affairs during consideration of the ministerial policy statements of the Presidency, Office of the Prime Minister and KCCA noted that in order for Government ministries and departments to be able to fully register high performance in delivery of planned outputs in their respective vote functions, there is the need for the following:

a) 	Strengthen the monitoring and evaluation function of Government and the various units in Government Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs), as it was noted that poor monitoring of programmes played a key role in the underperformance of most vote functions in delivery of services.

b) 	Checking the underperformance of some ministries and departments. 

Madam Speaker, in light of the above, the committee recommends that the House do approve the following proposed budget estimates for the respective MDAs for the financial year 2016/2017:

Vote 001:	Office of the President 
Recurrent expenditure – Shs 99, 490,676,000
Development Expenditure – Shs 5, 458,801,000

Vote 002:	State House 
Recurrent expenditure- Shs 238, 941,871,000		
Development Expenditure – Shs 16, 620,176,000		

Vote 003:	Office of the Prime Minister 
Recurrent expenditure – Shs 62, 642,409,000	
Development Expenditure -	Shs 133, 467,082,000
		                                                                                                                          
Vote 107:	Uganda AIDS Commission 
Recurrent Expenditure – Shs 7, 559,000,000
Development Expenditure	- Shs 127, 809,000	
	
Vote 112:	Ethics and Integrity 
Recurrent expenditure – Shs 5, 253,977,000	
Development Expenditure	- Shs 210, 597,000	

Vote 122: Kampala City Council Authority

Recurrent expenditure – Shs 174, 578,345,000			

Development Expenditure - Shs 360, 984,555,000

Vote 169 – External Security Organisation
Recurrent Expenditure - Shs 26,542,661,000
Development Expenditure - Shs 392,000,000

Madam Speaker, I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and Members of the Committee on Presidential Affairs. It has taken a bit of our time, but of course, they have many sectors under that docket. Let us have four comments; three minutes each.

4.26
MR PETER OKEYOH (NRM, Bukooli County, Namayingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and the committee Members for the report.

I would like to thank the committee chairperson for the observation he has made on Bunyoro – that the ministry is underfunded and the Government has not made any efforts to capitalise the Bunyoro programme. However, my question is in regard to the issue we have been raising year in- year out on the Busoga affirmative action programme. I remember the Rt Hon Prime Minister clearly stated that come this budget, Busoga would have a programme to alleviate poverty, disease, etcetera that are bedevilling the region.

I am sad to note that even the President, during his campaigns, clearly stated and affirmed to our people that come this budget, there would be a programme and money set aside to help Busoga to equal other regions. Madam Speaker, my question is what are we taking home as the people from this sub-region?

Secondly, I would like to thank the chairperson for observing - but I do not buy the idea of creating a state minister for Kampala. In addition, I do not buy the idea of creating a ministry for Busoga region. What I want is money deliberately for Busooga programmes. I do not want to see the whole office of a minister in charge of Busoga region without funding. What we want is for Busoga to have a deliberate affirmative action. Somebody will argue that there is NAADS but I know that NAADS cuts across the country.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like that maybe before the House sends this report to the Committee on Budget, an assurance be given to the House and the people from this sub-region who have been disadvantaged for long.  Thank you very much.

4.28
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, honourable Chairperson and the committee members for the report.

I would like to agree entirely with the committee on the lack of seriousness on the side of the Office of the Prime Minister when it comes to disaster. It is exactly a month today since we experienced a disaster in Buliisa; it left 840 families homeless. A total of 12 Government schools as well as more than 20 churches were affected. We lost 49 lives. However, not even five kilogrammes of posho or one blanket or iron sheet has been delivered. This is very unfortunate. 

We have appropriated money for contingency funds – the 3.5 per cent – but it is not there. Yesterday, I heard Katerera complaining and I have also heard other regions complaining. Kasese and Bundibugyo took one month to get something. That is not acceptable for a country and actionshould be taken immediately.

If these ministries such as Bunyoro affairs which we are creating were useful, we would have got assistance from them. Therefore, yesterday when the Committee on Local Government was presenting here, I wanted to submit that we do not need these ministries just for the sake of having them.  What we need is to enforce what is in the constitution – the regional tier system. Let us enforce the regional tier and make sure that every region is given resources for affirmative action. I am sure that areas such as Busoga and Teso are waiting. This is also in line with the debate they were grappling with in regard to municipalities and cities. Every regional tier should have its city so that this country develops everywhere and across the board. 

If you are putting universities or whatever, it should go to every regional tier and with equal resources, instead of just developing Kampala and possibly another region, which is favoured with resources. Therefore, we need special programmes and budget. We do not need ministries just in name. 

Buliisa has never got anything from Bunyoro Affairs for all the years it has been there. We do not even want other regions to be excited about these ministries. Let us enforce the regional tier. When we enforce the regional tier, we do not even need to come and make a mistake we made in the Eighth Parliament to discuss only the Kampala takeover. 

What we need to discuss is Kampala Metropolitan and other cities law so that when we get regional tier for Teso, they get their city. Busoga should also get their city and I am sure West Nile is waiting for their city in Arua, Lango is waiting for their city in Lira and Acholi is waiting for their city in Gulu. That is what we need and Uganda would be able to develop.

The same committee is responsible for KCCA. The traffic jam in Kampala and its neighbourhoods such as Mukono means that you need more than two hours to get out of Kampala and Mukono. You need more than two hours to reach Entebbe Airport. If you are travelling, you need more than three hours before check-in to be at the airport. 

We should consider that metropolitan conurbation law so that even when the transport sector at KCCA is looking at how to put in place multi-model transport, they work under that arrangement which brings Wakiso, Mpigi and possibly Bombo together. Therefore, I think we need to move very fast beyond the old law which did not look at the neighbours. We need a metropolitan law. The Ninth Parliament has not done that. I hope the Tenth Parliament will be able to achieve that. 

That also goes with the law on regional tiers. The Constitution provides for regional tier. The Bill came to the committee, but up to now, I do not know what is happening. We are waiting for regional tiers so that if we have a disaster in Bunyoro, we look within Bunyoro without having to rely on the centre. 

Yesterday, I watched that the Kenyans are having transformation in devolution. They were looking at their third year celebration of their new governors and counties. You can really see the powers they have away from the centre. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mukitale, I think you forgot to tell these people that Busoga brought its charter here as one of the requirements and they are still waiting.

4.33
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. However, I rise to oppose the nugatory proposed expenditure within the report.

The committee chairperson talked about presidential advisors knowing very well that in Africa, presidential advisors have no relevance. You always see the President meeting bodaboda riders and Taxi operators. He actually meets everybody in the country. I would like to say that the  President, such as the one of Uganda, advises himself. Therefore, we should not set aside money for presidential advisors who will never even see him. 

Madam Speaker and colleagues, one time I listened to Dr Suruma on “Spectrum”. When he was asked why he does not see the President, he said “even now that I am talking, he is listening”. The impression is that even as we talk, the President can keep on picking the information. You, therefore, do not need to spend money on advisors.

Secondly, when it comes to KCCA, my good friend the committee chairperson proposes that we should have a state minister in charge of Kampala. Actually, we are dealing with something different. The minister spent all his time acting as the Lord Mayor of Kampala. As a result, he forgot his ministerial business. For you as a committee, do you think that simply because he spent all his time doing the work of the Lord Mayor, therefore, we should have a State Minister so that the minister continues to act as the Lord Mayor?

Maybe, I have to inform the House and the chairperson that Kampala has just elected a Lord Mayor. Let the Lord Mayor be left to do his political work in the city and the minister concentrates on being a minister.

Thirdly, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, the chairperson proposes the machine to detect pornography. I thought this would be a programme which would be downloaded with the help of new technology. I do not know whether that is also one of the priority areas as a country where we must spend. However, in the wisdom of the committee, this recommendation was done.

Madam Speaker, I will not forget that not long ago, we were dealing with the Tax Bills in trying to see how we can raise money. If we are increasing all these taxes in order to raise money and expenditure, it will create a very big problem for the taxpayer. My understanding would be that as we raise money, the investment should go towards production other than investing in the production relations. We should ask ourselves these questions: Where are we investing? What is the return on the investment?

As a country, we need to come up with a checklist so that in future, as we appropriate money as Parliament, someone has to tell us why we must appropriate to them a given amount of money. What is the - (Member timed out.)

4.36
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On one of the issues, we had a meeting and recommended to have a Minister of State for Kampala. We should be mindful of the bloated public expenditure that we are already grappling with. I do not see any justification whatsoever to have a Minister of State for Kampala especially if we could follow the law and allow the various institutions to work. The Lord Mayor is in limbo and the political supervision of Kampala Capital City Authority has been taken over by the minister. That has already been highlighted by my colleague.

I would like to inform Members, especially the Committee on Presidential Affairs, that we have discovered some stray vote, which ordinarily should have been under Presidency. It has strayed itself to Agriculture and that is again about KCCA. At an appropriate time when we are dealing with Agriculture, we are coming up with very strong recommendations that Vote 122, which is being hidden under Agriculture, should go back to the right entity the way we handled the Uganda AIDS Commission. You remember at one time, Uganda AIDS Commission’s vote was hiding under Ministry of Health yet the Office of the President was the one overseeing it. Like we dealt with the Uganda AIDs Commission’s vote, kindly accept at that time, that we also take back this one.

Madam Speaker, I will deal with it in details when the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries finally presents. However, be on notice that you have a stray vote which is hidden somewhere.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. The chairperson did comment that to give KCCA a local government outlook, there is need to look at the policies and the laws and realign them.  Would it not be procedurally right - in light of what he presented that they were already overloaded and KCCA needs a deputy minister - for us to make a resolution to shift KCCA back to the Ministry of Local Government? It is an entity that should fall within decentralisation of power. It should go back to Ministry of Local Government.

Would it not also be procedurally right for us as a House - the President said that for once he would want to agree with Dr Besigye that RDCs are useless. In their recommendation, they should have come up with a way to cut costs. I propose, as a House, if we still need the RDCs, then let us have one RDC per district and we create the office of a Regional Resident Commissioner who will head them. It is just like the Regional Police Commander who heads all the DPCs, but the DPC does not necessarily need to have a deputy.

Much as we are talking about costs in relation to the vote that concerns RDCs, the committee should have come up with very tangible recommendations that we can look at so as to advise Government on how to proceed. Madam Speaker, would it not be procedurally right to take my line of argument? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you are keen on that issue, prepare a motion so that it can be debated in its entirety here before we make a resolution. The report is sent to the Committee on Budget . Further debate will ensue when the Budget Committee reports.

4.41
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I request to come after the next report. They are still uploading my report.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us have the Chairperson of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development.

MR FUNGAROO: The Shadow Minister of Defence and Security has alternative views to Government. We, therefore, think we should give ours. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: No, you will be given the opportunity when – okay, you will both speak on the same day. (Laughter)

PRESENTATION AND CONSIDERATION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2016/2017

4.44
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Margaret Komuhangi): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Before I make my presentation, I beg to lay a report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2016/2017 with the minutes of the proceedings of the meetings.

Madam Speaker, I will beg for your indulgence that I present a summarised report and refer Members to the detailed report uploaded on the iPads.

THE SPEAKER: That is really our intention. Just give explanatory remarks and Members will read the rest.

MS KOMUHANGI: Madam Speaker, thank you so much. In accordance with Article 155(4) of the Constitution; Section 12 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and Rule 177 (a) of the Rules of Procedure, the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development considered the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the social development sector for the financial year 2016/2017 and beg to report.

Scope 

The report covers Vote 018 - the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the statutory bodies, which receive subvention for the ministry, namely: Uganda National Cultural Centre, National Library of Uganda, National Youth Council, National Women Council and National Council for Persons with Disabilities;

Vote 124 - Equal Opportunities Commission; and Votes 501 – 850 - Local Government. 

The report highlights the performance of the first half of the financial year 2015/2016, the mandate of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, the key achievements for the first half of the financial year 2015/2016 and the financial performance for the first half of the 2015/2016 financial year.

Challenges Experienced

Key planned activities programmes for the financial year 2016/2017 - budget proposals for the financial year 2016/2017 and observations and recommendations. 

Vote 018 - Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development

The performance overview is in the table and by the end of the first half of the financial year 2015/2016, the ministry had spent 93 per cent of the released amounts against the target of 100 per cent. The below-the-target performance was due to the lengthy procurement processes some of which had not been completed by the end of December 2015; unfilled vacancies and expiry of the term of office of district youth chairpersons who could not process projects to be funded under the Youth Livelihood Programme. The funds released were below the 50 per cent-target due to poor revenue performance as well. 

Proposed Allocations for the Financial Year 2016/2017 

The proposed budget allocation for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development in the financial year 2016/2017 is Shs 161.61 billion representing a net increment of Shs 91.61 billion (117 per cent) compared to Shs 77.99 billion, which was approved for the financial year 2015/2016. 

The increment is mainly attributed to an increase of Shs 40 billion for the Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme under the Mainstreaming Gender and Rights vote function and an increase of Shs 50 billion for the Youth Livelihood Programme under the Social Protection for Vulnerable Groups vote function. The increments are indicated in the table. I refer you to the table, honourable colleagues.

Observations and Recommendations

Vote 018 – Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development 

i) Externalisation of Labour 

Many Ugandan migrant workers get jobs in the Gulf countries, yet agreements with those nations have not been finalised. Getting placements through unlicensed companies, some of which run advertisements in the Ugandan media, makes the situation worse. This leaves the workers helpless when they encounter problems.  

There is no preparation of the workers for the new jobs in terms of what is expected of them and the cultural practices of the host countries. The committee is concerned that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has not undertaken any initiative to look for unlicensed companies with a view of bringing them to order. 

Also, Saudi Arabia is the only country with whom the ministry has signed a memorandum and domestic workers are the only category with employment or contract terms. 

The committee strongly recommends that: 
    a) The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development conducts due diligence nationally and internationally with embassies, Interpol, the immigration department, Civil Aviation Authority and  local leaders to get authentic information about how the entire industry operates with a view of plugging loopholes;

    b) The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should work with Uganda Communications Commission to ban adverts by unlicensed companies;

    c) The memoranda with the receiving countries should be standardised to cater for the interests of Uganda as well;
    d) A database of migrant workers be established; and
    e) Migrant workers should receive training regarding their duties and responsibilities in the host countries and the social-cultural practices of the receiving countries. 

ii) Social Assistance Grant for Empowerment (SAGE) Programme 

During the discussion of the sector budget and the Policy Statement for the financial year 2015/2016 on the Floor of Parliament, Members unanimously agreed to roll out SAGE to other local governments. Consequently, development partners in principle agreed to fund the roll out if Government could counter fund with a minimum of Shs 149 billion in the Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) period.
Financial Requirements for SAGE Roll-out
You will find the requirements in that table as stipulated above.  However, in the National Budget Framework Paper for financial year 2016/2017-2020/2021 and the ministerial policy statement financial year 2016/2017, Shs 9 billion was provided against the required Shs 17.59 billion, leaving a funding gap of Shs 8.59 billion. 

The inability of Government to provide Shs 8.59 billion violates commitments to development partners and will affect implementation in the 15 old districts and the 40 new districts as well; it jeopardises donor funding.  

The selection criteria, which is based on a composite poverty and vulnerability index based on the data from the National Population Census, household surveys and other indicators of vulnerability, human development and empowerment, is questionable because some of the poorest districts have not benefitted. 

The committee strongly recommends that: 
    a) Government provides Shs 8.59 billion to close the funding gap in the budget for financial year 2016/2017 and thus ensure continuity of the programme; and
    b) The selection criteria is reviewed so that the poorest of the poor become beneficiaries. 

iii) Youth Livelihood Programme 

The monitoring and evaluation strategy for this programme defines how, where, by whom and when monitoring and the evaluation is done. Essentially the monitoring and evaluation activities are four-layered. They start from community level to sub-county level and then to the district level and finally the national level. 

The committee is concerned about the large number of stakeholders monitoring the programme with issues like corruption, non-youths benefitting and embezzlement of funds by community development officers, cropping up.  

The committee strongly recommends that the implementation framework is reviewed so as to have the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, together with the National Youth Council, be in charge of monitoring and evaluation of the programme and thus reduce the number of players involved. 

iv) Youth Venture Capital Fund 

The Government introduced the Youth Venture Capital Fund in 2011/2012 so as to create jobs for the youth, help them expand their business and acquire entrepreneurship skills. This programme was a precursor to the Youth Livelihood Programme. 
The committee is concerned that there has been no formal closure of the project with a report highlighting the amount of money that was disbursed, the unpaid balances by beneficiaries and what is left in Centenary, Stanbic and Dfcu banks, which are implementing partners. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development closes the programme and produces a report highlighting disbursed funds, unutilised funds and unpaid balances and hands over to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development so that the project is incorporated into the Youth Livelihood Programme.   

v) Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Fund (UWEF) 

According to Section 13(6) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, the annual budget shall be consistent with the National Development Plan, the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility and the Budget Framework Paper. 
However, the budget estimates presented to Parliament contain a re-allocation of Shs 10 billion from the Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Fund to the Office of the Prime Minister for Luwero-Rwenzori compensation. This indicates a change in priorities and a violation of the law. 

The committee recommends that the Shs 10 billion be reverted to the Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Fund as approved by Parliament in the Budget Framework Paper for financial year 2016/2017-2020/2021.  

The implementation framework for Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Fund (UWEF) provides for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development together with the National Women Council as the entities in charge of monitoring and evaluation of this Programme. 

vi)  Industrial Court 

The industrial court does not have original jurisdiction in employment and labour disputes. As such, all pleadings before the court are preceded with a reference from either the labour officers or the party making the reference. 

However, the committee was informed that the labour officers who are mandated to act as courts of first instance do not have the capacity to effectively and efficiently exercise that mandate. 

The committee was also informed that when the court was operationalised, there was no budget in place to cater for panelists’ allowances thus the court has to pay these allowances from its operational funds, which are so minimal and as a result, panelists accumulate arrears. This may lead to closure of the court since it cannot operate without the panelists. 

The committee strongly recommends that the labour officers who act as courts of first instance, be trained to enable them execute that mandate, which is essential in the administration of labour justice.
Secondly, that there is clarity on the qualifications of these labour officers to provide for some legal background and also have their appointment recentralised.

The committee also recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, provides the panelists’ statutory allowances amounting to Shs 792 million and that these allowances are protected as an item under the wage subvention.   

Vote 124 – Equal Opportunities Commission (EOC) 

Budget Performance Overview for the First Half of the Financial Year

This section looks at the performance of EOC in the first half of financial year 2015/2016 by Vote function. And honourable colleagues, I invite you to look at that table below. The below-the-target expenditure performance was due to expiry of the term of office of the commissioners and the absence of new commissioners for six months and that the wages approved and released for commissioners would not be spent. 

6.3 	Proposed Allocations for Financial Year 2016/17

Table 4 indicates that the proposed budget allocations for the EOC in the financial year 2016/2017 is Shs 4.647 billion excluding taxes representing a 10.7 per cent net increment and Shs 0.45 billion net increment, in comparison to the approved budget of Shs 4.197 billion in financial year 2015/16.The increment is attributed to the wage recurrent component. The proposed budget allocations for financial year 2016/2107 is in the table following. 

Observations and Recommendations 

1. Certificate of Gender and Equity Compliance 

Section 13(15)(g) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 mandates the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in consultation with the Equal Opportunities Commission to issue a Certificate of Gender and Equity Compliance, certifying that a policy statement is gender and equity responsive and that there are measures put in place to equalise opportunities for men, women, persons with disability and other marginalised groups.  The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development issues a certificate while the Equal Opportunities Commission conducts the assessment for compliance. 

Results from the Equal Opportunities Commission indicate that 124 ministerial policy statements were submitted for assessment. Out of the 90 assessed, excluding missions abroad, 67 passed with a mark of 40 per cent and above, 23 scored below 40 per cent and 11 never submitted their policy statements.  

The committee observes that the funding for the Equal Opportunities Commission is not adequate enough to enable it carry out the assessment adequately and timely. 
The committee recommends:
    a) That the budgets of MDAs, which did not comply are not passed;
    b) That Shs 4 billion be provided to the Equal Opportunities Commission to execute its mandate in relation to section 13(15)(g) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015; and
    c) That the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should scale up its role of mainstreaming gender and equity in the formulation and implementation of the national budget.

2. Staffing levels  

The Equal Opportunities Commission (EOC) created a compliance and reporting department with a key responsibility of assessing ministerial policy statements and budget framework papers for compliance with gender and equity requirements. In the proposed budget for financial year 2016/2017, the Commission was allocated an additional Shs 450 million to cater for wages of the new employees recruited. 

The committee recommends that the recruitment is concentrated on compliance officers so as to strengthen the commission’s ability to implement section 13(15)(g) of the Public Finance and Management Act, 2015.

3. Donor Support 

The committee observed that the Equal Opportunities Commission mixes donor projects with Government-funded activities, leading to false accountability. 

The committee recommends that the Commission should clearly separate donor-funded activities from Government activities for easy accountability. 

4. Statutory Bodies 

The Uganda National Cultural Centre (UNCC) 
The Uganda National Cultural Centre was established by the Uganda National Cultural Centre Act, 1959 and is mandated to preserve, promote and popularise Ugandan culture within and outside Uganda. 

(i) Jama Fest, 2017

This cultural exhibition takes place in the East African Community on a rotational basis and is slated to be held in Uganda in 2017. The two-week event brings together member states to interact, perform and display the rich cultural heritage they possess. The event attracts people from all walks of life. 

It is unfortunate that the Shs 6 billion, which was indicated in the Budget Framework Paper for this cultural gala is not reflected in the ministerial policy statement yet preparatory meetings are already taking place. 
The committee, therefore, recommends that the Shs 6 billion required for the Jama Fest be provided to ensure adequate preparations for the cultural gala.
 The Uganda National Cultural Centre be provided with Shs 2.5 billion for renovation of the National Theatre and the Nommo Gallery. 

5. National Library of Uganda (NLU)

The National Library of Uganda was established by the National Library Act, 2003 and is mandated to collect, preserve and make available for use, Uganda’s documented heritage. 

(i) Arrears

The NLU has accumulated rent arrears to the tune of Shs 88.8 million while wage arrears stand at Shs 206 million. The committee lauds the institution for attracting Book Aid as donors who provide E-readers, a modern reading method which is used mainly by pupils. 

(ii) Land for Construction of the Headquarters  

The rented premises housing the Uganda National Library are not favourable at all. The place is small and congested, leading to high temperatures, which are not favourable for storing books. 
The committee was informed that the National Library of Uganda recovered its land title and requires a total Shs 250 million to construct their own premises.   
The committee, therefore, recommends that a total of Shs 545 million be provided to the National Library of Uganda to cater for rent and wage arrears as well as construction. 

6. National Women Council 

The National Women’s Council was established by the National Women’s Council Statute of 1993 to unite all women of Uganda for development purposes.

(i)Women Council elections

The elections for women councils and committees have not taken place since 2003 yet the Electoral Commission has organised elections for other groups like the elderly, youth and persons with disability. 
The Government spent Shs 50 billion on elections for the youth and Shs 30 billion on elections for persons with disability. This shows a high level of discrimination yet women form 51 per cent of the country’s population.  

The committee recommends that the Electoral Commission expedites the process of organising elections for the women councils. 

(ii)National Youth Council 

The National Youth Council was established by the National Youth Council Act, Cap 319, as a national umbrella body for the youth. The council has structures from the village, sub-county, district and national levels with elected youth leaders at all these levels.

The committee was informed that the National Youth Council is not empowered to carry out monitoring and evaluation of the youth livelihood programme, and is currently being suppressed by the community development officers and Chief Administrative Offices in the monitoring process. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Gender Labour and Social Development empowers National Youth Council to monitor the Youth Livelihood Programme as well as other youth targeting projects so as to enable them execute their mandate for being politically responsible to all the youth in the country.

National Council for Persons with Disability

The National Council for Persons with Disability was established by the National Council Disability Act, 2003 as a national monitoring and evaluation mechanism for disability policies and programmes.

The vehicle 

The ministry is aware that the National Council for Persons with Disability has only one vehicle which is old, grounded and in the garage. This has made it difficult for the members to go down to the grass roots to carry-out their statutory obligations. 

The committee therefore recommends that the Ministry of Gender should repair and hand over the vehicle or provide funds for procurement of a new vehicle for the council.

National Council for Children 

The Children (Amendment) Bill, 2015 was passed by Parliament in February 2016 and awaits the Presidents ascent. 

The Act of Parliament created a Children’s Authority thereby dissolving the National Council for Children. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should make adequate preparation for the Children’s authority to begin.

Vote 501- 850: Local government Budget Performance Overview 

Madam Speaker, this is the side of budget that has never increased ever since I became the chairperson of that committee.

Observations and Recommendations 

Staffing structures at Local Governments

The committee observed that the current staffing structure at the local governments does not fully support implementation of social development sector activities. Ideally, every district should have gender, youth and labour officers but this is not possible due to different staffing structure models.

Therefore, the community development officer combines the roles of probation and welfare, gender mainstreaming, labour administration in some districts, and recently coordinator of the youth livelihood programme. That mandate is wide yet that officer is not technical in all those areas.

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government recentralises the community development function for proper supervision by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.

Conclusion 

The social development sector is key in the transformation of the country because it caters for critical population segments like the youth, children and women. Underfunding, it is ignoring that reality and denying citizens life saving opportunities and privileges, which are vital for the stability of society. Uganda cannot develop into a middle income country without paying attention to this sector. 

The committee recommends that in line with the above observations and recommendations, Parliament appropriates the following estimates for the votes under the social development sector for financial year 2016/2017 as follows:

Vote 018 - Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development 

Recurrent expenditure  -  Shs 22,665,667,000; and
Development expenditure  -  Shs 144,287,077,000;
Total expenditure 	-  Shs 166,952,744,000.

Vote 124 - Equal Opportunities Commission

Recurrent expenditure 	- Shs 4,346,808,000
Development expenditure - Shs 300,000,000
Total expenditure 	    - Shs 4,646,808,000

Vote 501-850: Local Government 
Recurrent expenditure 	- Shs 7,141,000,000
Total expenditure 	     - Shs 178,740,552,000

I urge the august House to adopt this report. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, very much, Chairperson of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development and members of your committee. Just four comments - the shadow minister will speak last.

5.10
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern): Madam Speaker, first of all, I would like to thank the committee for the report, but I have a few observations to make.

One is on the Youth Livelihood Programme. We do appreciate the effort of Government in trying to help our young people. However, what we have found out in the field - the programme is good but it has many challenges.

Madam Speaker, we passed a guideline that gave a certain percentage for monitoring of the Youth Livelihood Programme. To be specific, it gave 10 per cent. But what is coming out and which is annoying the young people of this country is that even the 10 per cent is not seen by them when it comes to monitoring. For instance, chairpersons of the youth councils, both at national and at the districts, are not involved in this activity. This is where the programme begins from. 

If you look at how these young people are trying to pay back this money - we are not achieving the objective of the programme, so where is the problem? I would like the ministry here - and I remember that even I appeared before the committee -  my own proposal was for the involvement of the youth to be made a priority. 

I beg and urge this august House that out of 10 per cent, can we give 6 per cent involvement of the monitoring aspect to go to the youth; we have these structures from the village up to the national level. For instance, you spend Shs 50 billion in organising elections and you make them redundant. How do you expect a programme of this kind to succeed, if you don’t involve these young people? Therefore, I would like to urge this august House to accept to give a specific percentage to the monitoring of these programmes by the youth in this country.

Another observation is that in line with the council structures, there is a provision which the chairperson read under local government - if you all recall Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development allocates Shs 500,000,000 to the district councils. But it is a pity that when Uganda had 58 districts, Government allocated Shs 1,000,000,000 for the district structures of these young people. But today when Uganda has 112 districts, Government gives only Shs 500,000,000. On top of that, I was even informed that the balance of this money was given to the Inter-Religious Council of Uganda and cultural leaders.

I would like to beg the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development - when will you begin to respect the power of the young people of this country?

You have seen in the just concluded elections and you will see it from some of our colleagues who are joining this august House - most of them are young people. When are you going to make us a priority in this country? What can Shs 500,000,000 million do? Madam Speaker, allow me use Kamuli as a case study. How many villages are in Kamuli District?

THE SPEAKER: 776

MR OGWANG: Seven hundred seventy six villages - can the minister get on the Floor and tell the people of Uganda how much money you allocate to Kamuli District as youth council money? We need to get serious with some of these things because we are not only here just to talk and take no action. Tell us how much money did you give to Kamuli District? In a quarter, Madam Speaker, they give Kamuli District less than Shs 3 million. What can that do for the young people in 776 villages? Honestly, can it even call a council meeting? Can it even buy a ball? Can it fuel a motorcycle for the young people of this country? What do you want us to do? You have given us power to come to this august House but you are not giving us the resources. What do you want us to do?

Talk about Manafwa District - this is a district of 30 subcounties with over 1000 villages, divide that money - are we seriously addressing problems of the young people of this country? Then why spend Shs 50 billion on an election? Why? – (Interjections) - no I am talking to a Government which – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I give you two more minutes to speak for the youth. (Applause)

MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, I would like to go on record here. Honourable colleagues think by us raising these things, we must be in opposition, no. I am in the national assembly and I must raise it so that we address the issues here. That is the reason I was voted. I am here to appropriate and that is my core role. 

I would like to ask the Minister of Gender, Labour  and Social Development – Madam Speaker, I would propose to this august House and the chairperson of the committee to let Shs 500 million, which has been pushed to inter-religious council, be reverted back to the National Youth Council for restructuring.  I also would like to urge this august House to help the young people by increasing the vote for youth activities in this country. I thank you.

5.16
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is a simple observation and I rise to support the recommendation of the committee that Shs 10 billion, which was meant for the women enterprise fund and has now been re-allocated to the Office of the Prime Minster, be returned.

Madam Speaker, we put the minister here to task to explain and to pledge to us that this Shs 53 billion would go to all the districts so that all the women can benefit. Of course, we know that Shs 53 billion is not enough but, at least it should be shared equally by the districts. Now we are told that Shs 10 billion has been taken away. But the Office of the Prime Minister has no role in monitoring the women enterprise fund. Therefore, why would a whole Shs 10 billion be taken away and given to that office? 

Madam Speaker, we are grateful to His Excellency, the President and the NRM Government for recognising that women involvement in economic activities is key to the economic development of this nation. 
However, we should not give with one hand and take away with another. I beg to propose that a resolution be taken that this money be returned, short of that we should not approve the budget for the Office of the Prime Minister. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Jovah Kamateeka. I hope that you can follow it up with a formal motion so that we can conclude it. 

5.18
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga County West, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the committee and the chairperson. About Shs 10 billion, for the compensation of Luweero Triangle war veterans; last financial year, I remember we gave around Shs 20 billion. However, they have not indicated how they distributed it, because even the veterans from Kyankwanzi, Singo, Kiboga and Luweero have converged at Kitagenda Primary School, Lwamata, for a full week. They are demanding payment and complaining that those responsible to recommend and pay them divert their money always.

Therefore, Government should get involved seriously because those who head the programme allegedly put in new entrants who are being paid; they give kick-backs. They left out the real veterans. That is why they have converged there in a demonstration. So, I support the proposal that this money be given back to women but also propose that we look for money for Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment (SAGE) programme.

This programme started and has been running for over three years. It is very bad to stop it now. It should be rolled out to other districts thus we must look for the money. 
I would like to suggest that this Shs 10 billion goes to SAGE, since women have remained with Shs 40 out of 50 billion. This Shs 10 billion should be given to SAGE so that this programme continues, because it has already started. For women programme, it will start with Shs 40 billion. That is my submission.

5.20
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA-KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, I thank you. I have one or two questions to ask and they are very specific. I see on page 26, they are recommending, Shs 2.6 billion to be spent on the rehabilitation of the national theatre and Nommo Gallery. I heard there are controversies about the ownership of the Nomo Gallery. I would like to know from the ministry if they are in possession of the land title of Nommo Gallery where they want to invest public money or it is still in the hands of Gen. Elly Tumwine. And why are they investing public money in property that is under dispute.   

Another clarification I would like to know is about the pronouncement by the Minister of State for Youth and Culture, hon. Anite. She is all over the media saying that she is mobilising three young people from every district to pilot the national service. I would like to know under which programme - I have read every literature therein and found nothing like a policy statement. There is no legal framework and under what capacity - and the housing of that programme is still controversial. I would like to know what she is piloting, which we are not sure about. Those are my two concerns.

5.23
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I commend the chairperson of the committee for allowing us, as a shadow ministers in this sector to sit with the committee while they were looking at the ministerial policy statement. I have submitted the detailed alternative ministerial policy statement to the committee and I would like to present the summary of that alternative.

THE SPEAKER: Can you do that in five minutes?

MR ATIKU: Yeah, it is only three pages. 

THE SPEAKER: Then four minutes if it is three pages. 

MR ATIKU: I have a summary here of the alternative policy statement that we presented.

Madam Speaker, we propose that an enabling legal and policy environment to facilitate job creation, skills development and enterprise opportunities for young Ugandans, be put in place. We further propose that Government institutes measures to require employers, particularly foreign investors, to target local youth in recruitment.  

We also propose that Government takes steps to develop local workforce such as offering internships and procure from the area within which they operate in addition to regulations and incentives such as tax breaks, which should be considered so that these youths can be gainfully employed.

We propose a reserve of at least 40 per cent of public procurement contracts for youth-led businesses or other businesses that employ the youth. We also propose a reserve of at least 40 per cent of jobs created in public works; projects such as major road construction works for the youth.

We propose that the ministry facilitates the formalisation of the informal sector in such a way as to generate new job opportunities for young people and also to provide care in areas that stifle innovation or inhibit development of small scale enterprises. We also propose a speedy review of the minimum wage to ensure that it reflects the cost of living and applies robustly to all young workers.

Madam Speaker, I would like to emphasise that this august House should speed up - and I do not know whether it is not too late because there was a Private Member’s Bill that interested itself in reviewing the minimum wage for this country. However, the ministry can administratively address this.

We also propose that labour export regulations be enforced to protect and improve the working conditions of the youth in the diaspora, enforce existing policies on human trafficking and the law that we passed recently in regard to children should be put in operation immediately it is assented to.

We propose measures to support youth business start-ups and to nurture new businesses particularly, the funds that have been put under the ministry be well utilised and also additional funds be added.

We also propose that a regional incubation centre for invention and innovation be put in place to create opportunities for business growth thereby increasing the pace of job creation. Steps should be taken to ensure these are accessible to all youth and to ensure they are geared towards the National Development Plan II in the growth areas.

Fast-track the establishment of the national youth service and internship schemes by all sectors including Government. Develop clear guidelines for the implementation of the national disability policy ensuring enforcement is robust where it applies to youth with disabilities.

We propose that the ministry institutes a mechanism to involve the youth in the agricultural sector across the value chain by promoting the establishment of youth cooperatives and availing public land to youth. 

Expedite the passing of the National Health Insurance Bill, which will provide universal and affordable health care for all.

We propose that the ministry provides accurate and comprehensive health information to the youth through the most convenient, affordable and effective methods, including support to ensure language and formal education levels are not barriers to access – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have one minute. 

MR ATIKU: Madam Speaker and honourable members, I know the details were submitted to the committee. We also propose that the ministry invests 5 per cent of the annual Ministry of Health budget as a standalone allocation for establishment and sustenance of youth corners in all public health facilities at all levels.

Enhance free skills training opportunities through Universal Post Primary Education and Training (UPPET) and Business, Technical and Vocational Education and Training (BTVET), which provide an opportunity for creating new vocational centres and utilising the available community polytechnics.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, as time is not on our side, we do agree with most of the recommendations of the committee as we sat together during the deliberations on the presentations by the ministry. We do urge that what we have proposed also in our alternatives policy statement be incorporated by this august House and the budget committee to see that our youth sector is vibrant and addressing most of the areas of need. I thank you. I beg to lay on the Table the summary of the social development sector in regard to the youth.

5.30
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Madam Speaker, allow me appreciate our chairperson; we worked as partners. However, I would like to emphasise that in the Committee on Equal Opportunities, we still see that the budget given compared to the magnitude of the work that we do in the committee, is still very little. If we want fairness promoted, we need to increase from Shs 4.6 billion, which is still very little.

About the women councils, we found that it is not functional at the moment. At first being on the extreme, we wanted it abolished but we said no; there should be a review of this structure right from village level to the national level and make it operational and beneficial to women.

Government should establish policies which ensure monitoring the contribution of women and children in the relevant sector to reflect their contribution to national development. We also said enforce laws on human trafficking to protect Ugandans who are normally taken to work outside the country for greener pastures.

We further recommend establishment of sustainable programmes for youth and women economic empowerment projects. For example, if you look at the National Women Entrepreneurship Programme, it is just Shs 40 billion and this money is spent on 112 districts. I do not know how we can apply it to all the districts and how it can be sustainable including the youth livelihood programme.

Government should desist from making the Women’s Day celebrations an NRM function. It should be for all women regardless of the political, religious and ethnic barrier. At least Government should do this if we really need a national budget. Consider establishing an economically empowered policy focused at uplifting the persons with disability, social and economic livelihood. 

Ensure that all projects and programmes involving financial assistance negotiation teams include persons with gender and children analysis skills. Focus on the family unit as the basic structure for the social construction of gender and children’s relations through community based initiatives.

Establish implementable policies focused at eliminating street children from the city and town centres. The children and young offenders should be directed towards compulsory rehabilitation counselling and treatment for psychosocial support rather than detention.

Enforce the existing regulation of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Drug Substance Action; overcome the rampant rate of drug abuse among the youth. Adopt a gender responsive budgeting system at all levels.

Concerning human rights related policies, establish day care playing centres, in prison zones for babies arrested with their mothers or even produced in jail. Restructure prison construction structure to cater for female inmates.

Government should consider constructing standard and well-ventilated prisons for inmates to allow free gaseous exchange and reduce on the rampant air borne diseases among inmates. 

In the interest of time, we worked together; we can say HIV inmates should be exposed to balanced diet foods and free routine counselling services from qualified counsellors’ desk at the prison centre. 

Government, through the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Affairs should take the initiative to establish children protection units in prison centres countrywide. This will help to protect the rights of criminal mothers whose babies are born in prisons and  have no relatives outside there or their mothers are not sure of their safety when not with them. They should further take responsibility of gender sexual challenges in prison. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.36
MS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As former Shadow Minister for Gender, Labour and Social Development,  I can’t express my happiness that the budget for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development can now be talked of in terms of Shs 100 billion and beyond. I would like to appreciate this commitment because for over – I do not know how many years – it could not go even beyond Shs 30 billion. Therefore, if we are talking about Shs 166 billion, honourable members, thank you very much for the work well done and the persistence.

However, talking about this money is one thing and its release is another. Even when we scrutinise the ministerial policy statements for these ministries, most of the budget releases are standing at 20, 30, 40 and a dismal 50 per cent even when we are talking about the releases of the third quarter. Government should make commitment – putting figures on paper is one thing and releasing the funds is another. We want your total commitment into releasing these funds because when you are talking about the Ministry of Gender Labour and Social Development, you are talking about the departments of labour, gender, the youth, the women and the PWDs.

Honourable colleagues, this is something that calls for total commitment because the people who fall within this bracket are people who need defence and attention from Government.

Madam Speaker, the other thing I would like to comment about is the issue of the libraries. We have all been told repeatedly that if you want to hide anything from a Ugandan put it in print – just write it down. Government should move towards having libraries functional. Most of the structures are dilapidated across the country and it should be a deliberate effort by Government to make sure that these libraries are well stocked and functional. Even some of the land for these libraries is under threat. When you talk about a modern library, you should put effort into having modalities of books that entice people to use the library and not obsolete, archaic and out-dated books and you think you will encourage anyone to visit your library. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, you take credit for the efforts that this House has made towards the export of labour and the plight of Ugandans languishing in China and those being mistreated in Kuwait and other Arab states.

I would like to appeal to this House – some of us won’t be in the Tenth Parliament – to kindly help this country. These companies that are exporting labour – the question of the labour market and hon. Rukutana was by then Minister of State for Labour; he never helped this country. 

If I were to audit his performance and his interest in the export of labour, Madam Speaker, this issue should be taken beyond this level. These companies that are exporting labour; why should their licences even be renewed? Why should they be encouraged to do this?

We have seen some reports in the media where some people give testimony on how they were exported to work in offices and hotels but when they reached there they were subjected to homosexuality. There was a man who brought a video of how he had been shattered beyond repair - (Interjections) - yes, it was on television on Fourth Estate one Sunday. 

Honourable members, if you are going to be part of the Tenth Parliament, kindly help this country. If that turns out to be your son, your brother or your relative and you are in this House yet you cannot do anything about it, then we are not helping this country at all. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable Members, for the main report and the report from the shadow ministers.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to move a motion that this House resolves that the Shs 10 billion re-allocated from the Women Enterprise Fund to the Office of the Prime Minister in the 2016/2017 budget estimates be reinstated. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, it will be handled when we are doing the appropriation; just prepare yourself, mobilise the Members and during appropriation, you move it. Thank you. All will be sent to the Committee on Budget for expeditious perusal and report back. 

I do not know who is ready. Chairperson of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, I hope you are finally in position to report to us.

PRESENTATION AND CONSIDERATION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2016/2017

5.42
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I read out the report, I beg to lay on the Table a copy of the same and the minutes of the committee meetings. 

Madam Speaker and colleagues, as guided by the Speaker and in the interest of time, I am going to skip some few things that you will read privately on page 1 and that is the introduction and the methodology on page 2. 

The report is organised in three sections: Section A presents budget performance for financial year 2015/2016 and proposed budgetary allocations for the financial year 2016/2017 for Vote 004 - Ministry of Defence.

Section B presents budget performance for financial year 2015/2016 and proposed budgetary allocations financial year 2016/2017 for all votes under the Ministry of Internal Affairs while Section C presents the proposed budgetary estimates for the respective votes under the ministries of Defence and that of Internal Affairs for consideration and approval.

Vote 004: Ministry of Defence

Compliance to NDP II

The committee notes that the Security Sector’s compliance level stood at 61 per cent in compliance and this was a result of lack of a sector development plan which ought to guide the operations and implementation of sectoral mandates. It also lacked a clear mechanism to ensure that the army actively and productively engages in primary, secondary and industrial production. Thirdly, there is absence of a regulatory framework that can streamline and guide the engagement of the army in infrastructural development projects, such as the Standard Gauge Railway, among others. 

Gender and Equity Responsiveness

Madam Speaker, the sector scored 88 per cent and the committee applauds it for that good performance.

Preliminary Budget Performance financial year 2015/2016

I want to draw the attention of the Members to Table 1, which has the details. I will just make one comment; that the overall total performance by the end of March, 2016, was at 61.1 per cent.

I would also like to indicate to Members that this performance was affected by external development financing which under performed at 17.4 percent on account of the delayed approval of the Russian loan for acquisition of defence equipment under classified expenditure currently before this Parliament, and the late disbursements of AMISOM financing. By the end of the third quarter, only Shs 98 billion out of the total AMISOM financing of Shs 298.266 billion had been released. 

I am glad to report that the total provision of arrears amounting to Shs 5.11 billion had been released by the end of the third quarter.

Table 3.5 indicates the budget allocations for the financial year 2016/2017 under Vote 004.

The total budget earmarked for Ministry of Defence is projected to reduce by Shs 67.67 billion, which is four per cent. This is due to the reduction in non-wage of external development financing by Shs 2.88 billion. This was a one-off state expenditure.

The overall recurrent budget will account for 58.8 per cent up from 55.1 per cent in the Financial Year 2016/2017.

Observations and Recommendations 

Persistent Supplementary Budget

The committee was concerned about the unprecedented supplementary requests under the Ministry of Defence year in year out, and in most cases exceeding the amount appropriated. The committee observed that the supplementary budget requests under programme 3 (air force) amounted to 100.3 per cent of the approved budget while under land forces it was 59 per cent of the approved budget under the programme. 

The committee has noted that each financial year, the Ministry of Defence benefits from supplementary budget requests to cater for wage shortfalls. This is an indication of poor planning and lack of prioritisation on the part of the ministry.

The committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that Government, through the Minister for Defence and the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development, adequately provide for the requisite allocation under wage to avoid supplementary budget pressures which disrupt the budget mid-way.

African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) Operations

The committee applauds the achievement of the UPDF under AMISOM since its commencement in March 2007, notably under the mandate of the United Nations and the consent of the African Union.

The committee was, however, concerned about the delayed payments for troops’ allowances sometimes up to four months in arrears. This has been compounded by the recent decision to reduce the troops’ allowance for AMISOM from $1,028 to $828 effective January 2016 yet the ministry also deducts $200 from each officer to cater for preparatory expenses. The proposed reduction implies that the troops will now receive only US$628 after deductions. 

The committee was further informed that there is a mismatch in troops’ allowance, death and disability compensation given to AMISOM and other groups such as the AU operating within the same area. 

The delay in disbursement of AMISOM operation financing not only demoralises troops but also affects the efficiency of the operations. By the end of March 2016, a total of Shs 98.365 billion out of Shs 298.266 billion for the Financial Year 2016/2017 had been released.

The committee recommends as follows:
    1. Government should re-examine the terms and conditions relating to AMISOM operations, and assess its performance in terms of costs and benefits to the country and report back to Parliament within three months after the adoption of this report.

    2. Government should engage with the UN and other stakeholders to ensure that the allowance for the troops is paid promptly. In addition, Government should reject the proposed reduction in allowances of troops from $1,028 to $828 as this is way below the risk exposure of our soldiers while in operation.

    3. Government should quantify the economic benefits attributed to the AMISOM operations to-date and report to Parliament within three months after the adoption of this report.

    4. Government should fast track the payment of arrears amounting to $10.6 million to compensate for the wear and tear of the equipment in line with the existing memorandum of understanding.

Domestic Arrears

Madam Speaker, as usual, the committee was concerned about the perennial accumulation of arrears under the defence budget.

The committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that MDAs should adhere to the existing commitment control systems, and forthwith stop committing Government but instead prioritise payment for arrears going forward. Parliament should not approve any budgets for avoidable arrears in future.

Acquisition of Land

The committee noted that Shs 76.2 billion currently unfunded is required to purchase, compensate and survey land for production as well as training of the UPDF. 

The committee appreciates the idea to acquire land for production as it will generate savings to Government. 

The committee, however, recommends that Government should find money to enable the ministry to acquire the land. 

National Enterprise Corporation (NEC)

The committee noted that while NEC was established in 1989 by an Act of Parliament as a commercial profitable arm of the then National Resistance Army with the objective of redeploying soldiers involved in the war for gainful employment, the committee was concerned that NEC was among the public corporations whose budgetary estimates were not laid before Parliament as required by Section 13 (11(f) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. Consequently, it was not possible to ascertain the budgetary requirements, achievements to-date, planned activities and challenges being faced. 

Although the Ministry of Defence indicates that NEC requires re-capitalisation to boost its performance, without a status report, it may be difficult for Parliament to recommend this request.

The committee recommends that the Minister for Defence should submit to Parliament a report on the status of NEC in terms of performance, profitability and future strategic direction within three months after the adoption of this report to enable Parliament make a decision on whether re-capitalising NEC can create the required impact.

Uganda Air Cargo

Madam Speaker, the Uganda Air Cargo (UAC) corporation was created by an Act of Parliament and has been in operation for some time. The last time that we reported here, its operating license had been suspended.

The committee was informed that the operations of UAC had resumed and that it was expected to become viable in the near future. 

However, for the Financial Year 2016/2017, Uganda Air Cargo is projected to receive a total of Shs 30.9 billion in form of Government transfers and non-tax revenue sources have been indicated yet it is expected to raise revenue from its operations. 

A review of the 2014 audit report indicated that the Uganda Air Cargo had a total of Shs 2.834 billion as outstanding debtors’ obligations to it but this had not been recovered by end of June 2014. 

The committee recommends that the Minister for Defence and the Minister for Works and Transport should report to Parliament on the performance of Uganda Air Cargo, with a view of ascertaining the current state of affairs as far as the commercial viability of the corporation is concerned within two months after the adoption of this report.

Operation Wealth Creation 

The committee appreciates the efforts of the UPDF in ensuring that Operation Wealth Creation (OWC) is a success. 

The committee was informed that the UPDF was playing a coordination and leading role in OWC, which is likely to compromise the role of extension workers in providing extension services due to lack of the requisite technical capacity.

The committee recommends as follows:
    1. The Government, through the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF) should ensure that the role of extension workers is strengthened so that farmers are provided with the necessary technical support services for sustained production and income enhancement.

    2. The Government, through the Office of the President and that of the Prime Minister, should ensure that the UPDF and the agriculture ministry harmonise their roles to avoid loss of focus.

National Service

The committee appreciates Government’s proposal to introduce national service. The committee was informed that the national service programme aims at inculcating in the Ugandan youth the requisite knowledge, skills and values which will enable them contribute to the country’s socioeconomic development as well as national defence and security.

The committee noted that under NDP II, national service is placed under the Ministry of Defence since it has a military training component and it is expected to boost the reserve forces’ strengths. It is anticipated that all Ugandan youth aged 18 years and above will be required to undertake the national service programme before they join universities and other higher institutions of learning. 

The programme will ensure that the youth acquire both military and vocational skills and it will be implemented in a phased manner. Government expects that the programme will be implemented as a shared responsibility between the Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports; and the President’s Office. The committee noted that the success of this programme lies in proper conceptualization and planning.

The committee recommends that Government, through the Ministry of Defence, should fast track the necessary programme concept, policy and legal framework before implementation of the programme to ensure maximum benefits to the country.

Ministry of Internal Affairs Headquarters

I will skip the mandate and go to JLOS where this ministry performed at 71 per cent under the compliance to NDP II. One of the things that affected their performance is the delay in the dispensation of justice due to delays in case investigation leading to case backlogs.

Madam Speaker, by 31st March, budget performance stood at 75 percent. As regards the budgetary questions for 2016/2017, I want to note that the overall recurrent budget will account for 84 per cent from 89 per cent.

The wage allocation is projected to reduce from Shs 2.4 billion approved for Financial Year 2015/2016 to Shs 1.3 billion in Financial Year 2016/2017.

The observed increase in non-wage of Shs 0.32 billion was more than off-set by reductions in wage and development budget categories. A total of Shs 0.57 billion has been provided for arrears in Financial Year 2016/17.

Observations and Recommendations 

Operationalisation of NGO Act, 2016

Parliament enacted the NGO Act, 2016 which establishes the NGO Bureau and other matters therein. The total number of NGOs is estimated to be 12,400. Whilst NGOs receive funding directly from external financing which requires monitoring and supervision to avoid possible macroeconomic risks as well as duplication of services, the ministry requires Shs 8.325 billion to enable the NGO Bureau commence its operations in Financial Year 2016/2017. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that a separate vote be created for the NGO Bureau.

Government earmarks at least Shs 5 billion as a start-up fund to enable the NGO Bureau carry out critical activities during the next Financial Year 2016/2017. 

Trafficking in Persons
 
The committee observed that the ministry has not provided for activities related to curbing of trafficking in persons, which requires an additional Shs 1.2 billion. Parliament, during the consideration of the national budget for Financial Year 2016/2017, recommended that an additional Shs 1 billion be provided to the coordination office for prevention of trafficking in persons but this was not honoured.

The committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that Shs 1 billion required for financing activities related to trafficking in persons should be provided as recommended by Parliament during the approval of the National Budget Framework Paper (NBFP) for Financial Year 2016/2017.

Subscription to international obligations

Madam Speaker, whereas Uganda is a signatory to the Nairobi Declaration and the Protocol on Small Arms and Light Weapons, Government has not been honouring its obligations to pay subscription as required. It is currently in arrears to the tune of Shs 2.237 billion to the Regional Centre on Small Arms and Light Weapons (RECSA) and the Northern Corridor Integration Projects (NCIP).

Whereas Parliament during the consideration of the NBFP for Financial Year 2016/2017 recommended that an additional Shs 0.55 billion be provided to the National Focal Point on Light Arms and Weapons (NFP), this was not honoured.

The committee recommends that Shs 0.55 billion should be earmarked to the National Focal Point on Light Arms and Weapons as recommended by Parliament to meet this international obligation.

Amnesty Commission

The Amnesty Commission was established by the Amnesty Act, 2000 with the mandate of bringing peace and reconciliation in Uganda. The committee notes the need to continue dialogue and reconciliation with communities and the general public. In addition, the committee noted that Part II of the law will be expiring in May 2016. Although the law requires the Minister of Internal Affairs to extend the timelines, this has not been done to-date.

The committee recommends that Government, through the Minister of Internal Affairs, should ensure that the timelines are reviewed well in time to avoid last minute panic when it expires.

National Citizenship and Immigration Control (NCIC)
The overall budgetary performance was 93.89 percent. The reason for this is that the bulk of this money was for development budget, which was meant to buy some equipment for the national identity card project.

Budgetary Proposals for NCIC Financial Year 2016/2017

Table 6 shows that the total budget for vote 120 is projected to reduce by Shs 19.7 billion; that is 13 per cent.

The budget is projected to remain static in the Financial Year 2017/2018.

The observed reduction is attributed to a reduction in the provision for taxes amounting to Shs 19.5 billion, Shs 0.08 billion and Shs 0.15 billion reductions in wage and non-wage respectively.

Observations and Recommendations

Salary and Gratuity Shortfall

The committee was informed that NCIC recruited 321 new immigration staff comprising of 169 immigration officers and 152 immigration assistants. The new officers are currently undergoing a six months training in Butiaba. This will necessitate the wage bill of Shs 4.335 billion but only Shs 4.023 billion has been provided, leaving a funding gap of Shs 0.312 billion. 

In addition, there is a funding gap of Shs 0.022 billion in respect to payment for gratuity in Financial Year 2016/2017. If not provided for, this will result into supplementary requests most likely through re-allocations, which potentially disrupt budget execution. 

The committee recommends that the funding gap of Shs 0.312 billion and Shs 0.022 billion for the wage and gratuity shortfalls respectively should be provided well before the budget is approved to avoid budget disruptions since salary and gratuity are statutory expenditures and ought to be paid.

Non-wage Shortfalls

The committee noted that despite the expected increase in number of staff, the non-wage budget is projected to reduce by Shs 0.15 billion yet there is a funding gap already. The committee notes that failure to provide for these activities will constrain NCIC’s operations and the attainment of planned activities as well as non-tax revenue collections hence affecting the overall budget.

The committee was informed that by the end of December 2015, NCIC had collected Shs 75 billion in form of NTR. This translates into a potential NTR of Shs 150 billion annually when adequately funded. 

The committee recommends that Government should rationalise and ensure that an additional Shs 2.279 billion is provided as soon as new resources are realised to avoid disruptions of National Citizenship and Immigration Control’s operations and overall revenue collection efforts in form of NTR.

Electronic Passport Issuance

The committee noted that whereas many countries have transited from paper passports to e-passports, Uganda is yet to achieve this. The committee was informed that despite the fact that the heads of EAC partner states launched the new electronic passport during the 17th Ordinary Summit Meeting and directed that partner states should commence issuance of e-passports by January 2017. Operationalisation of e-passports requires Shs 27 billion but it has remained unfunded in the Financial Year 2016/2017. 

The committee was further informed that Government was considering negotiating a Public Private Partnership (PPP) arrangement as an alternative. The committee noted that Government has not shown any commitment to this undertaking by providing the start-up resources in Financial Year 2016/2017.

The committee recommends that Government, through the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provides the start-up funds to kick-start activities leading to the issuance of e-passports in the Financial Year 2016/2017. 

In addition, Government should fast track the option of a PPP arrangement to ensure adequate funding to meet the deadline of January 2017 as directed by the EAC heads of State.

National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA)

The committee appreciated Government’s commitment to the operationalisation of the National Identification and Registration Authority following the enactment of the Registration of Persons Act, 2015. The committee was informed that operationalising NIRA required Shs 103.256 billion in the Financial Year 2016/2017, and has been availed under vote 120; National Citizenship and Immigration Control. However, the committee noted that for proper accountability, effectiveness and efficiency, NIRA should be upgraded to a vote.

In addition, the committee was concerned about the delayed establishment of a Disaster Recovery Site (DRS) yet Government has invested heavily in the national registration project through the mass registration exercise. The committee was informed that the required funding for Phase I and II is available in Financial Year 2015/2016 and 2016 /2017 respectively.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Minister of Internal Affairs should ensure that all the prerequisites for granting of a vote status to such a key sector is in place to fast track the process of upgrading NIRA to a vote next Financial Year 2017/2018.  

The Minister of Internal Affairs and management of NIRA should ensure that the establishment of a disaster recovery site is fast tracked without any delay, with a view of securing the national registration data that has cost the country colossal sums of money.
  
Recommendations on NBFP Financial Year 2016/2017

The committee noted that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development did not adhere to Parliament’s recommendations on the approved NBFP Financial Year 2016/2017. 

Parliament had recommended that additional provisions be made from the additional resources over and above Financial Year 2015/2016 under Vote 120, National Citizenship and Immigration Control, out of the new resource for Financial Year 2016/2017 as follows:
    a) Shs 1.86 billion for enhancing passport issuance system but no provision has been made.
    b) Shs 1.5 billion for digitizing of filing system but only Shs 0.5 billion has been availed.
    c) Shs 3.6 billion for the rollout of decentralization passport issuance system to Fort Portal and Arua but no provision has been made.
    d) Shs 0.64 billion to cater for the shortfall on maintenance of passport issuance within and abroad but only Shs0.357 billion has been provided. 

The committee observed that non-adherence to the position of Parliament on the approved NBFP is a contravention of Section 9(8) of the PFM Act, 2015. 

Recommendations:
    i. The committee recommends that Government should endeavour to honour Parliament’s resolutions on NBFP in line with Section 9 (8) of the PFM Act, 2015.

    ii. The committee recommends that Parliament maintains its earlier stance and the approved additional allocations should be provided in Financial Year 2016/2017, to enable National Citizenship and Immigration Control implement the planned programmes as approved in the NBFP.

    iii.  An additional allocation amounting to Shs 7.1 billion should be provided as follows:
    a) Shs 1 billion to cater for digitizing of filing system.
    b) Shs 0.64 billion to cater for the shortfall on maintenance of passport issuance within and abroad.
    c) Shs 1.86 billion for enhancing the passport issuance system.
    d) Shs 3.6 billion for the rollout of the decentralisation passport issuance system to Fort Portal and Arua.

Vote 144: Uganda Police Force

Madam Speaker, I would like to note that by 31st March, the budget performance of Uganda Police Force was at 74 per cent. The performance of wage was at 73 per cent, non-wage at 78 per cent, Government of Uganda development 63 per cent.

Table 4.42 shows details of the budget performance as of 31 March 2016.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the Members can read those tables. Just go to the areas where you want help from this House.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Let me go to observations and recommendations. 

Case backlog

There has been continued delay to investigate and conclude cases which has exerted undue pressure on Uganda Prisons Services’ resources and JLOS sector in general. In order to reduce the current case backlog by 30 per cent in Financial Year 2016/2017, Shs 48 billion is required but this has been left unfunded. 

The committee recommends that Government should rationalize its expenditure priorities and allocate adequate resources to enable CIID conclude cases well in time to avoid further accumulation of case backlogs as a cost saving measure starting with Financial Year 2016/2017.

Inadequate Accommodation

There has been a cry from this House that there is inadequate accommodation for office and staff. The committee recommends that a total of Shs 4.2 billion, required to bridge the budgetary requirements for rent and to provide for the recapitalization of the engineering department, should be provided to avoid supplementary requests yet this need has been identified well in time.

Crime Preventers

The committee was informed that police trained and facilitated crime preventers with motorcycles, uniforms among others to be able to efficiently deliver on their duties. 

However, the committee was concerned that whereas the Uganda Police Force reported that crime preventers had been disbanded and de-mobilized, it is still appearing in the policy statement as an unfunded priority. Government facilities including motorcycles and bicycles have not been withdrawn to-date. As a result, the motorcycles are currently being used for commercial private gains as boda bodas.

In addition, the committee was concerned that crime preventers have taken police officers’ duties such as controlling and managing traffic, effecting arrests and manning police cells.

The committee recommends that the Minister of Internal Affairs and Uganda Police management should withdraw all the motorcycles previously given to crime preventers and instead have them registered in Government asset registers to facilitate the police force.

The committee further recommends that the Minister for Internal Affairs should update Parliament on the status of crime preventers to-date within two months after the adoption of this report.

High Crime Rate

The committee notes with concern that there is increasing crime rate in the country especially in the urban centres, Kampala city being the most affected with some places turned into no-go zones to pedestrians. 

The committee learnt that places with high incidents of crime include: Ben Kiwanuka Clock Tower stretch, Kibuye-Katwe-Kalitunsi, Arua Park, Namirembe Road, Yusufu Lule Road, Entebbe Road, Nakivubo Road, among others. 

In addition, a number of criminal gangs have been reported to be mushrooming and are currently terrorizing people in the city and surrounding areas. Some of these gangs have been reported as Kifeesi group, B13, Naguru Arrow Boys and Bijambiya Boys. The committee was informed that the gangs have demarcated the city into their own territories from where they operate. 

The committee was concerned that while Uganda Police Force has been trying to crackdown on these criminals, they sounded as if they have resigned on their duty to keep law and order. 

The committee was informed that most of the members in these gangs were children aged between 12 and 15 and whenever arrested and taken to remand homes, they escape and find their way back to the city. Police indicated that the solution to the problem lies in having a holistic approach where these children can be rehabilitated, including medical solutions since it is believed that they are mentally sick.

The committee recommends that the Minister of Internal Affairs should ensure that Uganda Police Force enhances its performance as far as its mandate of keeping law and order is concerned. 

In addition, the minister should spearhead efforts that require co-ordination with other MDAs in ensuring that these gangs are eliminated once and for all. The minister must report to Parliament on the progress and status as far as these criminal gangs are concerned within two months after the adoption of this report.

The committee noted that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development did not adhere to Parliament’s recommendations on the approved National Budget Framework Paper (NBFP) for Financial Year 2016/2017. Parliament had recommended that Shs 51 billion which Government had proposed to re-allocate from Vote 144, Uganda Police Force, be left in the vote for purposes of expenditures under non-wage to counter post-election violence. 

The committee recommends that Government, through the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, should provide funds to cater for salaries and gratuity as statutory expenditures and Shs 51 billion be maintained for post-election violence as recommended by Parliament during the approval of the NBFP Financial Year 2016/2017.

VOTE 145 - Uganda Prisons Service
The overall budget performance was at 75 per cent and the current budget is projected to drop.

Observations and recommendations 

Welfare of staff and prisoners 

The committee recommends that Government through Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should provide adequate resources to guarantee reasonable standards of living to the prisons staff and prisoners in a phased and steady manner beginning with Financial Year 2017/2018.

Prison farm production

Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that for sustained production and savings, adequate budgetary provisions should be availed to enable prisons produce to capacity for both consumption and for the market. Greater attention should be given to the accumulated food arrears amounting to Shs 10.85 billion which if not paid may attract interest and possible litigation.

Dilapidated infrastructure
    i. The committee reiterates Parliament’s earlier recommendation that Government should provide adequate budgetary resources to enable prison services renovate the dilapidated structures and construct new prisons in a steady manner to avoid further costs resulting from depreciations year in year out. 

    ii. Government should explore a cheaper option where UPDF and Uganda Police Force engineering departments can be facilitated to undertake these works.

VOTE 305 – Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratory (DGAL)

Madam Speaker, we do not have a performance for this because this is a new vote. It has been allocated Shs 5.7 billion for Financial Year 2016/2017.

Observations and Recommendations 

Underfunding of DGAL Operations

The committee has noted that despite the significance of DGAL in providing specialised scientific analytical and advisory services through scientific investigations such as in micro-biological analysis of food, water and drugs, pharmaceuticals, agro-chemicals, animal feeds and manufactured products, it has been receiving inadequate allocations. As a result, DGAL has been running out of chemicals, reagents as well as modern scientific equipment to effectively and efficiently execute its mandate.

In addition, there has been delay in the dispensation of justice resulting into accumulation of case backlogs, especially those related to ascertaining fingerprints at scenes of crime such as murders and burglary, DNA tests in case of parentage contestations and homicides due to suspected poisoning, among others. 

The committee recommends that Government should prioritise DGAL so as to promote dispensation of justice, trade and NTR collection by providing the additional Shs 1.5 billion to enable DGAL procure the required reagents in Financial Year 2016/2017.

DGAL economic benefits 

The committee noted that the proposed legislation – Forensic Services and Chemical Management Bill – which is expected to establish the Government chemist agency as a regulator of industrial and consumer chemicals, management and control of industrial chemicals, mandated to analyse imported and exported chemicals, registration of chemicals, among others, has potential to transform DGAL into a major source of non-tax revenue. 

The Bill proposes a modest levy of one per cent on value of imported chemicals. The committee was informed that in Financial Year 2014/2015, the total chemical import value amounted to Shs 281,239,000,000 – applying a one per cent levy, would generate Shs 2,812,000,000 in form of NTR.

The committee recommends that the Minister of Internal Affairs should fast track the tabling of the Forensic Services and Chemical Management Bill to pave way for a more secure control and management of chemical in addition to raising extra NTR for the Government.

Lack of modern scientific equipment

Madam Speaker, the committee noted that DGAL lacks modern scientific equipment. We have a table which shows the details of equipment such as Genetic Analyser 3500XL 24, which needs replacement. The committee feels we shouldn’t have a repeat of what is happening in Mulago Cancer Institute. We need to replace this as soon as possible to enable DNA analyses.

There is also Industry Coupled Plasma AES/MS which needs upgrade and requires Shs 1.6 billion. The equipment helps in environmental contaminant and oil waste test. Water purification system requires Shs 0.167 billion; power backup requires Shs 0.090 billion; HPTLC requires Shs 1.100 billion. The total is Shs 5.407 billion.

The committee recommends that Shs 5.407 billion required to procure the critical modern equipment should be provided to enable DGAL cope with the increasing levels of sophistication in crime and the emerging issues in oil and gas sector, bio-terrorism and poison in addition to saving Government Shs 13.16 billion, which is currently incurred annually whenever samples are taken abroad for investigations. 

Accreditation of DGAL laboratories

The committee applauded DGAL for its efforts towards promoting private-led growth through trade resulting from the scientific opinion regarding conformity of goods to international standards. 

The committee recommends that Shs 0.3 billion required should be availed to enable accreditation of DGAL laboratories as an international best practices compliance requirement by the national reference laboratories, and boost export trade and raise approximately Shs 3.6 billion in NTR through testing for pesticide residual in exports to international markets.

Dilapidated structures – office block

Madam Speaker, the committee was informed that the structures housing DGAL were constructed in 1927 and require a complete overhaul. Although DGAL has plans to renovate, expand and improve the current laboratory workspace as well as securing the place, the required funding has not been provided. The committee noted that only Shs 0.2 billion out of the required Shs 0.9 billion is available in Financial Year 2016/2017. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government through the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic development should secure the additional Shs 0.7 billion required to renovate, expand and improve the current laboratory workspace and secure the workplace to avoid further deterioration and increase in cost.

Proposed budget estimates for Financial Year 2016/2017

Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that Parliament adopts this report and approves the budgetary estimates as follows:

Vote 004 – Ministry of Defence 

Recurrent Budget – Shs 886.6 billion
Development Budget - Shs 614.62 billion
Arrears – Shs 5.84 billion
This makes a total of Shs 1,507.06 billion.

Vote 009 – Ministry of Internal Affairs

Recurrent Budget - Shs 12.19 billion. This includes Shs 1.2 billion for community service as recommended by Parliament during approval of the National Budget Framework Paper for Financial Year 2016/2017.
Development Budget Shs 1.29 billion
Arrears – Shs 0.57 billion
Total- Shs 12.85 billion

Vote 144 – Uganda Police Force

Recurrent Budget – Shs 419.38 billion
Development Budget – Shs 101.66 billion
Arrears – Shs 1.4 billion
Total – Shs 522.48 billion

Vote 145 – Uganda Prisons

Recurrent Budget – Shs 128.04 billion
Development Budget – Shs 23.19 billion
Arrears – Shs 7.1 billion
A total of Shs 152.32 billion

Vote 120 - National Citizenship and Immigration Control

Recurrent Budget – Shs 22.16 billion. This includes the additional Shs 7.1 billion of which Shs 1 billion is to cater for digitising of the filing system; Shs 0.64 billion to cater for the shortfall on maintenance of passport issuance; Shs 1.8 billion to enhance passport issuance; Shs 3.6 billion for the rollout of decentralisation passport issuance system to Fort Portal and Arua as recommended by Parliament during the approval of the National Budget Framework Paper for 2016/2017.
Development Budget – Shs 102.2 billion
Arrears – Shs 0.7 billion.
This gives us a total of Shs 127.96 billion.

Vote 305 – Government Analytical Laboratory

Recurrent Budget – Shs 4.86 billion. This includes Shs 2.52 billion for procuring chemicals for testing and accreditation of DGAL laboratories as recommended by Parliament during approval of National Budget Framework Paper for 2016/2017.

Development Budget – Shs 8.747 billion. This includes Shs 5.407 billion to procure modern equipment. This gives us a total of Shs 5.69 billion.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and the members of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. 

6.29
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

I would like to thank the committee for this report. I would like to support the committee’s position to revamp the activities of the Government Analytical Laboratory. 

Madam Speaker, it would appear to many of us that this institution is not understood, but we live in a time where we interact globally. The easiest way for us to appreciate what should be done for this laboratory is when we consider the fact that at one point in time, we were trying to export products to Europe and they shunned us. The European Union shunned us because of the pesticides and other things. However, if we have a laboratory that is competent enough to analyse and give guidance on those products and what to use, the farmers of this country stand to benefit. 

We are talking about controlling acid which has become a very common weapon of violence against the women of this country. There is no institution that manages its importation and disbursement to the public. We need some institution like the Government Analytical Laboratory.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I am dismayed, perhaps even outraged by the gangsters. We have been here in this Parliament and we okayed the crime preventers without any legal framework. The committee is complaining about them not bringing back uniforms. You have fallen shy because you should have also said they have not brought back some guns. Some of them were armed and caned people during elections.

Madam Speaker, in Kampala, we watch the very police that are supposed to protect civilians working with the Kifeesi group. Didn’t I hear it on the media last week that the hooded group in town were moving alongside the police while caning Ugandans who were riding their motorcycles?  If that is how far the police force in this country has sunk, then they are committing atrocities. That is treason against the people of Uganda.

How can you have a hooded man next to a policeman and the hooded man batters a boda boda and the policeman says nothing and our committee here worries about gangsters? Actually, our police force, on its own, has become a gang of criminals against the ordinary citizens in this country.

Madam Speaker, during the last general elections, you would want to ask yourself who was in charge of the army. Some candidates owned the army and used it to kidnap and beat up people. For instance, in Serere, you would ask yourself whether this army is for the people of Uganda or for a given political candidate. Is this police for all of us or it is for someone in town? 

This Parliament must rethink the issues of security. In the short run, it looks very nice to cane one Ugandan, but you are creating a situation where Ugandans will want to defend themselves. Soon enough, they will get used to the batons and teargas and it will become very difficult to manage law and order in this country. 

I pray that the ministers of Internal Affairs and Defence take this matter seriously and sort political questions politically; you cannot sort them militarily, it will backfire. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.32
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. The matters of security have no limitation and should be everybody’s concern.

Madam Speaker, when you find non-gazetted officers or persons putting on gazetted uniforms, that is a source of crime. It is because you do not know how many LC III chairpersons are putting on army uniform. During the night, you do not know how many people you will meet on the way to rob you. You could do it politically to arm your LC III chairpersons. Some of these Members of Parliament, when they go somewhere, they are happy putting on the army uniforms illegally. They have no capacity to keep it. You find some of their drivers having them.

Therefore, a source of crime can be enhanced or condoned by Government. Tomorrow when you are robbed, you will not ask- 

Another issue is when you find a civilian on the street with a pistol. We must have capacity to know who is armed and why. However, people are applying for guns and they are forgetting that in Rwanda and Libya, when there was high political tension, people started killing each other and they did not know who was killing the other.

Therefore, I would like to sound a warning to the people getting guns that they are very dangerous and you can become the target. Civilians getting armed means they are losing confidence in police who are supposed to protect them.

Madam Speaker, when we talk of cash budget and commitment control and the chairperson reads that there are arrears in police, prisons and the UPDF. What is that? Should we remove those committee control systems? Why should there be arrears where we have a cash budget? Haven’t those people who have not been paid for the last 10 years already sold their properties? Can’t they be a source of danger? Can’t they even commit suicide? The food for the police and UPDF has become a non-priority in your budget. Is that realistic? When you are budgeting realistically, you are supposed to start with human rights and food is a human right. 

The other day I was at Uganda House and I found police officers buying uniforms. How can you allow police officers to buy uniforms for themselves? When you are budgeting, what do you look at? Every police officer must have a uniform; that is an entitlement. When you talk about it, they say that you should not be in Parliament again. I will not be in Parliament, but there will be more crime because nobody would talk about it. 

Therefore, let us talk about this crime and prevent it. Crime preventers should be Members of Parliament by speaking up against crime. However, when you use school drop-outs for crime preventers, you are going to play the music and dance to it. As Members of Parliament, you should be the first crime preventers - but I do not know if the minister has the capacity to listen to you. 

I understand they always appoint a cabinet minister and a minister of state for the purposes of one covering up for the other when they are not around; but in this case, who is covering up- who is taking note of this? Which minister of Internal Affairs is here? There is none. Therefore, what are you doing - I think we should get serious. 

We are here talking about security yet the Minister of Defence is not here. Security has no tribe or party. I think even the welfare of police can be a source of crime. Look at the money they pay them and the houses they stay in; the other day the police was evicting its own officers and yet they pay them only Shs 500,000. After subtracting the Pay as You Earn, they earn Shs 300,000. 

I met one of my relatives. He was going to his house and he told me that he was supposed to pay Shs 500,000, yet the money he gets on his account is Shs 200,000. He was willing to apply and leave police.  There was a day I was going to use a boda boda and he told me he is a police officer. However, he operates a boda boda in the evening to avoid being a thief. Supposing you have an armed cadet officer on a boda boda and he shoots you, what happens then? Do you monitor your officers? We need to be realistic in whatever we are doing. 

I am very disappointed that the chairperson of defence included a provision of wealth creation in the budget. Is it a department of the army? I thought the army was a secondment to agriculture. It was done illegally because of failure to get capable agricultural officers. They instead drop out trained army veterans to go and act as agricultural officers. The National Agricultural Advisory Service is meant to advise. You can be an expert on arms but not on agriculture. Therefore, it is wrong to take money provided for wealth creation and give it to the military. I cannot support that. 

We need crime preventers, but where is the law? Why can’t we have it? What are the qualifications of a crime preventer?  During the elections, they predetermined the results of Bufumbira East. The army was deployed and they were putting on police uniforms. Crime preventers from Kabale were also deployed. However, since they had predetermined their elections, I decided not to participate. On the day of voting, I was here; I avoided the polling station because I am not a time waster. I am telling the truth and I believe it will save me.  I thank you. 

6.40
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this report. We are discussing the budget of the Ministry of Defence and the Ministry of Internal Affairs. The citizens of Uganda decided that this Parliament should be run on a multiparty system. 

If we dialogued more, we would reduce confrontation between the police and the politicians; these expenses could be avoided. The fact that there are clashes between the police and politicians means we politicians have failed in our role to dialogue and resolve national issues. Otherwise, you will continue complaining while you are funding police operations, including those ones in Kololo. Can we, therefore, dialogue if we love this country?

Secondly, I would like to see the National ID programme rolled out fully to everybody. I would like to request that this data from the register be distributed to all institutions, including banks.it is not just a matter of having the National ID. This will help the banks to check those people who have different accounts in different names. It is not enough for us to stop there and wait to issue cards. 

If somebody has lost his card and goes to access whatever service he wants, be it in a bank, registering for a land title, claiming for the NSSF money or applying for a job, as long as his name has been captured by the register, this information should be given to him. We need this data. 

It is very unfortunate that after spending all that money, we are not using this information. That is why we even had problems in our primaries. We did not pilot the national ID project. People created their own ghost registers, yet Government had spent a lot of money on the national register. You would have no problems if we had derived names from the National Security Information System Project. I have always stood against creating too many security organs -(Member timed out.) 

6.42
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this report and I want to commend them for the good observations. 

I would like to make a comment on page 27, which talks about the issue of the backlog of cases. These cases are too many; 300,003 is quite a big number of cases. I believe this has caused a lot of injustice to these family members who have their people in prison. 

I wish this Parliament could look for ways to ensure that money is allocated and these cases are worked on expeditiously so that the families can also settle. Madam Speaker, as you know, when somebody is in prison, usually everybody in the family is concerned and there is no enjoyment in the home. This House should seriously look to this issue. We need to make sure that we get money and reduce on this case backlog. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

6.44
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have seen the police have imported a lot of brand new equipment, including old ones from South Africa which the white men were using on Africans. 

They are driving new vehicles while sleeping in houses where even pigs cannot sleep. What type of person is that? Do you think policemen are happy? I will give you a personal example of Mbale. I do not know if other barracks are okay, but if you want to see the worst police barracks, go to Mbale. Now you want to give Bugiri? That means if Mbale is the worst, which is supposed to become a city soon, then I do not know what others look like.

Why do we invest money in equipment and not in the welfare of the police? I am sure the same applies to the army. That is why they are going for Operation Wealth Creation. Do you mean they are angels because they are the ones now eating the wealth for the poor people? They are not agriculture experts. They are human beings like others; because we are now under pretence that army is protected, they are eating it in the names of the people of Uganda.

I am happy that I am speaking after the honourable member for Buliisa has spoken. He is advocating for dialogue between the Opposition and the ruling party for purposes of supporting the police; he was in the primaries and from the NRM. He came here crying the other day saying that they almost finished him. So, why would they finish you if you are part of the system?

Even during the primaries, we saved him the army and the police who wanted to finish him; he would be dead by now. Assuming we were not there – I am not from NRM, yet I saved him. The police and the army are supposed to be for all of us, and not only for the NRM.

When I was studying law, we were told that the police should be one of the best friends to the public by keeping law and order. However, the current Police of Uganda, if you see them, you must run. Why should you run away from police; you would rather go to army because the police can beat you up. The worst people are now the police.  We run away from police yet police are supposed to be for us.

I would be happier if the chairperson of the committee had asked for money for houses for police men, salaries for police men - (Member timed out.)  

THE SPEAKER: One minute, hon. Nandala-Mafabi

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I know why Engineer Byabigambi does not like me; because he is a chemical engineer -(Laughter). Why do we budget for classified expenditures and we live out the welfare of the people? I heard the chairperson of the committee talking about arrears of food. How can we have arrears in food when we are paying for equipment? The other day, I was told that there was food remaining for the people in operations only. Meaning the traffic officers are not entitled to food. This means that they must stop other expenditures and we give them food. 

Parliament is now promoting corruption; unless we appropriate money to pay the police well, we should not blame them for stealing. We should give them enough. Even the civil servants should be paid very well for them to deliver services. The reason there is no service delivery is because people are not paid well. For a person to deliver fully, they should be paid well because they have to survive thus, they only deliver 50 percent and eat the 50 percent balance which is excess. However, if we gave them 20 percent of that, they would deliver. Why don’t we pay civil servants - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Fungaroo, four minutes.

6.50
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. With due respect, I would like to inform you that I am standing in for my colleague, the  Shadow Minister of Defence and Internal Affairs, hon. Kivumbi. Four minutes for internal affairs and another four minutes for defence and that makes it eight minutes.

THE SPEAKER: No, five minutes in total, summarise.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Our Alternative Policy Statement for the Ministry of Defence and Internal Affairs has been uploaded on your iPads. In the interest of time, I would like to draw your attention to some specific areas so that when you go there by yourself, you can be able to search for the specific areas.

I start with defence: the security situation of the county has two elements: human security and state security. However, it has been perverted to mean regime security. What you see the police and army doing when they are fused together is to defend a regime in power. That is why people get killed in Kampala, the Muslim clerics; people get killed on the roads with iron bar hit men and hooded men beating boda boda riders. This is jeopardizing human security; Ugandans are not secure.

The State of Uganda is relatively secure in that there is no part of the country under the control of a foreign power. The NRM regime is the most secured entity because all the armed forces, the army and police, are dedicated to protect the regime and that is a perversion of the concept of security. It should be corrected.

Secondly, the army is not being managed well. Issues of welfare of the people are not taken care of properly. This applies to both the police and the army. Issues of salaries, soldiers missing salaries like those in Somalia for five months - seven months without being paid yet they are in a risky environment.

Madam Speaker, as I was walking here, some policemen ran here after getting frustrated from the headquarters, travelling all the way from Fort Portal to follow up their salary payments that they had not received for seven months. They go to the headquarters and come back empty handed yet they are supposed to go back to Fort Portal and they do not have money to go back.

Yes, you have bought new equipment, but weapons do not fight; it is human beings that do the fighting. If you spend money to buy equipment and you think you will have a better force, you are dreaming.

 The police should be paid and also those who have not been paid – I have the list but I will not read it. If you need it, I will give it to you -(Interjections)- okay, let me read for you the number and if you find someone with the number 57934; this is the fourth number. Muktar Siragi – (Interjection) – he has not committed any crime for reporting to a Member of Parliament. I am under obligation as a Shadow Minister of Defence and Internal Affairs to make sure that the substantive minister functions properly. If you victimise this soldier or this police officer, you are committing a crime because he has done his part, I will leave the rest.

Madam Speaker, there is also a problem of displacement of resources. We have discussed much about it in the alternative statement which you will read from your iPads. Asking the army personnel to go to agriculture when they do not have the agricultural expertise to work in the so-called operation wealth creation is not proper. 

We have recommended that soldiers should be withdrawn from the operation wealth creation to the army and they should be deployed under National Enterprise Cooperation (NEC) and they should work in the promotion of research, science and development. It should be the products of NEC which should be fed into the civilian world.

The army is globally known to be a promoter in the advancement of science and technology. Some of the things we use in the modern world today like the ultra sound technology, radio technology were developed in the military but today -(Interruption)

MR RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I would like to clarify because there seems to be a misconception. The soldiers are not doing extension; they are on secondment and the purpose for which they were deployed, I explained to the House. They are not substitute for extension workers. They are on secondment and after this operation they will go back to the barracks. It is not the first time that we have soldiers supporting a civilian establishment. We have done it many times and this is one of them. 

MR FUNGAROO: What is your clarification here? There is no clarification. You have just made a statement. Madam Speaker, today -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I now go to Internal Affairs. The police are being taken over by the army. You find army men in police uniforms beginning with the Inspector General of Police. He is not a professional police officer and there are many others who are hidden there.

Resources from Ministry of Local Government are being used in construction of police barracks. For example, if you go to Obongi, there is a latrine which was constructed under the budget of Moyo District Local Government at Obongi Police Station. If a local government is now building police stations, what is this budget you are passing here for? 

Lastly, promotions in the army, deployment in the army, and regional balance. We have said it over and again that the army should be balanced to reflect Uganda. The army should get out of Parliament, but if they are to remain, the army members of Parliament elected should also be regionally balanced. 

Look at this, the whole of the east from the bridge on the Nile up to Moroto does not have a single MP of the army. Out of the 10, the north, from West Nile up to Karamoja there are only two MPs for the whole of this region actually in West Nile there is no body.

You mean there are no soldiers from West Nile, from the east to be elected as army MPs? If we can have youth MPs elected regionally - there is a youth MP from the east, west, central and north.

How do you think an army officer from the west will be an MP for soldiers from Busoga? These army MPs should be disbanded; the election should be done again so that we have MPs elected from the west as well as from east and from the north on constituency basis.

There should be constituencies for the army just like for the youth, people with disability and other special interest groups. The army and this country are for all of us. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, very much. Honourable members, the main report and the alternatives will be sent to the committee on budget for expeditious perusal and report back. But there are just two areas I would like clarifications on.


I do not know whether my mind is deceiving me but I do not know what task is this that policemen are undergoing, which takes 40 per cent of their resources.

Hon. Kwizera said that his relative was earning Shs 500,000 and then he said that Shs 200,000 is taken in tax. I have not understood that. 

Then I also wanted to know about the proposal for housing under the private public partnership. Did you touch on it? I don’t think I heard it.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Madam Speaker, we did not bring it to the attention of Parliament because work is in progress –(Interjections) – No, they are procuring a service provider. This is what the ministry told us and they indicated that their plan is to construct 2,300 units. 

They are beginning with 230 units in Kampala Metropolitan area. So the committee was comfortable with that and since they did not have budgetary implications here we never included it in our report. Thank you.

MS EKWAU: Madam Speaker, I am very passionate about what we appropriated last year for the female inmates. I would like to know from the chairperson, are you following up whether these services are reaching the female inmates? Maybe we would get a particular brief because these are necessities that women must do with.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I believe the ministers of Defence and Internal Affairs should come to answer on this report. We are only talking. I heard my brother Col. Rwamirama getting up to speak; he was only talking about something he knew because he one time held a gun.

However, the people who are responsible for these sectors are the ministers for Defence and of Internal Affairs. We raised many issues here, for example, on welfare. Madam Speaker, don’t you think that the policemen are beating people because they are angry or whatever, it is because they have slept on an empty stomach!

THE SPEAKER: I think you already said that.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the chairperson cannot answer these questions.

THE SPEAKER: You want the minister? We demand that when we come for appropriation, there will be a debate on those issues; therefore, all the ministers for all the sectors should be here. Okay, honourable members, the House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m., Tuesday, 26 April next week. The committees that are not yet ready please use the weekend to complete the reports.

(The House rose at 7.00 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 26 April 2016 at 2.00 p.m.)








