

Thursday, 5 April 2018

Parliament met at 4.23 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was walled to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. The delay is self-explanatory because we had His Excellency the President, in the precincts of Parliament so business could not start. He has just left and that is why we are starting business now.

We have lost the Prime Minister’s Question Time, which should have started at 4 o’clock. We can now dispense with that because we have been able to have a discussion with the President himself; we can now say that that will make for the Prime Minister’s Question Time that we should have had in the House. 

There are some formalities that we need to deal with such as laying of papers that have just come in and constituting committees, so we shall see if we can handle one business. 

There are also members who had requested for some urgent matters; may I know if they are here?

4.26
MS JUDITH NABAKOOBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the state of roads in Mityana Municipality. 

This morning, the community of Mityana Municipality demonstrated over the same issue. This is not the first time we are presenting this issue before the Floor of Parliament. We have even gone further to write to the Minister of Works and Transport. In the previous financial year, they promised that they would get some money for at least three kilometres to be worked on. However, we are going into the fourth quarter of this financial year without any intervention from the responsible ministry. 

The issue of roads is affecting the business community in Mityana Municipality because when it rains, they cannot work and when it shines, dust affects businesses such as food, clothing and others as well. 

We are in a very bad state and I pray that Government quickly intervenes because the problem has existed for the last 20years without any intervention. UNRA and the Ministry of Works and Transport have abandoned and the Uganda Road Fund has not done any intervention either. We are therefore in a dilemma. Thank you.

4.28
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, on 8 March 2018 at 7.30 p.m. at Enro Hotel Mityana, I held a meeting with hon. Esther Ndyanabo, the Mayor of Mityana Municipality. She expressed her concern about the sorry state of the road network in Mityana Municipality.

I was told that the municipality missed out on a World Bank project, which was to work on the roads of municipalities which had a development plan but Mityana did not have one and missed out on that project. 

I promised the Mayor for Mityana Municipality that I was going to add my effort to hers and the Members of Parliament for Mityana to make sure that they are catered for so that the roads are worked on. 

Since the Minister of Works is supposed to come and talk about the other broken bridges, I suggest that he also tells us his plans in helping Mityana Municipality.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, there was a demonstration this morning in Mityana Municipality about the poor state of the road and I do not know how it was stopped. What is going to happen in the meantime so that those people know that something immediate will happen and they stop whatever they are doing? What confidence do you give them?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I took the demonstration as an extra effort and of course, it is their right to demonstrate. I believe that the demonstration was authorised by the police; so that message has been captured and probably, it will catalyse the Ministry of Works and Transport’s effort to ensure that they come to the rescue of the people of Mityana Municipality.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of finance, is there money for Mityana Municipality?

4.30
THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, the Mayor of Mityana Municipality came to see me over this matter - of course we know each other very well and I pass through that area when I am going to Kibale. The issue is funding. 

I had promised the Mayor that if funds become available, I will be able to give the Ministry of Works and Transport money for those roads. What the Member of Parliament for Mityana Municipality has said is true because the roads are in terrible shape with potholes, yet it is a very fast growing centre. 

Therefore, what I can promise this House and the honourable colleague to tell the people of Mityana is that there is a loan which we are working on for municipalities. I will try my level best to ensure that Mityana is included among the municipalities to benefit from that World Bank loan. Thank you.

4.32
MR ASHRAF OLEGA (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national concern. I am conversant that Uganda Revenue Authority has been assigned the duty of collecting taxes for this country. It is also true that no nation can survive without taxes.

However, my concern is about the methodology used by URA, which is causing a lot of tension. For instance, last week on 27th March, Uganda Revenue Authority officials while collecting revenue, knocked a boda boda rider and a passenger. This caused a lot of tension. 

The boda bodas then went to the Resident District Commissioner’s office to find out why the Uganda Revenue Authority officials had behaved that way. The RDC tried to respond but when they saw the URA vehicle parked at the court, the people rushed and attacked the officials. In the confusion, the UPDF officers that were guarding these people started shooting anyhow thus injuring five people. As I talk, most of them are fighting for their lives in health centres in Yumbe District.

Mr Speaker, we know that people must be sensitised before revenue is collected from them. However, the revenue collectors go without informing the authorities. Although it is not their duty, they should at least inform the authorities or the RDC so that people know their presence. At times they come at night and the modalities they are adopting to collect taxes are very crude. How do you chase and knock a person off the road? This is what actually caused problems in Yumbe. 

I will get time and ask for leave of this House to move a motion so that every activity in West Nile can be designated by a committee of Parliament.

Mr Speaker, these people do not have support and some of them are still languishing in the hospitals and they need some support. We end up paying our own monies to support them. Therefore, my prayer is that we get a relevant authority to support these people that are fighting for their lives in the hospitals.

When this incident happened, I was perturbed by the report of the Commissioner General of the Uganda Revenue Authority. She accused me of inciting people not to pay taxes. How can I do that? I am one of the authors of the Constitution of Uganda, particularly this law. Why should I again fight a law that I put in place? It is unfair and it has given me a lot of headache. 

As I speak, my lawyer is researching the Commissioner General’s statement. Once I find it to be true, I will sue her unless she withdraws it officially, as it appeared in the Daily Monitor newspaper.

Mr Speaker, I have some issues that I will raise substantially when a motion is moved. Right now, I rest my case. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Minister of Finance, is that the right way of collecting revenue? That is the concern from the Member for Aringa. 

4.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, it is true that we need taxes to run the affairs of the state. At the same time, we have ethics and procedures in the way we collect this revenue. 

We are very sorry that our brothers and sisters were affected during this exercise in Yumbe. However, this is the very first time that I am hearing this. I will crosscheck with the Commissioner General after here and then I will be able to bilaterally inform you tomorrow what course of action we are taking. 

4.37
MS ZAITUN DRIWARU (Independent, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. What happened in Yumbe District is very disappointing. We are aware that URA is mandated to collect tax and I strongly believe that there are laws to guide them. 

However, these people use very crude methods that when they suspect you of smuggling, they drive near you, open their door and hit you down. The concern is that they hit anybody; whether you have your number plate registered or not. After hitting you down, they will leave you without minding your fate. Thereafter, the victims go for treatment at their own cost.

Recently, Mr Speaker, riots took place in Yumbe. URA officials arrived in court over a case of motorcycles. They impounded somebody’s motorcycle and it got lost. When people saw the URA officials in Yumbe, they went and asked the RDC why URA officials were using crude methods to collect taxes from the people of Yumbe. 

I believe this issue is all over Uganda. In Koboko, we lost two lives. As a woman, I am concerned. Those lives lost have left behind families which are stranded because they do not have school fees. 

I was very disappointed to learn, on social media, that the Commissioner General for URA decided to go online and say that it is Members of Parliament fuelling the whole thing, instead of getting all the facts right, yet we reached Yumbe District to calm the situation. The situation was already out of hand with the people claiming that the local leaders were not helping them since this issue had happened time and again. We work together and as leaders, we need to consult one another.

Mr Speaker, another big concern that I would like to put to this House and the nation at large is that instead of people looking at the cause of the problem, people were looking at the effect. The people that burnt the NGO vehicles were not the boda boda men that had gone to ask the RDC about their fate. Those were people that took advantage of the situation in Yumbe District. 

Therefore, I call that kind of situation a stray bullet. If a stray bullet is in the air, it can even kill the most innocent person. If there are riots in any part of the world, the rioters have got their own ways of behaviour and nobody can control them. When there is a riot in Yumbe District or any other part of the country, people give it different brands. 

The NGOs now say they want to shift their offices from Yumbe District, which is not right. We apologise for that chaotic action of people that were not part of that problem. However, we appeal to the Government to intervene. Since my colleague intends to ask for leave from this House to draft a motion to come and present on the Floor of this Parliament, I rest my case. Thank you. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, as I said before, this is the first time I am hearing of this but I will crosscheck with the Commissioner General of URA to see what happened and see what can be done immediately to help the situation in Yumbe. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is what happened last week; the honourable member for Aringa came to my office and told me that he wanted to raise a matter. I called the Minister of State for Internal Affairs and we had a conference call together with another Member. 

The minister said that he had also heard of the incident that transpired in Yumbe. However, he urged the Member that since the facts were not yet clear, he should not raise it because he himself had already got information and they had deployed to find out what had happened there. That is why the Member did not raise the matter last week. 

Now to see in the press that the Member is being accused when he was actually in Kampala - and yet that is the day that he decided to go there since he was not able to raise it in Parliament, respecting the minister’s undertaking. How can it now be that the agencies are accusing the honourable members publically for inciting violence? I think we need to handle this thing and respect each other when we deal with this issue. Please, I urge you to address this issue –(Mr Ecweru rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Information to who?

MR ECWERU: Mr Speaker, the humanitarian organisations that were victims had threatened to pull out of the district. However, I am happy to report to you on consultations and discussions with them, that we have directed them to stay in Yumbe and in all the districts that they were in while investigations go on particularly the cause of the burning of vehicles. No humanitarian organisation is going to leave Yumbe because of this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.44
MR REAGAN OKUMU (Independent, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance because the issue is going to be decided tomorrow between the Ministry of Works and Transport and the World Bank. This is the issue of infrastructural development along Lake Victoria. 

Mr Speaker, the Government of Uganda has been planning a huge infrastructural programme project along Lake Victoria to link rail to sea through Kisumu and Mwanza. This is what Ugandans have been waiting for to cheapen the cost of transportation.

Officials from the Ministry of Works and Transport did due diligence for Jinja port and Port Bell. Additionally, with 2000 kilometre access roads around the whole of Lake Victoria right from Kyotera up to Jinja, 20 kilometres of tarmac dual-carriage in Jinja to link the port and 11 kilometres of dual-carriage to link Kampala to Port Bell.

Mr Speaker, the World Bank accepted the cost of Jinja and Port Bell with a grant of $60 million. In addition, the World Bank accepted to fund 11 ferry routes and building 20 landing sites at a total cost of $125 million.

Some officials in the Ministry of Works and Transport have included Bukasa, which the World Bank is objecting to under the Public Private Partnership (PPP). Mr Speaker, Bukasa will cost €360 million almost double the cost of Jinja and Port Bell and yet it will have a commercial borrowing rate, which means Uganda will have to pay dearly.

Bukasa will further incur the cost of silting because it is a new place. According to a letter dated December 2017, the World Bank did not approve Bukasa and because it is not purely Government and this Parliament passed some money, which needs to be accounted for at a tune of €50 million in the name of an investor.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, what is the urgent matter?

MR OKUMU: The Ministry of Works and Transport will meet the World Bank tomorrow with this background to decide on this matter and each of them seem to have a stand whether to include Bukasa. The World Bank does not want to include it in a document they presented but the Ministry of Works and Transport is going to present the inclusion of Bukasa. 

Therefore, there will be no understanding and there will be no funding. For how long, if tomorrow’s meeting fails, will Uganda wait to source for other funding to make sure that Jinja and Port Bell are built to service our people?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Any information on this from the Government?

4.48
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, hon. Reagan Okumu said that the contract is going to take place tomorrow between the Minister of Works and Transport who is not here. I do not know what the Minister of Works and Transport is doing right now - whether they are renegotiating, I do not know. 

However, I would like to say that under such circumstances, the Minister of Works and Transport gets back to the Leader of Government Business - the Rt Hon. Prime Minister - to sort out such conflicts. However, right now, I do not have any useful information to give to this House since the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and the minister in charge of works are not here –(Interjection)

I have authorization from the General, sir. Therefore, I would like to pray that the negotiations are still going on and that in case we lose out on Bukasa, the onus is on Government to make sure that we look for money to develop Bukasa. That will not be the end of the world; remember we suffered when looking for money for our dams and our roads. We decided to get money from within our budget and we have constructed these projects. Therefore, if we lose out on Bukasa tomorrow, we have to sit and get money and make sure that we develop Bukasa ourselves.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On this matter honourable? No. Let us pause this and go to the Order paper. I will amend the Order Paper to allow the finance minister to lay the Certificate of Gender and Equity Compliance 2018/2019. It is not on the Order Paper but the Order Paper is accordingly altered to accommodate this item.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On what matter do you rise?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I rise on a matter of hardware products on the market.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, we did not have a discussion on that. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I just want to make one comment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you know the rules; let us stick to the rules - it helps. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

4.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the Certificate of Gender and Equity Compliance for the Financial Year 2018/2019.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, this is part of the documentation that will help the different committees to analyse the proposals and the Budget Committee when it finally sits to look at it and see how complaint we are in terms of gender and equity. The records have captured it. Next item.

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO COMMITTEES IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULES 157(2) AND 184(2) OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

4.51
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to designate the following Members on different standing committees:
    1. Hon. Kahima Moses Mugambe (Ruhama County) – Public Accounts Committee; 
    2. Hon. Kuluwo Andrew (Toroma County) - Human Rights Committee; 
    3. Hon. Orot Ismael (Kanyomu County) – Government Assurance;
    4. Hon. Kamusiime Pentagon (Butemba County) from Equal Opportunities Committee to Human Right Committee;
    5. Hon. Wamala Namboozo (Woman Representative Sironko) - from HIV/ AIDS to Human Rights Committee;
    6. Hon. Kaahwa Tophace (Woman Representative, Hoima) - from COSASE to Equal Opportunities Committee.
I beg to designate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the list that has been read to you for your approval. I put the question for the approval of these names of Members to belong to these committees.

(Question put and agreed to.)

4.53
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to designate the following two Members on sectoral committees:
    1. Hon. Kahima Moses (Ruhama County) – Committee of ICT;
    2. Hon. Adome Bildad (Jie County) from the Committee of Health to ICT.
I beg to designate 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have heard the names. I put the question that those Members belong to those committees.

(Question put and agreed to.)

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Transport and Works? I see the honourable member for Bunya East here and the minister is not here. Why are you people now taking - Each time one is present, the other one is not present. This is the third time now. Did the minister delegate any of you to read the answer to the House? Government Chief Whip, do we have somebody who can present this response from the ministry? No. Okay. Honourable, we cannot proceed with this matter. Next item.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO CONGRATULATE HON. JACQUELINE AMONGIN ON RECEIVING THE MANDELA WOMEN’S LEADERSHIP PRIZE, 2017

4.54
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to move a motion for the resolution of Parliament to congratulate hon. Jacqueline Amongin on receiving the Mandela Women’s Leadership Prize, 2017: 

“WHEREAS the Mandela Prizes are awarded annually by the Mandela Institute to personalities or institutions for their commendable actions in favour of Africa and peace in the spirit of Pan-Africanism and it follows a rigorous and thorough selection process;

AND WHEREAS the 2017 award ceremony for the Mandela Prizes was held on 19 March 2018 at the Marriott Champs Elysees Hotel in Paris;

ACKNOWLEDGING that hon. Jacqueline Amongin, the Ngora District Woman Member of Parliament and Uganda’s representative to the Pan African Parliament was among 15 leading figures and institutions out of 4,956 candidates who were awarded the Mandela Prize Award at the ceremony;

RECOGNISING hon. Amongin’s efforts as the founder of the Jacqueline Amongin Development Foundation (JADEF) aimed at initiating community transformation and empowerment through education and information;

FURTHER RECOGNISING that her praiseworthy actions, perseverance, humility and achievement have not only brought joy, solidarity, pride and inspiration to the people of Uganda but has also lifted Uganda’s international standing;

NOTING that her achievement is worthy of commendation, not only for her patriotism but also for being able to balance her roles as a Member of Parliament for Ngora District, as Uganda's representative to the Pan-African Parliament, a young mother, wife and as a symbol of Uganda’s strength of character and a public servant;

NOW THEREFORE be it resolved by this l0th Parliament sitting at Kampala to congratulate hon. Jacqueline Amongin on receiving the prestigious Mandela Women's Leadership Prize, 2017.” 

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by Member for Toroma, Member for Kamuli Municipality, Member for Amuria, Workers Representative, Member for Nakaseke, Member for Ngora County, PWD Representative Western, Member for Yumbe and Member for Gulu Municipality. Would you like to justify your motion briefly? 

MR AGABA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In justification of this motion, I would like to talk about the award itself. The Mandela Leadership Award is given to people, especially Africans, who have excelled in helping Africa, especially in leadership, transformation of their societies and made great contributions to either specific groups or a bigger group in society.

Mr Speaker, this award goes through a rigorous process that is not prone to corruption, bribery or simplicity. It is a process that is watertight at international level. By the time a person emerges through this process, they have competed well and are worthy of that award. When I read through the current recipients of these awards, I am sure it will make the case better for justification of this motion.

The 2017 awards were done by a jury that consisted of five people and these people went through a procedure, which I would like to state briefly. The selection criteria had three steps:

    a) There was a popular phase in which anyone would submit a motivated candidacy to be a potential recipient and it had its own dates.
    b) The second was the diplomatic phase in which diplomats and personalities suggested candidates to be beneficiaries of the awards.
    c) The third was the actual selection phase in which the Mandela Prize Committee selected five candidates among the suggested personalities and forwarded the list to the jury which chose the winners for this year.

Mr Speaker, the 2017 award had 4,956 candidates and out of all those candidates, our own emerged one of the best. However, I would like to take you through the order so that we can appreciate the level at which our own was recognised. The Mandela Prize in Peace was awarded to His Excellency Dr John Pombe Magufuli, the President of the Republic of Tanzania and the reasons are stated as to why he was a recipient.

The second one was the Mandela Leadership Prize in Democracy and it was awarded to His Excellency Uhuru Kenyatta, the President of the Republic of Kenya. The reasons are listed as to why he was a recipient. 

The third prize; the Mandela Leadership Prize for Security, was awarded to His Excellency Mr Idriss Déby, the President of the Republic of Chad. 

The fourth one – these awards are not in the order of merit but it is just the fourth as I am reading – the Mandela Leadership Prize for Courage was given to His Excellency Pierre Nkurunziza, the President of the Republic of Burundi. 

Another award was the Mandela Leadership Award for Emergency, which was given to His Excellency Hailemariam Desalegn, the Prime Minster of Ethiopia. The list is long and I can go on. 

I would like to mention that the Mandela Leadership Award in Governance was given to Mr Pravind Kumar Jugnauth, the Prime Minister of the Republic of Mauritius.

Mr Speaker, the Mandela Women Leadership Prize was given to our very own, hon. Jacqueline Amongin. (Applause) It is needless to mention that she is a Member of this Parliament but she is the chairperson and founder of the Jacqueline Amongin Development Foundation, which has catapulted her efforts and made them very visible; they gave her the social and political capacity building efforts towards women, her valuable achievements in community change, girls education, rural and maternal health, women and youth entrepreneurship, good governance, human rights promotion and the rest in Uganda.

Mr Speaker, it makes the case even better and worthwhile that our own Parliament recognises our own for flying high among presidents and others that made it through to receive this award that recognises her effort in leadership.

Finally, in justifying the need for this award, in Africa, like we all know, we live a life of struggle from the time we are born crying, through the time of growth, to whatever time that God calls us. It takes a while before people take off time to recognise their own when they achieve. This feeds in with the Kiganda adage that says, “basiima ogenze”. 

“Basiima ogenze” means that you will always be thanked or recognised when you have already left the scene. I think it is right for our own Parliament to differ from that adage. When we realise that our own has made it, we take time and we recognise her.

Being a woman and considering the struggles that our mothers, daughters and wives go through to balance between being leaders, being mothers and being role models for many people, it takes great effort for a person to make it to this level.

There is an intrinsic value in our recognising the hon. Jacqueline Amongin. She has been an astute leader from a young age. She has gone through leadership in the youth structures in this country, through the students’ movement, the youth councils and the political party youth leagues.

At this level, when she is recognised as an achiever, it is a great turning point for the young people in this country. They can emulate her example by sustaining the hassles they go through. They can work hard despite the poverty and the challenges that they go through. They can pursue education despite the challenges and have hope that life can be better after all these challenges. I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is this award something visible that we can see or is it just in form of speeches? Was it an oral award?

MR AGABA: Mr Speaker, different from the Mo Ibrahim award that goes with a certificate and a cash prize, which I think the hon. Nandala-Mafabi was asking about, this award is symbolised with a certificate of recognition, which is given to the recipient. At this point, I would like to unleash the recipient to the House as well as the award that she received – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Had you leashed her somewhere that now you desire to unleash her? (Laughter)

MR AGABA: Mr Speaker, with your indulgence, I think she will have a chance to make her own statement – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are the mover of the motion. We want you to show us what you are talking about.

MR AGABA: May I, with your indulgence, Mr Speaker – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the award that you are speaking about -

MR AGABA: Mr Speaker, I hope that now you and every other person can see it. This is the certificate that symbolises the award that hon. Jacqueline Amongin received from the Mandela Leadership Institute. This certificate may add value wherever it is used.

Mr Speaker, the inscriptions on the certificate are as follows: on one hand is the logo of the Mandela Institute translated in different languages. On the other is, “Strategic Thinking at the Service of Collective Intelligence. Certificate of Mandela Awards, 2017. On the basis of proposals, considering diplomatic proposals, taking into consideration the criteria for the Mandela Prizes, the jury awards the Mandela Women Leadership Prize to hon. Jacqueline Amongin, Member of Parliament of Uganda, for her social and political actions towards social justice and community transformation in Uganda. Paris, 19 March 2018.” It is signed by Dr Paul Kananura, the President of the Mandela Institute. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Seconder of the motion?

5.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr MUSA ECWERU): Mr Speaker, before the recipient comes to speak, in seconding this motion, I beg to say the following: Last year, I was privileged to accompany His Excellency the President to Ngora District for a function. Before I reached Ngora, I did not know the magnitude but I suspected it was extremely exceptional.

Madam Jacqueline Amongin, the Member of Parliament for Ngora District, was graduating over 2,000 rural people who had undergone rigorous training in various skills, which skills are helping most of the communities in earning income in the very rural part of Uganda; a region whose poverty index has gone up of late.

Hon. Jacqueline Amongin has not only distinguished herself as an able legislator here but she has also gone back to Ngora and helped transform people’s lives there. I was impressed by what I witnessed and I would like to believe that His Excellency the President, who came to preside over the graduation as the guest of honour, was also extremely impressed because this is one young lady who has closely followed the teachings of His Excellency about going home and using the ideas that are here to transform the people. 

When we heard that Jacqueline had been given this award, the people of Teso celebrated because it is not very common that we get this kind of recognition. The people of Teso are happy; it is their victory and their recognition. The people of Ngora are very happy. I will say, with a lot of certainty, that Jacqueline’s future is very clear now and tomorrow. 

Personally, as one of the elders from that place, I will continue to work with her and sometimes try to learn from her.  I have been around for a while but there are certainly some good things that she is able to do that I am sure I am not able to do yet. I will therefore be learning from her because she is also very smart. She accepts to be taught and we share with her some of our experiences. 

I congratulate hon. Amongin and this House because it is this House that elected her to go to the Pan-African Parliament where she was able to shine and excel. Jacqueline, congratulations and on behalf of the people of Teso, we thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the motion that I now propose for your debate is for a resolution of Parliament to congratulate hon. Jacqueline Amongin on receiving the Mandela Women’s Leadership Prize 2017. That is the motion for your debate and debate starts right now, each Member taking two minutes.

5.13
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Mr Speaker, I thank you for giving me the opportunity to congratulate my sister, hon. Jacqueline Amongin. It is very rare for someone to get such an award; it is not simple. She is among the few that have been awarded a prize together with presidents like President Magufuli, among others. I would like to congratulate her for the job well done.
	
What I know about hon. Amongin is that she has an open mind. I have worked with her and we have never quarrelled; she is not someone who goes quarrelling with anyone. Many of us in this House quarrel with our Women Members of Parliament but we do not have a rift. We have even promised each other never to quarrel. These are realities and that is why I would like to thank her very much.

As we speak, hon. Amongin is the only Member of Parliament in Ngora District who bought four ambulances for the district. Each sub-county has one ambulance and we are waiting for the fifth ambulance to ensure that every sub-county has one. That is why I do not need to buy an ambulance because she has bought them. (Laughter)  

The people in South Africa saw something special in hon. Amongin. She is a very important lady in Africa and in the Parliament of Uganda.  Mr Speaker, we are only waiting for your award and I am sure that you will get one soon. We shall also thank you. 

Mr Speaker, it is very important that we thank our people when they have been recognised. I would like to appeal to hon. Amongin to continue doing good so that she gets more and more awards. The people of Ngora are proud and I am also proud of what you have done. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you very much and I pray that, that institute continues to grant more medals and awards to the people of this country. I am talking about the entire country not only Ngora so that next time, it is awarded to someone from another region, especially those representing us in the Pan African Parliament and one of them should be the Government Chief Whip. I thank you very much.

5.16
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of this motion and the seconder. I also stand to second the motion to congratulate and recognise the efforts of my sister, hon. Amongin.

When we saw the award, we started celebrations in our TPG (Teso Parliamentary Group) platform. In Teso, we know hon. Jacqueline as Ajele. Ajele is a dove and because of its characteristics, our people call her that name. Ajele is a dove that goes and returns with a message. Usually, it is good tidings and something tangible for the people that it has left behind.  

In terms of the work that hon. Amongin does, I knew her before we came to Parliament; we used to work on several projects outside Parliament. As young women, we said that we must be able to do our PhDs before we clock 30 years old. That is one of the agreements we had with her. 

Mr Speaker, I am very proud to see the achievements that she has made in her life particularly – it is not only the Mandela Leadership Award that she has obtained. She was also awarded the Young African Leaders Initiative (YALI) scholarship and she went to America to engage in some leadership training and coaching, which is beneficial for not only the people of Ngora but the people of Uganda.

As a woman, I know that it is very difficult to move and achieve this level in her life. I think hon. Amongin is not yet 35 years old and yet she has been able to tangibly not only represent her people but also lead at a continental level. 

I would like to congratulate her very much for those achievements and to say that as a woman, balancing the roles of –(Member timed out.)

5.18
MR LAWRENCE ONEGIU (NRM, Ora County, Zombo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate hon. Amongin for this achievement. This achievement is very important to the people of Uganda and Ngora District.

Hon. Jacqueline Amongin has been in this kind of struggle for a very long time: from Pan Africanism to Afro-Arab Partnerships and efforts. This has yielded the fruit we see in her today.

My interest in hon. Amongin’s award is its implication to the young people of Uganda. From the award, we learn that it can translate to help in building strong social entrepreneurship in Uganda for our young people. The challenge remains the working space for these young people to come and craft their ideas. If we can use this effort to promote social entrepreneurship for the young people, we can provide some core working space for them so that they can build their zeal along that line. I think that will help us a lot.

I am also happy that she has been a participant in the YALI. Personally, I was a mentor to that programme in Asia and so I know the rigorous process you go through to build entrepreneurship; teaching young people to learn four things namely leadership, civic engagement, education and environment. 

I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate her and urge her to continue with this spirit so that we can use entrepreneurship to build our economy because we need socio-economic empowerment in this country. That is the way to go and I congratulate you and support the motion. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Member of Busongora County South, are you now the Leader of the Opposition?

5.20
MR JACKSON MBAJU (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Mr Speaker, I am not the Leader of the Opposition but I am temporarily sitting in her seat because the mother of hon. Jacqueline Amoding is a constituent to the Leader of the Opposition. Her mother is also a councillor in Katwe-Kabatoro Town Council, which is in my constituency.
	
I would like to add my voice to those congratulating the success of my sister, hon. Amongin. Her success is not by surprise; it comes from the background she comes from. By virtue of the fact that her mother has portrayed great skills of leadership in my constituency, it does not surprise me that she has also reached this success.

Secondly, when I came to Parliament, the first forum I joined was the Uganda Parliamentary Women’s Association as an associate member because I believe in the strength of women. One of the ladies I met was hon. Amongin. She sat me down but belatedly. I regretted – if I had had an opportunity of talking to her before completing a year in this Parliament, maybe I would have been better than I am today. I would like to thank you, hon. Amongin, for the guidance you gave me.

Thirdly, the stories we have heard from her indeed give pride to women. I would like to ask her that as she progresses in her success, she should help other women come up. There are challenges in our families that we are facing –(Member timed out.)

5.23
MR ODRIA ALIONI (Independent, Aringa County South, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I rise to support the motion to recognise the achievement by our sister.

When I came to this Parliament, I think the first lady I met and interacted with was our sister, hon. Jacqueline Amongin. We met in the Members’ Lounge and in that first day discussion, she gave me a lot of advice on how to go about issues within Parliament. I went ahead and asked her how she was sustaining it. She gave me very good advice which I believe I have started following.

What I remember very well is she told me not to consider individuals more than communities. However, I cannot talk about her achievements within Teso-sub region because I am very much aware of the ambulances and skills. Above all, one day we discussed and she told me how she is empowering the schools, both primary and secondary by offering text books, past papers and taking examiners there, which is causing a very good improvement in education.

I can assure this House that from the advice I picked from her, the first time I came to this House, my constituency had only two first grades in Primary Seven. I tried what she was doing by taking examiners and past papers. The other year, I got 23 first grades from my constituency. From the lessons, I learnt – (Member timed out.)

5.25
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Mr Speaker, the Front Bench this side is very empty. Let me join them to celebrate the success of our own. I also speak on behalf of the Greater North Parliamentary Forum as the chairperson.

It is not easy to get success. I think this is the time to celebrate the girl child. If you see a product at a continental level like this, it is not simple. I met her in Makerere University and that is when I began to take note of the skills in debating in various fora, in defending the cause for South Sudan and I remember even the wife of the late Dr Garang took her to South Sudan, where she went to mentor the girls. In return, she was given some good honorarium and when she returned - I just want to say this - she said she did not know the importance of United States dollars because when she returned, she thought it was just simple money. However, when she began to exchange it, she did not know that it was too much money. (Laughter)

When she did this, it was voluntary work but as she was coming back, she was given a reward. That was because of the hard work she did in South Sudan, mentoring the girl child. We are very happy for you. I think from Teso and Uganda, we are reaping. 

That is why when you see us as members of Uganda Women Parliamentary Association (UWOPA); it is not just for being there. We are members of UWOPA and we are happy to see the chairperson there. I also speak as an ordinary woman because you remember, Mr Speaker, in 1997; you made a very strong statement in Kitgum where we went through two or three very dangerous road ambushes. You made a statement in Kitgum High where you said we should go beyond formal equality before the law – (Member timed out.)

5.28
MR JACKSON KAFUUZI (NRM, Kyaka County South, Kyegegwa): Mr Speaker, thank you for the opportunity. I stand to also congratulate our own, hon. Jacqueline Amongin. Hon. Amongin is one of the Members of Parliament I have come to know who has a lot of self-respect, is down to earth, open to everyone and is lovable. 

She calls me, “Uncle” and I call her, “My daughter”. I can say one thing, “I am honoured to have known you”. Thank you and congratulations.

5.29
MS JUDITH ALYEK (NRM, Woman Representative, Kole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise here to second the motion to celebrate our sister. She is celebrating her current victory. We are celebrating as Parliament. We are also celebrating as UWOPA and above all, we are celebrating as Uganda.

She has made us proud. As you have heard, the Mandela Leadership Award is a very important award. The award is ours. It is brought to us. That is why she has brought the trophy that she got to this Parliament so we have to be proud about it. It is not hers any more. It is ours.

What I would like to encourage her about is that much as she has raised our heads up, please continue bringing such awards. Continue mentoring your fellow women to bring more awards in this country. We shall be more proud about it when we see very many women and girls bringing the same awards in this country. Let it not stop with you today. We want more awards so that Uganda is recognised as a great country in this world. 

As Uganda, we have to promote the girl child. As it has been spoken about by one of the Members here, outside there, we have people with talents in leadership but their talents have not yet been identified. We need to work very hard. 

As we come to this Parliament and deliberate as women, we want more women to be blessed with such awards. Hon. Jacqueline Amongin, thank you so much for bringing this award to this Parliament and this country. Continue with the same spirit and continue encouraging other women. I thank you.

5.31
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, Persons With Disabilities Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to congratulate hon. Jacqueline Amongin for getting this award among the few in the Continent of Africa.

Hon. Amongin is somebody who has come from a humble beginning and I think she is growing stronger and stronger. Hon. Amongin is not a person who hates people. She worked very well with hon. Epetait who was in the Opposition and you would ask her how she was working with him.

There are people who do not even talk. Even when hon. Abala came in and that day we witnessed the ambulances, she still invited him as the male Member of Parliament to witness what she was doing. Hon. Amongin worked with every category of people and I am proud to say the person who leads her team in Ngora is a disabled man and one of my members. He is the one who is leading the group of hon. Jacqueline Amongin in all the preparations in the district. 

When hon. Amongin reached the Pan African Parliament, she was elected the chairperson of the youth committee. Immediately she joined, she was there. Recently, she was again nominated as the chairperson of agriculture committee and she is doing a lot of policy changes in the African Continent. Even now, they are advocating for the PAP to become a Parliament that can be listened to and can pass resolutions.

God gave Jacqueline a very strong voice; she is a fighter and also a mentor. It is because I know she supports young girls; some of them, she paid their school fees and she is trying to make them come on board. I do not know how many of us have a heart like Jacqueline has. 

During campaigns, there is a place where she was building a school that did not vote her. Then, I asked her, “Are you going to continue with the project?” She said, “I am going to build for them the school and finish it.” She then added, “Now that I have come to Parliament, I will still continue with my project.” Many of us would withdraw from such an area where people were against -(Member timed out.)

5.33
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in congratulating my niece, hon. Jacqueline Amongin. Mr Speaker, hon. Amongin fondly calls us, MPs from Karamoja, eja and mamai; meaning, aunt and uncle respectively.

Members of this House have been saying we should not wait for people to leave this world to acknowledge their contributions. I would like to thank you for giving us this opportunity to congratulate hon. Amongin. She is here with us listening. 

Mr Speaker, Jacqueline is a committed legislator. She is friendly and jolly, and I think that is why Members of the Ninth and Tenth Parliament elected her to the Pan-African Parliament. She is committed in the fight against Female Genital Mutilation (FGM).

I come from a community where this harmful cultural practice is being done, and in a number of meetings, hon. Amongin joined us to share her experiences of the Pan-African countries which are practising FGM. She has been able to share with us what so far those governments have done to address the challenge of FGM. She gave examples of what those countries are doing; for example, supporting the education of the girl child through provision of scholarships and construction of boarding schools so as to keep the girls in schools.

So, Mr Speaker, I wish we could also have here some of these good practices being done by other countries so that the girl child in the FGM practising communities can be helped. 

I would like to thank Jacqueline and congratulate her upon her achievement. Thank you.

5.36
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On behalf of Government and my own behalf, I would like to congratulate our own, hon. Jacqueline Amongin. I would like to thank the mover of the motion, and I must say this motion is timely.

Mr Speaker, I am one of those who have witnessed Jacqueline do it. I was in Sharm el-Sheik when Jacqueline tried to speak French, a language she had not grasped at that time, to convince members of the Pan-African Parliament to elect her to chair the Committee on Agriculture. When she tried to speak French; I had sat with hon. Anifa Kawooya, and we listened to her. The way she did it was like she knew what she wanted. I witnessed her again campaigning for something in South Africa when PAP was in session; Jacqueline knew what she wanted. 

When we are born, Mr Speaker, we grow and try to discover who we are. We are helped by our parents to discover who we are, but sometimes, we do not discover who we are, and then, we acquire friends who can help us. Then, we get married. I would like to congratulate Jacqueline because she discovered who she is and she has been walking in that path to achieve what she wants.

I would like to, at this juncture, thank her husband, Mr Achilles Lubega. I saw him in Sharm el-Sheik babysitting - (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I will put the question for our decision - (A Member rose.)– you would like to speak to your own motion? 

Honourable members, I now put the question that the motion for the resolution of Parliament to congratulate hon. Jacquiline Amongin on receiving the Mandela Women’s Leadership Prize, 2017 be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I have hon. Jacquiline Amongin very briefly say thank you to Parliament in two minutes?

5.39
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Mr Speaker, I am very honoured today to hear from my own colleagues because these are the people I spend time with. 

I would like to, however, briefly give you my background. My father died when I was three years old, and I was brought up by an elderly man who is my grandfather. He is one of the best mentors I have ever had in life. He said, “If you would like to be recognised like Mandela, do good things, and the best thing you can ever do in this world is to love people; the rest will follow.” That has always sunk in my heart.

Before I became a Member of Parliament, my grandfather said, “I am going to die soon, but I give you everything in this world.” I was extremely excited about it. 

Today, as I get this award - when I was in France with the different Heads of State, I personally do not know who nominated me for this award, but I thought I should bring it to Parliament to recognise the roles of a young girl who struggled to grow up but came to understand who she is so that the community appreciates her.

My grandfather lined up several women for me. We were three children born from Teso and others born from different sides. I remember my colleague talked here. 

My grandfather showed me Gen. Moses Ali first and he said those are the people I should run to while growing because they have vast knowledge. Indeed, when I was in Makerere University, I struggled hard to meet Gen. Moses Ali. He is not friendly to me anymore like he used to be; he was too friendly. (Laughter) I would go to his office when I was a student leader, and he would give me all the counsel I wanted. 

My grandfather gave me a list of women I should emulate. One of the women was Ms Victoria Sekitoleko because she was a champion in agriculture, and I would always watch her on TV. He also gave me hon. Kadaga, the Speaker of this Parliament - she was quite a young lady then. He said, “You can be like that woman; you don’t need to fear.” From the list of the people he gave me to emulate, at least I could remember those ones. 

Personally, when I was in Makerere University, I saw hon. Ruth Nankabirwa and hon. Anifa Kawooya. There were 10 MPs I used to really admire. My dream started when I came to this Parliament as a Primary Two child to meet the Parliamentarians in the parliamentary hall. I was really inspired by the Members of Parliament, and the way they were dressed. That night when I went back home, I started carrying a small bag my grandfather made, trying to imitate some of those Members of Parliament.

Growing up, my grandfather used to call me hon. Amongin and it came to pass because I got the title when I was in primary school. By the time I finished Primary Seven - I studied in a remote school called Agu Primary School and I give all the honours to it. I was the best girl in that school besides all odds. My grandfather said, “There is no better education anywhere; the best education is what you have now, and that is the best school for you”. I emerged the best.

So, today, as we - this is not the first award I got, but I say this is quite higher because the first award was a Mandela Young African Leaders Initiative Award when I went to the United States and I was placed in Massachusetts State where I worked with different senators as a young parliamentarian. 

I would like to thank the office of the Speaker, the Rt. Hon.  Rebecca Kadaga and Rt. Hon. Jacob Oulanyah for giving me the time off parliamentary duties for five months to appreciate the different roles young people play irrespective of the position that they hold in the different parts of the world. I went to Asia, America and I have been in the Pan African Parliament. 

Honourable members, you have talked, however, I would like to thank you, because when I came to this Parliament, you choose me, hon. Amongin, to go to the Pan African Parliament. Thank you so much. That has given me big mileage.

As they were reading for us how we were awarded this - because we did not know the individuals who were seated in front. One of the things that they said was that, “Hon. Jacqueline Amongin, you came to the Pan African Parliament when you were just 26 and in your first week as a Member of the Pan African Parliament, you moved a motion to revamp the African Union and come up with the youth department that is now working.” The youth department of the Pan African Parliament is being highly funded. I was quite happy because I did not know that some people appreciate my work. 

As I conclude, they also mentioned that they have been following me and at the Pan African Parliament for the last three years, that I have championed agriculture, food and nutrition security and this has been streamlined in our strategy as the African Union. They said, “We honour you because being a young woman; you are able to do things beyond your age”. I felt very excited. 

However, little I did I know that the jury that constituted the Mandela Leadership Award was coming from different continents. They said “Lastly, we are leaders and most of us lose touch with our local communities where we come from. However, as Member of Parliament in Uganda and also director of your own foundation in Uganda, you have done a lot on maternal health and girl child education”.

They even told me that so far we have a record of 102 girls and boys whom we have helped to connect to the different scholarships around the world. I was extremely excited because I had just graduated most of them from the different universities like Makerere. Therefore, I left France with this award and I thought that coming to Parliament and laying it at the Table was in order.

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you; just like our forefathers said, one of the key people who treated me like a princess was the late Garang. As a student leader and a Pan Africanist, I was in High School and whenever he would come to Uganda, he would look for me and say “This girl must be promoted to be something else.” He did that every time he came to Uganda and that lifted me up.

Therefore, sometimes in my life, when I meet someone, I need to say, “You are smart. Hon. Angeline Osegge, you are extremely smart in that brown Kitengi”, that motivates her. You feel confident when someone lifts up your spirit.

I would like to thank my party and the President of the Republic of Uganda for deeming it fit for me to go back to the Pan African Parliament. My five colleagues whom you took with us irrespective of their parties made me to be the leader of the delegation. I am honoured. I am doing that with pride for Uganda and not necessarily for myself.

Lastly, I would like to thank the people who have been very - you know, hon. Oulanyah is tough when seated on that Chair. However, when you meet him freely, he is the best person you can ever talk to -(Laughter)– I would like to thank hon. Oulanyah, we have the best Speakers for this House, because they build up young people. Personally, when people are a bit older than me, I fear sometimes to approach them but hon. Oulanyah has been very handy. 

Lastly, the Rt Hon. Speaker, Rebecca Kadaga; that woman is extremely busy; when you go to her office, she could be talking on phone and signing documents, yet she still appreciates you - that “Jacque you are smart and good”. They are the easiest people I have ever met. Since I came to this Parliament, I do not regret that we still have both of them steering this House for the better of the people of Uganda.

Mr Speaker and colleagues, I thank you for those kind gestures, and I am much delighted that although people are normally praised when they are dead, you talked about me when I am alive. Everyone in this House - my uncle and aunt, respectively - that is why you see when hon. Kafuuzi talked about me being his niece, he did not even know that hon. Rosemary is my aunt, yet they come from different regions.

My grandfather told me that the best way you can have - you can never have friends if you cannot touch their hearts. Touching their hearts means speaking their language. That is why the Chief Whip - when I had just gone to the Pan African Parliament, it was extremely hard for me, because almost 18 of the African countries speak French, others speak Arabic, with 14 which speak English. Therefore, I was forced to learn French. Today, I can speak French because if I must influence positions in the AU, I must bring everyone on board.

Mr Speaker, I thank you and the Government Chief Whip who re-designated me – and sent my name to the President of Uganda for the Pan African Parliament. I pledge to keep Uganda’s flag high. That is why I dressed like this because when I am out there, there are important occasions, I feel like Uganda should be above me and people are always excited about it. Merci beaucoup, Shukrani, Asante sana. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Amongin. You now know that that was the right time for you to speak after the motion. It has come out well. Honourable members, thank you for appreciating hon. Jacqueline Amongin for what she has been able to achieve.

Honourable members, we had said we would have time - of course we have spent the Prime Minister’s question time. For items seven and eight, we will not be able to do them today because we thought we would have sufficient time to discuss these two matters. Therefore, today, we will receive item nine.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS [CENTRAL GOVERNMENT] ON THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON ENTITIES UNDER PUBLIC SECTOR MANAGEMENT FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015: MINISTRY OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTRY OF PUBLIC SERVICE

5.31
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Mr Speaker and colleagues, I appreciate God and the Office of the Speaker for this opportunity. I am going to present a report of the Auditor-General where we amalgamated entities classified under the public sector which includes the ministries of Local Government, Public Service and the Prime Minister’s Office and this is for financial year 2014/2015.

Mr Speaker, allow me to lay on Table an original copy of the report and the minutes as the committee in processing this report. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes and the details of the report.

MS OSEGGE: Mr Speaker, because of time, I am not going to be able to go through the entire report but I have a summary that I would love to give you a copy of, so you can follow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

MS OSEGGE: The Members can find the details in the major report. 

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, the Public Accounts Committee considered the Auditor-General's report for the financial year 20l4/2015 for three public sector management entities namely: Ministry Of Local Government, Office of the Prime Minister and Ministry of Public Service. 

The Ministry of Local Government earned an adverse audit opinion while the Office of the Prime Minister and Ministry Of Public Service earned a qualified opinion. The committee considers the following concerns grave owing to the magnitude and recurring nature across the three MDAs and wishes to draw the attention of Parliament to adopt the individual recommendations in the main report. 

Just to clarify to the House, we have classified the Auditor-General’s report according to sectors and soon we will be presenting the other sectors to complete this financial year.

By doing that, we thought that we would give the House ample time to dissect issues and to understand the different sectors of Government. 

The salient issues that are recurring in the various MDAs

Mischarge; in the three entities a total of Shs 31.347 billion was mischarged; meaning it was appropriated for one reason but when it reached the ministry, they used it for different reasons that were not initially meant for them.

Out of the total mischarged amount, Shs 12.866 billion relates to Ministry of Local Government while Shs 14.65 billion and Shs 4.611 billion was committed by the Ministry of Public Service and Office of the Prime Minister respectively. 

The committee observed that mischarges violated the Appropriations Act, 2015 and the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 Section 21 (i) on budget execution. 

In view of the guidance offered by the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and the Budget Act 2001, on the budget reallocation virement supplementary expenditure, this practice was deliberate, according to us. 

The other thing that we found so common was diversion of funds by the MDAs; a total of Shs 5.9 billion was diverted by the Ministry of Local Government from key ministry activities. Of the affected items was project counterpart funding which was against the development finance agreement and eventually affected project disbursement and implementation. You will find that many of such projects become incomplete and remain white elephants.

When we go to the next financial year, they never completed, yet money has been wasted on them because we have not provided the counterpart funding. 

Pension payment irregularities: 

The Ministry of Public Service made irregular pension payments amounting to Shs 12.194 billion. Out of which, Shs 11.33 billion was paid to pensioners beyond the pensionable period. While Shs 1.161 billion was multiple payments to pension beneficiaries; we all know that our parents are crying because many of them do not get their pensions - because there is a problem in the ministry.

Some people are getting double payments, while others are not getting anything at all; the committee learnt that those who are not supposed to be getting money are also getting.

Overall, the committee noted that there was gross mismanagement of public funds and total abuse of stewardship in the Ministry of Local Government, as well as fraud tendencies in the Ministry of Public Service.

Allow me not to go through the whole introduction, I will read a portion of something that I think is motivational to us. 

As a committee, we are saying that any person holding a political or public office, According to article 164 (2) of the Constitution, which provides that any person holding a political or public office, who directs or concurs in the use of public funds, contrary to existing instructions, shall be accountable for any loss arising from that use and shall be required to make good the loss even if he or she has ceased to hold that office.

That is the background from which we make our recommendations to the different public officials, who will be found culpable according to us and probably will be proven later.

The Public Accounts Committee strongly holds the view that these provisions of the law were intended to be fully applied to give effect to the high principles in Article 164 of the Constitution stated herein above, to ensure prudent and responsible use of public funds.

The committee has accordingly applied these provisions to recommend diverse disciplinary action, investigations and surcharges of various persons found to bear responsibility for breaches of the law and or responsible for the loss or wastage of public funds.

The Auditor-General in his report revealed gross mismanagement of public funds in the Ministry of Local Government, pension payment irregularities in the Ministry of Public Service and others.

I will mention a few of the issues that we found outstanding. In the Ministry of Local Government, during the year under review, the ministry earned itself an adverse opinion of the Auditor-General and this implies that the ministry’s financial statements were misrepresented, misstated and did not accurately reflect its financial performance and health.

The details are examined hereunder: When you talk about mischarge, reviewing the Ministry of Local Government’s expenditure revealed that the entity charged wrong expenditure costs to the tune of Shs 12,860,792,676; this constituted 40 per cent of the total actual expenditure of the ministry that financial year. So out of what was approved, 40 per cent was mischarged and yet that is what was budgeted for.

Further included in the Shs 12 billion are a number of diversions that the Auditor-general took special interest in. whereas the funds were spent on the item for which they were not originally budgeted, the accounts have been presented in a way that reflects that amounts were spent on the earlier budgeted items; that showed that what was done was actually different.

The accounting officer then, Mr Patrick Mutabwire, explained that the mischarge was caused by inadequate budget filings, which were insufficient to meet key mandated activities and foreseen interventions that required swift action.

Our observations are that mischarge of expenditure is an indicator of poor budgeting and undermines the importance of the budgeting process as well as the intentions of the appropriating authority and leads to misreporting. We also observed that under these circumstances, the financial statements were not fairly represented.

A mischarge constituting 40 per cent of the total actual expenditure of the Ministry of Local Government is an indicator of a growing culture of impunity and budgetary indiscipline that wantonly abuses financial regulations.

With that background, the recommendation of the committee is that the Director of Public Prosecution should commence prosecution against Mr Mutabwire Patrick for gross breach of Government financial regulations and procedures and for failing to safeguard public funds as the accounting officer.

You will see the gravity of this matter when you look at the details in the report and this specifically refers to page 9 of the committee report.

Diversion of funds

In the Ministry of Local Government, there was diversion of funds that was meant to procure 111 district chairpersons vehicles. During the year under review, the ministry planned to procure 106 vehicles for the district chairpersons and the ministry respectively.

This involved a total contract amount of $4,590,568 for all the vehicles inclusive of taxes and therefore, funds totalling to Shs 7,013,611,179 was released to cater for part payment of the district vehicles and full payment of the ministry vehicles.

However, it was noted that only Shs 1,487,636,396 was spent on the vehicles procured from Toyota Ltd. The balance of funds which amounts to Shs 5,525,974,783 was diverted and purportedly spent on recurrent expenditure without authority from the Permanent Secretary and Secretary to the Treasury (PS/ST). These funds were subsequently transferred to staff personal accounts. I would like to invite the House to look at Appendix 1. We listed the staff on whose accounts the money was transferred. The total amount that was transferred is also indicated. 

Another amount of Shs 4,361,949,108 was payment for African Day of Decentralisation celebration. Mr Speaker, these are days that are marked on the calendar that ought to be budgeted for but the money was diverted to celebrate that day. 

Also Shs 118,277,664 cash withdrawals; Shs 120,000,000 million was due to fuel and DTRF – we need to get that in full.

Again, Shs 28,000,000 was purportedly paid in hotel bills for that same day – we are trying to desegregate the amounts while Shs 110,844,899 was a refund of borrowing to DLSP projects – that is one of the Local Government projects and Shs 315,674,140 on DTRF.

Rent took Shs 196,859,360. The Accounting-Officer, Mr Mutabwire explains that the releases were inadequate to fund the key ministry activities and the procurement process for the vehicles was not concluded within the financial year thus the need for utilisation of funds on unfunded activities and that is against the law.

The committee observed that use of development funds to cater for recurrent expenditure is contrary to financial regulations. We also observe that the Accounting-Officer blatantly lied and misrepresented facts before the committee. The bulk of the said funds constituting about Shs 4.3 billion were purportedly paid out as field allowances to inconceivable amounts of up to over 1,000 days per respective staff in the financial year. You will find this in Appendix 2; a member of staff claiming up to 1,000 days in a financial year as overnight allowance. (Laughter) 

Mr Speaker, there was also intentional delay of the procurement process with the motive, we think, of embezzling public funds by claiming that it was diverted to unfunded activities. The Accounting-Officer failed to integrate his procurement budgets with procurement programmes in accordance with section 58 of the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (PPDA). 

After tabulation and critical analysis of the figures, the committee noted that Shs 274,369,612 was not accounted for. Our recommendation is that:
    1. The Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) should institute an investigation against the Accounting-Officer with a view of prosecution for fraud and embezzlement of Shs 5,525,974,783. 

    2. That Shs 5,525,974,783 should be recovered expeditiously from Mr Patrick Mutabwire and the respective staff to whose accounts the said monies were advanced. 

Mr Speaker, there is also an attachment of all the staff together with the days that they erroneously claimed.

    3. The Accounting-Officer should also ensure that any reallocation should be supported with authority from the PS/ST. This is a very common occurrence where permanent secretaries do not observe the law and do whatever they like and blame the Ministry of Finance for shortage of funds. However, we think that shortage of funds does not warrant breaking the law. 

On page 10 of the report, you also find other diversions of funds planned for activities in the budget. You will find Government counterpart funding, payment of Value Added Tax (VAT), which was not undertaken; construction of Local Government administrative units, which was not undertaken and transfer to districts, which were not fully done.

There are also details attached in Appendix 3. The Accounting-Officer, Mr Mutabwire, still explained that the releases were inadequate to fund the key ministry activities. 

In our recommendations, the committee found the explanation of the Accounting-Officer, Mr Patrick Mutabwire, absolutely absurd and clearly bordering on ineptitude, negligence and impunity. Diversion of funds distorts and inhibits the intention of Parliament as the appropriating authority contrary to the financial regulations.

From the information availed in Appendix 2, the funds that were diverted were not meant for procurement of vehicles and African Day of Decentralisation as stated by the Accounting-Officer. 

Our recommendation is that the then Accounting-Officer, Mr Patrick Mutabwire, should be investigated with the view of prosecution and should refund Shs 883,904,600, which was meant for the three activities above. 

As regards advances to individual personal accounts, a total of Shs 10,460,426,784 was advanced to individual accounts in the ministry. I beg to lay a document which includes all those accounts and the amounts.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it in the report or is it a separate document?

MS OSEGGE: It is part of the report but because of its big volume, we could not attach it on the report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS OSEGGE: Mr Speaker, personal advances to a tune of Shs 3,827,011,454 were not accounted for by the respective officials, apart from being advanced, some was accounted and others not. As such, the Auditor-General could not ascertain whether the funds were used for intended purposes. 

It was also noted that the unaccounted for funds were not reflected as advances receivable in the financial statements at the end of the financial year. The financial statements were therefore misstated by Shs 3,827,011,454.

There were funds that were requisitioned without involvement of departmental heads. An amount of Shs 2,441,881,736 was requisitioned wrongly. That means that they passed through the wrong channels and it ended up in individual accounts. 

The accounting instructions that require approval of claims by respective heads before being finally approved by the Accounting-Officer are there. While the Accounting-Officer explains that activities were in line with approved departmental work plans and budgets, and that in some instances the heads of department were not at the station at the time of requisition, the Principal Internal-Auditor was asked to review the matter but the Inspector-General of Government (IGG) took all the documents for detailed investigation. What we need to say is that, the IGG picked up this matter but up to date, she has not concluded this investigation. I do not know if she will. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How many years now?

MS OSEGGE: From 2015 to date.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That should have been enough for the audit of the documents.

MS OSEGGE: Yes, to date - we interacted with the IGG and she said that she was waiting for the committee report. 

There were also excess payments for night subsistence allowance that I talked about earlier, amounting to Shs 499,590,000. While the provisions under the Public Service Standing Orders, 2010, stipulate a maximum claim of 150 days in 150 days in night allowances per year, it was noted that an officer claimed up to 1,036 nights in one year, which amounted to Shs 499,590,000, which was paid in excess of the allowable expenditure and the Auditor-General found this irregular. You will find this attachment in Appendix 4 of the committee report. 

Mr Speaker, the committee is of the view that the accounting officer, Mr Mutabwire, who oversaw the poor and irregular management of affairs at the ministry and who also admitted before the committee that he was always paid in excess because the hotels befitting his stature were more expensive than the Public Service Standing Orders prescribed rate of Shs 150,000 per night, erred.

Mr Speaker, there were also monies that were disallowed by the Auditor-General owing to their illegality amounting to Shs 635,621,910.

One officer claimed to have paid for accommodation, meals and venue for 70 participants at a guesthouse. However, when audit contacted some of the participants, they denied having been accommodated. The contact at the guesthouse also denied having hosted the function. Besides, the contact indicated that the guesthouse has the capacity of only 18 rooms and could not have accommodated 70 participants, as indicated in the claim.

It was observed that voucher number R378-R379 of May 20l4 clearly had two drivers receiving allowances. One person had two drivers and they were both paid allowances. However, fuel receipts indicated usage of four vehicles by two drivers for one person. The registration numbers of the vehicles are there and this cast doubt on how two drivers could have utilised four vehicles at the same time for one person. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, it was also noted that some officers requisitioned for money for the similar activities at similar venues more than twice. You will find more than one officer going to do the same job in the same place and all requisitioning for money and they were paid. For example, money for inspection of training centres for Katakwi Town Council, Katakwi District and Kaberamaido District and Town Council was requisitioned twice using voucher number R592/Aug and R155/Nov. Also voucher numbers R246/Aug-2014, R153/Nov and R247/Aug were used for requisitioning funds for the inspection of training centres in Lira Municipal Council, Lira District Council, Oyam, Dokolo District Council, and Amolatar by the same officials at the same time. This resulted into duplication of activities and subsequent loss of Government funds.

Mr Speaker, some officials even produced activity consolidated reports even before the field officials had completed the collection of data from the respective areas to which they had been deployed. The reports were available for the work that was supposed to be done before the work was done. 

Some officials accounted for funds before receipt making it appear like they had lent Government money. Those were the findings of the Auditor-General, Mr Speaker. 

Further, the committee found out that some officials requisitioned funds to carry out inspection of project activities under the Markets and Agriculture Trade Improvement Project (MATIP) in areas where the project was not operating such as Sheema, Ntoroko and Kiruhura let alone these officials not being project staff.

In some instances, officials claimed to be performing different activities at the same time in different places. For example, an official is purported to have carried out an activity of monitoring Community Driven Development (CDD) programmes in eastern region of Jinja and Kamuli from 1st - 4th September 2014. However, the officer again claimed to have carried out an activity in Mpigi and Buvuma in the same period from 8th – 14th September using vouchers No. R518/Aug 20l4 and R481/Aug 20l4.  

The accounting officer, Mr Patrick Mutabwire, explained that advance holders were informed about the observations and asked to provide further explanations on accountabilities. However, as noted earlier, IGG took all documents for investigations.

There were issues of direct procurement instead of using suppliers. In the three entities, Shs 248,927,671 was used to procure goods and services such as procurement of t-shirts for youth day, stationery and construction materials using single sourcing method, in situations that were not of an emergency nature. The procurements were also above the threshold of Shs 5,000,000 and as such could not have been micro procurements.

The accounting officer explained that procurements undertaken with the funds had competitive prices and some were urgent interventions.

Mr Speaker, in these ministries, we also found that fuel was deposited on personal accounts of staff. An amount of Shs 1,111,725,800 was deposited into staff personal accounts to procure fuel instead of being deposited on the ministry fuel cards.  Out of this amount, Shs 378,557,300 was not accounted for. It was noted that most of these activities were carried out in areas where fuel cards could easily be accessed, for example, Mbale, Mbarara and Soroti. 

There were also funds held on staff personal accounts after end of year, as raised by the Auditor-General. However, our observations, after the interrogation of the implicated officers, were as follows:

The ministry officials embarked on a money bonanza through connivance by supervisors with supervisees in the various departments to create fictitious field activities with the intention of defrauding the Government of Uganda.

The syndicate involved officers at all levels of financial approval, who authorised and had large sums of money deposited on the bank accounts of junior officers, sometimes without their prior consent. The named officers who played a central role in the fraud included Mr Wasolo Alfred, the principal accountant; Mr Atabua Ali, the senior accountant; and Mr David Kayongo, the senior assistant secretary. Actually, what used to happen was that they would deposit money on a junior staff’s account and they would take that junior staff to the bank to withdraw the money and hand it over to them. Some of the staff confessed and said that they were ready to pay the money but that has to be followed up probably by the IGG.   

The officers on whose accounts the funds were paid did not originate the documentation as required by financial regulations. The average travel was above the limit of 150 days in a year provided for in the Standing Orders for public officers and above the 365 days of the year. I think this was one year that God created with more days than any others. 
 
The implicated officers admitted to the committee that their accountabilities had been forged. We have these recordings, just in case the IGG would want to pick them up. 

The accounting officer, Mr Mutabwire, also admitted to the committee to having falsified accountability documents.

The committee noted that some of the funds were advanced for supply of goods and services that would have ordinarily been paid to the service providers according to the Treasury accounting instructions. The practice of depositing huge sums of money on personal accounts exposes public funds to risk of loss since the accounting officer does not have any control over such funds deposited on personal accounts. 

Given the fact that there was no competitive bidding, the accounting officer contravened the procurement principles. The ministry did not obtain value for money hence violating the basic principles of procurement as enshrined in section 43 of the PPDA Act.

The committee also observed that there was gross violation of Treasury accounting instructions. This can be attributed to connivance, conspiracy and weak internal control mechanisms.

The committee found no merit in the explanation by the accounting officer regarding fuel deposits on personal accounts, given that for areas such as Mbale and Soroti the fuel card system operates adequately.

Despite the overwhelming evidence availed to the committee and the IGG, the committee notes with concern that no charges have been preferred against the culprits since October 2Ol5 when the IGG seized the relevant documents, some of which could not be availed to the committee.

Therefore, the committee recommends that: 

1. 	The accounting officer, Mr Patrick Mutabwire, should be dismissed with disgrace and declared unfit for any public office.

2. 	Mr Mutabwire Patrick, the accounting officer; Mr Wasolo Alfred, the principal accountant; Mr Atabua Ali, the senior accountant; and Mr David Kayongo, the senior assistant secretary, should be investigated with a view of recovering the funds and be prosecuted for conspiracy, abuse of office, fraudulent and false accounting and embezzlement of public funds.

3. 	All the conspirators and accomplices in the syndicate should be investigated with a view of recovering the said amounts.

4. 	Officers found in breach of laid down procedures without requisite authorisation should be relieved of their duties and declared unfit to hold public office. Mr Speaker, this seems harsh but we think that we need to curb impunity in this country.

5. 	Officers implicated in Appendix 3 as having been paid in excess of the approved rates should be further investigated by the IGG and should accordingly refund the excess funds within three months from the presentation of this report.

6. 	The accounting officer should ensure that in future, heads of department are involved in the authorisation of expenditure of funds under their care as required by the financial regulations.

7. 	The culpable officers should refund the Shs 635, 621,91O within three months after the adoption of this report.

8. 	Accordingly, Mr Wasolo Alfred, the former principal accountant who is now on the run, and the officers in the PDU who were involved in the irregular procurement, should be apprehended and prosecuted. The committee implores the CID and DPP to investigate the matter with a view to prosecute the culprits.

9. 	Officers implicated should as well refund the money fraudulently advanced to their personal accounts for the procurement of fuel.

10. 	The IGG should expedite the investigations and bring this matter to its logical conclusion.

Mr Speaker, there were also irregular transfers of refunds to project accounts. That is reported on page 18 of the report. In that regard, the committee observed that the transfer of funds to closed project accounts is not only illegal but also fraudulent. 

The committee also noted that Shs 300,000,000, which was purportedly transferred to procure machinery and equipment, was misappropriated.

Accordingly, although management explained that the project is still operational with some funding from UNCDF and UN Women, the committee was not satisfied with this explanation because there was no budget provision for the project especially on the procurement of machinery or equipment in the circumstances. Note that the project accounts had been procedurally closed and so money was transferred to closed accounts.

The committee recommends that the accounting officer, Mr Mutabwire Patrick, should refund the Shs 826,996,165.

Secondly, the committee recommends that further investigations should be done on the transactions in the project accounts, with the view of prosecuting the accounting officer and the project team for fraud.

Mr Speaker, one of the entities was the Prime Minister’s office. The Office of the Prime Minister received a qualified audit opinion for the financial year under review. A detail of the queries raised and observations and recommendations made by the committee are given below. This is on page 46 of the report. 

Mr Speaker, we found a mischarge of expenditure. This is a common occurrence across all Government entities and it is expressly indicated - it is punitive and punishable according to the Public Finance Management Act. However, so far no body has been punished. We think that the PS/ST should do - (Interruption)

DR NSABA BUTURO: Mr Speaker, this is a particularly important report. The picture being painted is of a country, which is in danger; a country whose systems, quite frankly, are being undermined; a situation where the hunter and the hunted are equally culpable in so far as the governance we want to see in the country is concerned.

Mr Speaker, we see wickedness cutting across the board. We see networking, which the chair has referred to. We see incompetence. We see criminals well positioned. More worrying, we see a situation where action should be taken but it is not being taken, many times deliberately because of the networking that is going on.

Mr Speaker, I have a suspicion that what we are listening to is happening elsewhere as well. Therefore, is it in order that such a report of a very important nature, which has implications on the stability of this nation, the unity of Uganda, the prosperity of this nation, should be debated when the House is not adequately constituted? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That ordinarily would have been a procedural point but I guess in the circumstances, the view of the Member for Bufumbira is different. 

Honourable members, we are not debating this report; we are only receiving it. It has been uploaded on the iPads and this is just to commission the discussion. Once the presentation is finished, we will give time for Members to internalise it and then a fully-fledged debate will happen, if so necessary.

DR BUTURO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Public Accounts Committee reports are reports we get following the budget we appropriated. The procedural issue I am raising is that when it comes to the budget, we give it appropriate time and we pass it but when it comes to the Public Accounts Committee reports, we consider them after 4.00p.m. or 5.00 p.m. Why? 

Mr Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for Public Accounts Committee reports to be given maybe a week, and we begin in the morning when all television stations are on? I say this because we are now speaking but all television station reporters are not here. They are talking of people who have run away but these people have not run away; they are here. In fact if you report that somebody has run, you will still hear someone on phone saying, “No, the person is here.” 

Mr Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the reports of the Committee on Public Accounts to be given appropriate time when the whole world is watching, other than when we are very few as hon. Nsaba Buturo has raised? If you say that you want quorum, during consideration of reports of the Committee on Public Accounts, people will make sure they run away so that there is no quorum. Therefore, even if we are few, we would be happier if the entire world is watching. 

The chairperson has raised issues here and if you have heard them, you would start crying. When I saw the hon. Nsaba Buturo rising up, I thought he had remembered when he was the Minister of Ethics and Integrity; I thought he would cry even when he was there, but he was not crying. (Laughter) 

Mr Speaker, maybe this report can be finished, but wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the remaining ones, which they are going to present, to be given appropriate time when the whole world is watching? (Applause) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is the fourth day that this report is coming, but we raise urgent matters and other issues and it gets involving. Honourable member for Budadiri West, we usually start at 2 o’clock but by 3.30 p.m., we are still dealing with urgent matters. 

That is why in the past, I used to have urgent matters at the end of the sitting so that I can go with the business on the Order Paper first because that is the scheduled business of the House. I might have to go back to that, so that urgent matters come at the end and those with urgent matters can sit up to the end of the proceedings. In that way, when we come here, we immediately start on the business of the House as scheduled on the Order Paper. 

Honourable members, from our view point as presiding officers, by the time you get to the Order Paper, the Members are already exhausted. We spend one and a half to two hours on urgent matters before we touch the Order Paper. Therefore, I would like your support when I change my procedures in the future to have urgent matters raised at the end of the sitting, so that we can deal with them that way. That is what I used to do until Members got not very happy with the way I was doing business and I had to change.

However, today was a different kind of situation because we had scheduled this to happen earlier but you remember what happened. The chairperson has also been asking the Speaker to put her item on the Order Paper and today we had done that. If you can look at the Order Paper, that was supposed to be the main item for today. It should have happened earlier but because of what happened today, here we are. 

Let us live with this for now. Let us receive this report and then we schedule the debate for a day when Members can come and engage with this. These are very sad occurrences.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Office of the Prime Minister had a mischarge of expenditure to the tune of Shs 4,611,211,067. This constituted 3.4 per cent of total expenditure for the Office of the Prime Minister. 

The committee observed that this practice undermines the importance of the budgeting process as well as the intentions of the appropriating authority and leads to financial misreporting. The accounting officer explained, as usual, and I will not go into that explanation. 

Recommendations 

1. 	The committee recommended that the accounting officer should streamline the budget process to ensure that sufficient funds are allocated to each account and budget line codes are given. 

2. 	Authority should always be sought prior to any reallocations as provided for in the Public Finance Management Act.

Still under the Office of the Prime Minister, one of the issues raised was construction without approved building plans. A local company was contracted to construct a temporary relief store at Namanve Industrial Park at a cost of Shs 745,735,441. A review of the project implementation revealed the following:

    a) There was lack of an approved building plan. Management did not provide an approved building plan from Mukono District nor was there any evidence of payment to the district for plan assessment fees, implying that no plan was ever submitted for approval. 

    b) Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) study: Among the observations made in the report was that the EIA study and report was not carried out on this project. A speedy EIA study was recommended on the project, which was not done by OPM.

Observations

1. 	Although Shs 745,375,441 was allocated for the project, construction was done without approved plans. Certainty for value for money was lost.

2. 	The accounting officer does not possess a land title for the property thus cannot claim ownership.

Recommendations 

1. 	The Auditor-General should undertake a value for money audit on the said construction.

2. 	The accounting officer should immediately regularise the construction process, including obtaining ownership of the land.

Ministry of Public Service

This ministry earned itself a qualified opinion by the Auditor-General and the salient issues therein are as follows – this is on page 55 of the report: 

The Auditor-General observed pension mischarges, which amounted to Shs 14,657,510,377. The Government chart of accounts defines the nature of expenditure for each account code with the intention of facilitating better and consistent classification of financial transactions and tracking budget performance per expenditure item. An analysis of the pension payment file and Government of Uganda chart of accounts revealed that out of pension payments amounting to Shs 284,338,103,274 paid during the year, Shs 14,657,510,377 was charged on account codes which do not reflect the nature of the expenditure described in the Government of Uganda chart of accounts.

The audit attributed the above scenario to improper budgeting for the pension obligation as well as relaxation of the budgeting controls in the Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS), which would allow payments on items without sufficient funds. For example, scrutiny of the pension budget provisions revealed the following:

    a) Certain pension budget items had no funds provided for in the IFMS but payments were made. They included the pension arrears for defence, local governments, civil service and teachers. 

    b) Certain pension budget items also had a lot more funds provided for on the IFMS than they would actually need. Within this, you see fraud because what they require to pay is not budgeted for and they provide for money where it is not required; for example, emoluments paid to former Presidents and VIPs, and gratuity expenses. This resulted into under or over budgeting for some pension items, with an overall under budgeting of Shs 5,673,003,274.

Observation

The accounting officer violated the provisions of Section 20, which authorises Parliament to reallocate funds, and Section 22 of the Public Finance Management Act on virement.

Recommendation
The accounting officer should be sanctioned in accordance with the provisions of the Public Finance Management Act, Section 79(e).

Mr Speaker, the Auditor-General also found outstanding commitments in the name of Government, amounting to Shs 200,252,608,998. This was mostly for gratuity and pension arrears.

It was noted that the financial statements reflected an amount of Shs 200,252,608,998 as a cumulative ministry debt as at 30 June 2015. It was noted that the bulk of this amount, which is Shs 199,255,907,539, comprised of gratuity and pension arrears which have continued to accumulate uncontrollably. In 2O14, there was an amount of Shs 108,681,159,047.

The Auditor-General further noted that the ministry does not have a comprehensive stock of all potential claimants or retired employees, as well as an indication of future retirees, to enable it establish the funds that would be needed to sustainably manage the pension liability. This implies that the ministry has to rely on claims submitted by retired employees for it to establish the amount of resources to budget for, which eventually leads to under budgeting for gratuity and pension. 

Mr Speaker, suffice it to note that all these ministries have human resource departments. So, we see lack of human resource planning in the ministries.

Observations

1. 	The weaknesses in the internal control system were exploited with intention to defraud Government.

2. 	Lack of a comprehensive pensioners’ database was glaring.

Recommendations

1. 	The committee recommends that the accounting officer should devise a comprehensive strategy for the management of gratuity and pension for the entire public service, including a compilation of a complete stock of both retired and current employees. It could then be used in determining the expected liability over time.

2. 	Government could also explore a possibility of establishing a pension fund to guarantee availability of terminal benefits to civil servants as and when they retire.

Payment of pensioners beyond the pensionable period: Mr Speaker, an amount of Shs 11,038,936,918 was attributed to that. Section 18 (1) of the Pensions Act, Cap 286, requires that every pension or other allowance granted under the Act should cease upon the death of the person to whom it is granted. For the avoidance of doubt, it is declared that a pension granted under this section be payable for a period not exceeding in aggregate 15 years from the date of retirement of the deceased pensioner. 

Pursuant to the above therefore, all pensioners must furnish the Ministry of Public Service with annual life certificates after the expiry of their 15-year pensionable periods as proof that they are still alive.

The Auditor-General noted that Shs 11,038,936,918 was paid to pensioners who had exceeded their pensionable period of 15 years, yet no life certificates were availed as proof of their continued existence. This similar observation was made in the previous audit report of financial year 2013/2014 and the recommendations therein were not adhered to.

Observations

1. 	The payments made were premised on a wrong database from the onset. The accounting officer accepted that the payments were made in error.

2. 	The committee noted that there was gross negligence by the accounting officer and that this was collusion aimed at defrauding Government.

3. 	The accounting officer simply paid money out carelessly without verification, causing loss to Government.

4. 	Absence of evidence of continued existence of pensioners in form of life certificates to support pension payments may imply payments to non-existent pensioners.

5. 	Although the accounting officer stated that the respective life certificates were available to justify the amounts paid out, these were however not availed for verification.

Recommendations

1. 	The accounting officer should recover the said money, Shs 11,038,936,918, or be held personally responsible.

2. 	The accounting officer should always adhere to the requirements under the Act and obtain life certificates before making such payments.

3. 	The life certificates of pensioners in regard to the questioned payments should be obtained and provided for review to the Auditor-General.

Key Findings

Financial and Procurement Malpractices

The committee notes with grave concern the apparent widespread financial and procurement malpractices in the Ministry of Local Government. This is compounded by what bears all the hallmarks of a culture of impunity that routinely promotes and condones deliberate breaches of procurement and financial regulations.

Furthermore, inconsistencies were observed for a number of procurement activities agreed on between the ministries and the suppliers, with some failing to deduct and remit the six per cent withholding tax. Government entities are not remitting the six per cent withholding tax and yet they need taxes for service delivery.

The committee observed that Section 119 of the Income Tax Act was breached, meaning that in most of the contracts awarded by the entities during the period under review, the six per cent withholding tax was not deducted. The committee abhorred the manner in which accounting officers failed to deduct six per cent withholding tax and the evidence of payment made conveyed to URA.

Lacklustre Performances by Public Officials

The committee observed that some public officials do not treat their responsibilities seriously. The committee was dismayed by the rampant recurrent incidences of neglect of duty, gross misconduct and lack of seriousness as exhibited in failure to supervise and manage Government contracts.

Conclusion

In conclusion, therefore, the public sector management is cardinal to service delivery to the citizenry. However, during the financial year under review, its performance was dismal. This is demonstrated by the nature of opinions by the Auditor-General, especially to the Ministry of Local Government with an adverse opinion, the worst of all the entities in 20l4/2015. This is an indication that there was lack of compliance with the ministry's financial systems and disregard of financial regulations and procedures. 

The Ministry of Public Service and Office of the Prime Minister had a qualified opinion by the Auditor-General. This is an indication that they had occurrences which did not comply with generally accepted accounting principles.

Ministry of Local Government requires a complete overhaul, according to us, of its financial systems and further investigation by the requisite organs in order to bring the culprits involved in financial mismanagement to book and recover misappropriated funds.

The Office of the Prime Minister was involved in virement without seeking authority from the PS/ST. There were also several procurement anomalies demonstrating the failure to abide by the provisions of the PPDA Act. There was general neglect of the regulations on public financing in this year under review.

The Ministry of Public Service in the year under review greatly mismanaged the pension fund as evidenced by pension mischarges, outstanding commitments and payment of pensioners beyond the pensionable period. As a result, the beneficiaries from the pension fund suffered delays or failure to receive their entitlement as envisaged.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee wishes to summarise as follows: 

1. 	That generally across the board, there was evidence of systemic failure in administrative responsibilities and management functions in the Ministry of Local Government, the Ministry of Public Service and Office of the Prime Minister. This may be an indication for alertness in Government institutions.

2. 	That Government officials lack the culture of proper record management and adherence to financial regulations. 

Mr Speaker, you will find in the main report all the names of the people that are culpable. Therefore, we would like to implore this House to adopt these recommendations as provided by the Public Accounts Committee. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson. (Applause) This is one of those reports that have been given thorough study. As you can see, if the big report was read, it would have taken a long time. We agreed with the chairperson that she would take 30 minutes but she has spent more than an hour to present the report. That is okay because the seriousness of the matter so requires.

Honourable members, I now propose for your debate the motion for adoption of the report of the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) on the report of the Auditor-General on entities under the Public Sector Management for the financial year 2014/15: Ministry of Local Government, Office of the Prime Minister and Ministry of Public Service. That is the motion I propose for your debate. However, I do not think we can start debate now. I know the Member of Parliament for Budadiri County West would like us to debate now but we would not be able to debate now. 

Honourable members, what do you debate in such reports? The report is for the financial year 2014/2015. It is factual and the recommendations are clear. We should be looking at opportunities where our own committee has done work that cannot be contested and we proceed to adopt their recommendations. They can then move on as we wait for an extract from the Government - the Treasury Memorandum - on actions taken on what has been recommended by the committee.

Sometimes we debate and cause delays. We may have to re-examine this. This is a report for the financial year 2014/2015 but we also have the ones of 2015/2016 and 2016/2017. I think we might need to find a way of resolving this. The recommendations are clear; we might just need to adopt them and then proceed. However, we are not going to start debate today. We will see how to handle reports of this nature in future, but that is my recommendation to you. 

Honourable members, now that you have time, go and examine the report. Otherwise, if the recommendations are solid, why debate? We can just pass them. That is what I would like to suggest.

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Like you have guided, committees normally do a thorough job. They give themselves adequate time and many times they even source documents, among other things, before they present such reports to us. I therefore concur with you that sometimes it may not necessarily require us to waste time on some of these reports because the recommendations are very clear.

My interest is in the actions taken by Government on the recommendations that the committee makes. Once the committee has done a good job and Parliament has endorsed the report with those recommendations, they become part of our recommendations to Government. The time taken by Government to report back to the House and the actions taken are therefore important to us and the public. That is when we shall know that indeed, value-for-money audit reports are yielding results in terms of holding people accountable.

Ever since I joined Parliament - from the Ninth Parliament - we have received reports but I have never seen any action taken reports on the Floor of this House. Can we start receiving these action taken reports in the House so that we know that indeed people are being held accountable and then we begin saying the property is sold? 

For some of these people who have appeared in these reports, we know where their properties are located. Some who have been interdicted have tried to run out of the country but were arrested at the border and brought back. However, as we talk, they are free and enjoying the money. The assets in which they have invested the monies are still in their names. Therefore, action taken reports must come back to this House so that we know and report back to the voters that indeed, monies which denied them service delivery in their constituencies have been recovered. These monies must then be channelled back to what they had been budgeted for.

Mr Speaker, I think your guidance needs to be effected. As a House, we would be happy to see such reports coming back to us so that we know that our recommendations are being put in action. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, actually it is a requirement under rule 217 of our Rules of Procedure that we receive these matters from the people recommended to implement these recommendations when adopted by Parliament. Rule 217 requires that they come back to the House and reports on what action they have taken. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is just a reminder. You recall the time when the House proposed that backlog from the Auditor-General’s reports should not be discussed. The ruling by the then Attorney-General, Dr Khiddu Makubuya, and hon. Mwesige, was that all reports, whether they have taken a long time or not, must be examined, debated and adopted by the House. That was either in the Seventh or Eighth Parliament.

I said that these reports could be read in the public because this report, for example, mentions someone called Wasolo; Wasolo is in Bugisu and he is not on the run. He is actually walking free. He retired from the Public Service. That is why when reports like these come, I am very critical because I am giving evidence.

Mr Wasolo is walking free; he is not on the run. The report has said that he is on the run. However, if you want me to bring him here tomorrow, I will do so. That is the reason I wanted this report presented to the public. The reason is that the report can look very factual and attractive here but it may not be a true story. That is why the report needs to be examined further and discussed. We can deal with the figures but for some of the issues, we should give ourselves time and debate them. 

I know we should go and read these reports. I am sure this report is going to be on the internet and everyone is going to read it. However, I would like to request that as Parliament, we should advertise that the report of the Committee on Public Accounts is out and we request the public to read through it. Some of the people have retired and others are saying they are pensioners; for example, I have an uncle who was retired at 55 years and he is still alive, but for one and half years he was deleted from the pension payroll. They assumed he was dead and yet the man is still alive. He has reported many times but he has not been reinstated on the payroll. We could make an assumption of 15 years and yet people are still alive. You know that those who were born long time ago have stayed longer than some of us. 

Mr Speaker, what you have said about adopting the report is good. However, I would like to suggest that we should make the report public. After all, it is now a public report. Let us give a day when we are going to debate this report and confirm the recommendations which have been put across.

The Treasury Memorandum we are talking about should also come out very quickly. Today I discovered that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is now bringing Treasury Memoranda on the audited accounts of 2001. It is today when I saw the summary. How do you bring Treasury Memoranda of many years now –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The question is: when were those reports adopted by Parliament? That could also be the issue. If next year, they come with this Treasury Memorandum of this particular report, would you blame them? The point is, we are discussing it now. This is the year 2018 but these particular things were committed in 2014 and 2015. By the time the Treasury Memorandum comes, it may be October or December of this year, and that is if it comes early. 

Now we have not finished with this. I do not know when this matter will come up for debate, given that we have lined up so many other items which we have received but have not debated. This is going to enter onto the list of those that are going to await debate before we can actually transmit the recommendations to the ministry so that they can assess what can be done and what has been done, and then they can bring the Treasury Memorandum.

That is why I am saying it is a whole system which creates its own delays. I do not know how long the committee has been working but their report has been ready for five months and we have not been able to debate it. Now, today we are not going to adopt it because of what you are saying and I do not know when it will be adopted. First publicise it in the media, then come back, debate it and then we adopt - I do not know when that will happen.

Let me draw a distinction. I say this in the spirit of trying to facilitate how we do business. A report like this one on the performance of the economy requires a debate because we need to give serious input into what we think about the state of the economy, what should be done or things that should be changed. There is the state of indebtedness; what can we do about it? 

I have also deferred reports that hon. Reagan Okumu presented here yesterday in volumes, covering 2010 to 2016. How many years are those? Those are seven years, and that is what it is covering. When will they ever extract the memorandum? So, when they come next year to say this is what was recommended, with a Treasury Memorandum covering the year 2010, would you blame them? It is only yesterday that the reports for 2010 were tabled in this House and have not yet been adopted, so you cannot begin processing the memorandum. 

I am saying we need to think creatively outside the box and see how we can facilitate the processes of getting people to account. If the recommendations are clear, like we have listened to those from the chairperson of the Committee on Public Accounts, and then we keep extend this, we do not know when we will adopt the report. When we eventually adopt it, that is when the Clerk to Parliament will extract the recommendations and transmit them and then it takes its own time. We are trying to see how you can handle and help the process. That is all. Let me hear from the chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee.

MS OSEGGE: Mr Speaker, I just wish to correct one statement about Mr Wasolo because it has gone on the record. Mr Wasolo was brought to the committee by the police after we had summoned him and he was not appearing. It was not the first time that he came after he was summoned. It took a number of invitations and then finally the police’s intervention. 

Therefore, when the committee says he is on the run, he might have come because now the IGG has cooled off. Up to now, I am aware nothing has been done about those cases, even by the IGG. So why wouldn’t somebody come back to his home? I do not want us to think that the committee just states things for the sake of it. It was out of what we did. 

Mr Speaker, probably, we could also make a request as accountability committees. I would like to believe that the magnitude of work that we have to do is quite immense. Many times, you can do these reports, like this one which has been around for over five months. However, there is the issue of the time availed to us, because we also have to do work in the sessional committees. When the budget comes, we go into abeyance but the calendar that is required for us to report does not stop. In that process, we get late and we do not report according to the timelines that are given. If only Parliament could review the working of these committees. 

Mr Speaker, I appreciate you because you give us time to work during recess, which we would also love to spend in our constituencies but we recognise the magnitude of work that we have to do. Thank you so much, but we need a little more.

7.09
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Mr Speaker, given what you have said, that we need answers, I would like to move a motion that we adopt this report so that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development starts the process on the action taken report. When there is an error, it will be corrected by the Treasury Memorandum. 

I would like to move a motion that the report of the Public Accounts Committee be adopted by this House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that okay, Members? Honourable members, is it seconded? The motion that has been moved is that the question be put. Can I first put the question to that motion? I now put the question to the motion that the question be put.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to this motion that the report of the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) on the report of the Auditor-General on entities under public sector management for financial year 2014/2015: Ministry of Local Government, Office of the Prime Minister and Ministry of Public Service be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. If we adopt this kind of work, then we will offload this thing from Parliament and give it to the responsible people to come back and report under our rule 217. Thank you, honourable members.

Given that the time is now what it is –(Laughter)– and also the kind of things we have been able to do today, in the circumstances, honourable members, this House now stands adjourned to Tuesday at 2 O’clock. Thank you.

(The House rose at 7.10 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 10 April 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) 

