Thursday, 19 April 2012

Parliament met at 2.25 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Jacob Oulanya, in the chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Good afternoon honourable members; I have one announcement to make. It is on the issue involving hon. Paul Mwiru, MP Jinja Municipality East. The Speaker has used her prerogative under Rule 7 of our Rules of Procedure to nominate him to the committees of Parliament. This is arising from the communication that came from the Speaker’s office to the Leader of Opposition’s office, but there was no response to it in terms of assigning hon. Paul Mwiru to committees. The hon. Paul Mwiru has been assigned to the following committees: Standing Committee on Public Accounts; and Sessional Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

MS NABUKENYA: I want to say that I have not been officially assigned a committee. I was told by the Opposition Chief Whip that it will be met after I have sent a communication to her to be made the same day with my colleague hon. Mwiru, but I have been waiting and it has not been done.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the delay is from the office of the Opposition Whip because this is what has prompted the Speaker to use rule 7 to assign hon. Paul Mwiru. You may have to use the same procedure when you look at the listing of the committees. You should send it to the Speaker’s office and it will be handled quickly.

PETITION OF THE RESIDENTS OF MUKONGORO SUB-COUNTY IN KUMI AFFECTED BY THE MISAPPROPRIATION OF PUBLIC FUNDS BY THE PUBLIC OFFICIALS OF KUMI DISTRICT

2.28
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much Rt. Hon. Speaker. This is a humble petition of the residents of Mukongoro sub-county in Kumi District, affected by the lack of piped water; the project that was funded and, therefore, is suspecting misappropriation of public funds by public officials.

Mukongoro is a sub-county that I represent in Parliament. It is found in Kumi County, Kumi District, and there is a water project that has just gone wrong. Your humble petitioners have one prayer: That Parliament investigates the possible loss of public funds due to the failed Mukongoro Urban Centre Water Project and makes recommendations to the relevant authorities to take action. 

Your humble petitioners’ representatives have appended their signatures together with pictures of this failed project. In all, they are 143. I beg to move and lay on Table this petition.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Being a project, it stands referred to the Committee on Public Accounts to be handled expeditiously. We give them a timeframe of three weeks to be able to accommodate the handling of the budget framework paper. It is so, Committee on Public Accounts.

I want to use my prerogative and alter the Order Paper to allow the laying of the publication from the committee on Government Assurance that has been launched this morning by the Speaker.

2.30
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Mr Speaker, I want to thank you and Members of Parliament for attending the launch of the first publication of the Committee on Government Assurance this morning at the Parliamentary conference hall. 

I beg to lay formally on Table the Publication entitled: “Government assurances from the month of June to December 2011 made by minsters on the Floor of the House.” I just wish to state two things; that the publication has a total of 249 assurances made by ministers on the Floor and with Ministry of Finance making 38 assurances; Ministry of Agriculture making 31 assurances; Ministry of Education and Sports making 25 assurances; Ministry of Works and Transport also making 25 assurances; Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development making 16 assurances; Ministry of Local Government making 15 assurances; Ministry of Health making 14 assurances; OPM making 13 assurances; Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development making 13 assurances; Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Affairs making 9 assurances; Ministry for Karamoja Affairs, making eight assurances; Ministry of Internal Affairs making eight assurances; Office of the President making seven assurances; Ministry of Defence making six assurances; Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry, making six assurances; Ministry of Relief and Disaster Preparedness making four assurances; the Government Chief Whip making three assurances; the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs making three assurances; the Ministry of Communication, Information and Technology making three assurances and lastly, Ministry of Water and Environment making two assurances, totalling to 249 assurances. 

Lastly, Mr Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Otto you are now -

MR ODONGA OTTO: I beg to be excused, Mr Speaker, this is unprecedented. But I want to inform all the Members of Parliament and specifically the ministers that we have a team of technocrats seated in this Parliament everyday during our sittings and extracting assurances and commitments you make on the Floor of the House, which will serve as a basis of us summoning you to our committee. So, you better take note that someone there is watching and listening to what you are saying. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairman. I will use my prerogative again – okay, let us proceed.  

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

2.33
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a report on behalf of the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee, on the support to Post-Primary Education and Training, Expansion and Improvement, ADB III project and ADB grant for the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, wait for the clerk to call it. Just following the sequence? Okay, proceed.

MR ODONGA OTTO: I wish to lay on Table a report, Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development - Strengthening the Management of Oil and Gas Sector in Uganda Project, financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the financial statement for the years ended 30 June 2010 and 30 June 2011, the Ministry of Education and Sports, Universal Post-Primary Education and Training Project (UPPET) and IDA credit. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Let the records capture that.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a report on the Uganda Medical and Dental Practitioners Council financial statements of the year ended 30 June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let it be captured.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table, Quality Infrastructure and Standards Programme financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a report of Ministry of Education and Sports - Support to Post- Primary Education and Training Expansion and Improvement, ADB 5 project, the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a report of the Ministry of Local Government, District Livelihood Support Programme under the IFAD loan, financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that as such.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Kampala Institutional and Infrastructure Development Project, IDA Credit No.4367 financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a report, Ministry of Water and Environment Joint Partnership Fund financial statements for the 27-month period ended 30 September 2010. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Uganda Millennium Finance Initiative Project, IDA Credit Agreement No. Q4174 UG financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011. I beg to lay.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Gulu University for the year ended 30 June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that as such.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, the Broadcasting Council: I beg to lay on Table the financial statements for the financial year ended 30 June 2011.  I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that as such.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, the Uganda AIDS Commission. I beg to lay on Table the financial statements for the financial year ended 30 June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that as such.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Kyambogo University for the year ended 30 June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that as such.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, Uganda Wildlife Education Centre. I beg to lay on Table financial statements for the financial year ended 30 June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Busitema University for the year ended 30 June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that as such.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Makerere University Business School for the year ended 30 June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that as such.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Ministry of Education and Sports Universal Post-Primary Education and Training Project, IDA Credit No.4570 report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2010. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that as such.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry Second Trade Capacity Enhancement Project(STRACE II) financial statements for the 15-month period ended 31 December 2010. I beg to lay.


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the annual report of the Auditor-General for the year ended 30 June 2011, Volume 1 - Performance Report. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that as such.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the annual report of the Auditor-General for the year ended 30 June 2011, Volume 2 - Central Government. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that as such.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the annual report of the Auditor-General for the year ended 30 June 2011, Volume 3 - Local Authorities. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that as such.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the annual report of the Auditor-General for the year ended 30 June 2011, Volume No.3 - Local Authorities. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that as such.

MR ODONGA OTTO:  Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the annual report of the Auditor-General for the year ended 30 June 2011, Volume No.4 - Statutory Corporations. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that as such.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Lastly, Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the annual report of the Auditor-General for the year ended 30 June 2011, Volume No.5 - Value-for-oney Audit. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that as such and congratulations for all those papers. (Applause)

2.41
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a report from the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 30 June, 2011 for Uganda Printing and Publishing Corporation. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that as such.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the report from the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the financial year ended 30 June, 2011 for the National Drugs Authority. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that as such.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay a report from the Auditor-General for the financial statements of the year ended 30 June 2011, for National Water and Sewerage Corporation. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that as such and congratulations. Honourable members, all these reports and papers that have been laid stand committed to the appropriate committees for expeditious handling and reporting back on the details to this august House for future appropriate decisions to be taken. 

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE UGANDA NATIONAL METEOROLOGICAL AUTHORITY BILL, 2010

Clause 8

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think clause 8 was supposed to be implemented by recommitting clause 6, so that it could be accommodated under that. 

Clause 9

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, we did consult; the minister is going to come and explain to the House. We haven’t yet concluded and I think we need to finish the consultation with the minister –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, Mr Chairman, we have to finish this. The debate was that we should not do tenure of office of board members and instead we should deal with tenure of the board. That was the issue you were supposed to resolve.

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, under clause 9, we propose to have the tenure of the board as a head note: “The board shall have a tenure of three years”. That is the proposal we have agreed on.

We would then move on to have, “A member of the board shall hold office for three years and will be eligible for re-appointment for one more term.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that okay? Then the details will be in polishing up in the re-drafting and so forth. So, I put the question to the amendment by the chairman.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 12

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, the delegation of the functions of the board – it was clause 2, “The board may delegate to any competent person the power to:
a)	Collect meteorological data;
b)	Disseminate information relating to Meteorology;
c)	Ensure security of installations; and
d)	Recruitment of staff.

Mr Chairman, the committee would like to retain this as it is provided because we believe that if there are any issues to do with procurement, you can look at sub-clause 5: “In the exercise of delegated power under this section, comply with such directions and guidelines as the board may from time to time communicate in writing -”.

We believe that the board in so doing will take into account all the laws and regulations governing procurement. 

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Whereas I appreciate what the committee chairman has observed under sub-clause 5, I think what we are talking about is the law and not directions or guidelines as the board may give. 

The PPDA Act and other Acts of Parliament are not mere guidelines and directions from the board. So, I think if we are to consider –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Would you like to propose the amendment that will cure that?

MR AMURAIT: In my view, all matters related to procurement should be done under the existing law, which is the PPDA Act. Therefore, I do not see what sub-clause 2 is intending to add. I do not see any value in it and I think it should be totally deleted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No. You could consider introducing a clause 6, which would make that qualification to take care of where procurement will be required so that it is - there is a rider. Can somebody propose this so that where it requires procurement, the necessary laws are followed?

MR ODONGA OTTO: The problem with that is that if we add another clause 6 stating that, “Where there is a requirement of procurement, the law should be followed, “ and then clause 6 will be talking about procurement, but clause 2 would still be talking about delegation. So, someone can easily say that they just delegated their duty and we are not procuring. 

As a Member suggested yesterday, I think we should substitute the word, “delegate,” with “procure,” so that it will read, “The Board may procure the services of any competent person or body.” So, we use the word, “procure,” instead of, “delegate”. “The Board may procure the services of any competent person or body to –

(a)	Collect metrological data; and
(b)	Decimate these things.”

This is so that we do not – so if the procurement is for free - if you can collect the data for free, that is fine and that is the nature of your charity, but at least it should be procured other than - what we are fearing is for me to pick my relative and say, “Come and guard the installation because I have delegated to you.” We want the system to be clear for all those who are interested in it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let us hear from hon. Amuriat.

MR AMURIAT: In my view, this is a matter of administration, where you know that you seek to procure and yet in our case, we are trying to legislate these matters of procurement. It is like producing a long list for every parastatal and corporation and then say that when you want to do this, you have got to procure this way. 

I really do not see what useful purpose this entire clause plays, because when you want to procure, then the chief executive together with the top management sit down and take a decision, and then they will know how to proceed on that procurement. Why do we have to legislate this function that is really supposed to be management in nature? I would like to seek an explanation from either the minister, chairman or a member of the committee. I do not think it is necessary.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is the power to procure automatic? Just by mere existing you have the power to procure something? Is it automatic hon. Amuriat?

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, the power to procure is not automatic. I think what the Bill had in mind was that there are institutions like NARO that could actually be delegated with powers to actually collect certain specialised information on behalf of the Authority. So, we are having this in mind and that is why we said we could actually delegate either a person or an institution to do that, but this has to be provided for. Otherwise, if you do not do that, you could actually end up being challenged legally in future.

I would propose that instead of using, “a competent person,” we could use, “a competent institution or organisation.” We had NARO and other specialised –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But the word, “person,” is a legally defined word. The word, “person,” means a human being, a corporation, institution – is that not what it means? Yes, a person includes a thing. Isn’t that correct? My understanding is that and if I can guide the minister – why the title of this thing is, “delegation of functions of the board,” is to capture the relationship between the institution, the Authority and other institutions that deal in data of this nature.
 
Now, this is the delegation specifically and that is why I was proposing a rider in case it will require procurement because if it is going to deal with NARO or whatever institution, it will not be a procurement. Would it be procurement? It would not be and that is why I am saying that if your fear is about procuring hon. Odonga Otto’s sister to come and do the job, then you will put a rider to deal with where it requires procurement and then the necessary laws will be followed. But when it is a delegation in the sense that it is going to be sent to any other institution of Government that can collect data, then that would not be procurement as such.

MR AMURIAT: I think there is some level of clarity in my mind now. But rather than talk about a person, maybe it would be good to substitute that word for “authority” in which case  - Government authority – if it is a case of recruitment for example, this particular board can ask a board from another Authority to come and assist with the recruitment. 

When you talk about a person, I do not know what that means in law, but in my lay man’s sense - like hon. Werikhe Khafabusa or Gen. Moses Ali – this fellow has got to have terms in which he or she would perform this duty. It ends up taking us to towards procurement whereas in the case of an Authority or Government entity, this is Government to Authority relationship.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Amuriat, we said that a person is a wider embracing term, but you are now saying that you put a rider so that if it requires procurement, you specifically qualify it. If it going to require procurement, then that means that you are now going to deal with a private company or some other person or individual who is not good and does not fall within the government circles, and then you now call under procurement, which will mean you follow the necessary rules. Would that be –

MR ODONGA OTTO: If the concern of the committee is that the board may work with NARO, URA – if that is the intention of this section, then we need the section. Maybe we could say that, “The board may delegate to any Government institution or Authority -” We be specific; “The board may delegate to any Government institution or Authority the power to -” other than leaving it to, “competent person.” 

If you really want the board to work well with NARO, URA or UNRA, we restrict it at a level of those authorities so that the issues of procurement that we fear do not arise. I do not know what the chairman would think of that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The chairman.

MR WERIKHE: I think I have no problem with substituting, “institution or Government Authority,” for “competent person,” to achieve what the Bill actually intends to. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Oboth Oboth.

MR OBOTH OBOTH: I was wondering whether as a member, I could seek clarification from my own chairman - but wouldn’t that be limiting the scope? I thought the chairman was giving an example of a Government institution. Why should the law be so limited in its nature and operation? I thought that in the current form, “competent person,” is broad enough to include but not limited to either Government institution or any other competent person.  The words “competent person”, therefore, qualify. Competence is purely a relative term and it is not subjective. It is used in such a way that would be all embracing. I would only appeal that it be –(Interjection)– well, I did not know it could be itching, but I believe you have useful information that I would love to get. I thought in the current form, my conviction tells me so, and we should be able to - sometimes the vagueness in legislation could help in many ways. When you are trying to be specific, you could leave out the intention of the legislation. I would only love to seek that clarification, whether it is not limiting. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, that is why I was proposing that you put a rider saying, where such delegations require procurement, the necessary procurement laws will be followed. That would take care of it. Wouldn’t it?

MR KHAFABUSA: Mr Chairman, with the wise guidance from the chair, we could have a rider as sub-clause 6 taking into account the requirements of the procurement law, but we need to actually have this properly drafted. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Where delegation under 2 requires procurement. 

MR WERIKHE: Some of these things need legal minds. I thought I was a paralegal -(Laughter)- but I think hon. Oboth could do some quick drafting along those lines that are subject to actually what is in 2. We take into account the PPDA requirements, but I think that needs to have the legal mind to frame it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Where is the chairman of the committee on rules? This is when you are called upon to present the raw draft and we polish it. 

MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, I propose an amendment to clause 12 by way of addition by introduction of sub-clause 6 to read as follows: “Where a delegation under (2) requires procurement, the necessary procurement laws shall apply.” 

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, I do accept the proposed amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment proposed by hon. Fox Odoi-Oywelowo, that the amendment be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 22

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, I propose the amendment to clause 22(1) to read as follows: “The minister may give directions to the Authority with respect to the approved Government policy to be observed and implemented by the Authority, and the Authority shall comply with those directions.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Have you taken away the words “in writing?”

MR WERIKHE: “The minister may give directions in writing to the Authority with respect to the approved Government policy to be observed and implemented by the Authority, and the Authority shall comply with those directions.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In other words you are retaining the draft in the Bill.

MR WERIKHE: Here, the addition is the approved Government policy. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Ministers make policy directions and the policy directions they make sometimes do not necessarily go through the – for example, if you want some matter investigated, that affects policy issues and you give directions that funds be allocated for example for a commission of inquiry, that is a policy directive. Would that have to be approved by Cabinet? You can give policy guidance even without having – it might be over limiting so that with every little thing, you go to Cabinet. Is there a problem with the way it is? 

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, again with your guidance, I think since the policy may be approved or not, I think we can go with the proposal as enshrined in the Bill. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 22 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22, agreed to.
Clause 42

MRWERIKHE: Mr Chairman, I would like to propose an amendment to clause 42 as follows: “On the commencement of this Act, all persons who immediately before the date of commencement of this Act were employed in the Department of Meteorology, shall become employees of the Authority until the appraisal is conducted within two years. The justification here is that yes, at the time the Authority comes into being, all these people are actually going to be required to continue rendering the services as they were doing under the department, but then within a period of two years, the Authority will be able to evaluate each person’s performance and the need of the service that each person might be actually rendering, and then they will decide who remains and who is asked to move on.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Don’t you think it would be better to state the principle and then you qualify it in another paragraph? Somebody can help. Hon. Oboth?

MR OBOTH: I believe that the honourable chair of the committee is moved by the experience from KCCA, but it is unfortunate I wasn’t in the committee when they discussed this. Tagging it to two years, I would think that the law as it is, the proposed clause is sufficient. If in the law we provide that they shall remain employees of the Authority on commencement until after two years, we are actually jeopardizing the employment of those people. Why don’t we just say that they will be on the commencement – “that all persons who, immediately before the date of commencement of this Act were employed in the Department of Meteorology, shall continue to be employed in that office.” The rest would be internal or administrative arrangements. My fear here is that when you try to provide it within the law – first, Government should be able to provide a package for terminal benefits. But since the Bill is being moved – I am not Government myself, it would be good to hear from the responsible minister that within two years, they will be ready to provide the benefits to other employees whose services will not be needed at that time. Otherwise, to me this is a good draft and practice that would be maintained there. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, can we take some advice from the Minister of Public Service? And as the minister gets ready, can we hear from hon. Odonga Otto?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much, Mr Chairman. I just want to inform my colleague, hon. Oboth, that yesterday the challenge we had, which was debated for about 20 minutes, was that if we leave the draft the way it is – reading that a person who immediately before the date of commencement of this Act, were employed in the Department of Meteorology shall continue to be employed in that department – it means that those who are staff now, should continue working there. It also means that nobody can terminate their employment.

I think that what the chairperson of the committee is introducing is something that should be accepted, only that it should come as another item to appear immediately after paragraph (a) – that “The Authority shall carry out appraisals within two years.” This will let these people continue working while knowing that the law mandates the Authority to review their employment. But once we pass it the way it is, it will mean that those who are there will now have become permanent staff until this law is amended. I suggest that we go with what the chairman of the committee has tabled, of course not as a continuation of (a); it should be separate.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You see, the current employees – and this is my understanding – of the meteorological department are civil servants under permanent and pensionable terms of reference. What this law is trying to do is to move them to the Authority. This law is only trying to handle that transition. But what happens to them as they transit?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I just want to add something to hon. Odonga Otto’s suggestion. Normally, we know that when you take it straight as one thing - appraisal added to this paragraph (a) will create a sense of insecurity among the existing employees. We could draft it in such a way that the appraisal can be done on both the existing and new employees. I suggest that we insert another item for appraisal after two years.

MRS SEZI MBAGUTA: Mr Chairman, I am going to give the advice based on the practice because I have not internalised the provision that is being debated. Anyway, in practice, when you create an Authority, it becomes a new entity. That means that the entity is given the mandate to recruit its new staff. The current staff of the meteorology department will be given the opportunity to be appointed by the new organisation. Those who will not be appointed will be returned to us at the Public Service Ministry so that we can pay them a severance package. My view is that this should not take so long to keep people under uncertain circumstances. That is the practice that we have and it has worked well. It helps the Authority to start with skilled and efficient people.

MR AURU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. In fact, my submission is not different from that of the minister. What I want to add is that such arrangements have ever been used in many organisations. If staff have been recruited on permanent basis and the mandate of the organisation changes, those staff must be bought off. There should be some money paid to such staff to go through that transition, for example, from permanent to a contract or temporary basis. When we just leave this law the way it was drafted, I don’t think the employees will work whole-heartedly. But when they get to know that even their employment terms will change to either contract or temporary terms, they will work effectively. Thank you.

MR KAKOBA: Thank you so much. I agree with what the responsible minister said. However, I would like to point out that there is need not to take on everybody in that department now. The way this Bill was drafted indicates that the current employees will automatically become the employees of the Authority yet this is not in the new arrangement. 

In that regard, therefore, I would like to propose that after the word, “shall” we insert “become employees of the Authority” instead of just saying they will continue to be employees of the Authority because this would mean they will still work with the old department, which is not true in this case. After that we can then provide for the appraisal in a separate clause. I thank you.

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, I just want to point out that appraisal is an annual activity and so, we cannot legislate over it. But as we manage this transition, what we should provide for is the fact that once people get to move away from permanent and pensionable terms to different terms in the Authority, they should be paid their gratuity. That assurance should be provided for in this law.

MR KWEMARA: Mr Chairman, I want to propose that - we have sub-clause (1), to say that the service of any employees or staff of the former Department of Meteorology shall be deemed to continue with the Authority. We are only deeming them to continue working; we are not saying they will be mandated to become employees of the Authority. In other words, they must not become employees of the Authority. 

From there, we can have other clauses, for example, saying that as soon as practicable, possibly in less than a period of two years, there should be a competitive recruitment process. We can also have another clause that states that for those people who will not have gone through the competitive recruitment process, they should return to Public Service for re-deployment. Those who will not have been re-deployed by Public Service can be given their terminal benefits. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, we just gave ourselves an opportunity to look at these things again, but you remember what happened yesterday. We voted to reject the clause in the Bill; and we have now voted to look at the proposals by the committee. But you know that there is a fundamental difference between the two. Because 42 in the Bill was talking about employees and the one from the chairman is talking about former employees. So, that is the improvement. 

Since we had found that what is in the Bill was not sustainable, I think in order for us to move properly, let us revert to the proposals by the committee and we leave the Bill so that we can make some conclusions on this matter. Our working document is now the draft from the committee. 

MR WERIKHE: We had accepted to expunge 42(3) from the committee’s report. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So you are now adopting the two only?

MR WERIKHE: We leave 42(1) and 42(2). We remove 42(3).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay. We had voted to remove 42(3) anyway. Had we? But I heard you proposing a different 42(1).

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, it was in light of hon. Otto and hon. Oboth that we are now trying to have 42(1) as enshrined in the Bill modified in order to accommodate the interest that had been indicated in the committee’s report. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, can somebody after sub-clause (1) have a new sub-clause (2) that makes provision for this process. 

MR SSEMPIJJA: I don’t know whether the chairman still has his report of yesterday.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, that is the one. 

MR SSEMPIJJA: In the circumstances, I do not find any problem with 42(3), if I can read it verbatim: “A person who is not accepted as an employee of the Authority is entitled to terminal benefits and pension in accordance with the existing terms and conditions of service of that employee.” What is wrong with that?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But we voted that out yesterday. We also voted out 42(3) on the initiative of hon. Kabakumba, unless you want to reintroduce it. 

MRS SEZI: Mr Chairman, I want to clarify that the staff of meteorology as of today are civil servants; they are public officers. Therefore, terms and conditions of the Public Service do apply to them up to when they relinquish their positions and when that department is restructured and created into an Authority. 

Their terms also involve pension and gratuity and because they are losing jobs because of restructuring and creating of a new Authority, we shall pay them a severance package; and on their pension, we shall add 25 percent for loss of employment. That arrangement is already catered for by the Public Service Act and by the Pensions Act. 

So, they will not lose anything by not going into the Authority. And to me it is normal practice, so I don’t know whether we should embed it here. If they are not taken by the Authority, they are officially returned to the Ministry of Public Service and we shall work out their terms. 

I am sure when the new Authority is created, we shall run through the terms and guidance on how they leave their departments back to Public Service, and for those that will be recruited into the new Authority. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the final proposal which is before the House is that clause 42 now has two sub-clauses (1) and (2). Sub-clause (3) was voted out yesterday. So, if we are satisfied that (1) and (2) are sufficient to carry the intention of clause 42, I will put the question. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, if I heard my honourable colleague submitting, when you read the amendment of the committee, there is a phrase that, “The Authority shall on the effective date of its operation accept into its employment every person who immediately before the commencement of this Act was an employee, and who was given an opportunity to serve, has opted to serve.” 

Other than saying that, “The Authority shall accept into its employment…” we could just say, “The Authority, after appraisal…” so that the acceptance is not a personal thing. It is through a formal process. We could just add the word, “appraisal”. The “Authority may, after appraisal…” because the way it is now, the procedure of acceptance is not there; we can just tell you that you have not been accepted. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, when the Authority comes into operation, it has no single employee. So now, the Authority is offering other people the opportunity to come. So, how they do that offer is administrative; do we need to legislate on that? 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: No.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment of the new clauses 42(1) and 42(2) as proposed by the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 42, as amended, agreed to.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, just for clarity. Much as we have adopted the committee amendments, the minister had said earlier that the word should change from “shall” to “may.” I hope that is the one we have adopted. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, we have adopted “may.”

MR ODONGA OTTO: Most obliged.
 
The Title

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, I would like to propose that under the short title, we substitute the word “Autority” for the word “Authority.” The justification is to correct a typographic error. I beg to move.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is a typographical error. I put the question that the short title of the Bill be amended as proposed by the chair.
 
(Question put and agreed to.) 

The short title as amended, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the title of the Bill remains part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)
 
MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER (Mrs Betty Bigombe): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed and the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER (Mrs Betty Bigombe): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Uganda National Meteorological Authority Bill, 2010” and passed it with some amendments. I beg to move. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER (Mrs Betty Bigombe): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question to the motion.
  
(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
 THIRD READING

THE UGANDA NATIONAL METEOROLOGICAL AUTHORITY BILL, 2010

3.35
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader):  Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. At committee stage, we removed clause 8 and voted that it should be brought to be part three of clause 6. However, clause 6 was passed yesterday. So, I beg to move that we recommit clause 6 for purposes of adopting the shifting of clause 8 to be clause 6(3) because I am very certain that we passed clause 6 yesterday. So, I am hereby moving for a recommittal, Mr Speaker.
  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is clear, but before we put the question to the motion, this afternoon in the public gallery we have pupils and teachers of Mutesa I Memorial Primary School in Wakiso District represented by the hon. Medard Lubega Sseggona. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)  

Honourable members, the motion is for recommittal of clause 6 and you will recall that we removed clause 8 that would fall on the redrafting of clause 6 to accommodate what is currently clause 8. I put the question that we recommit clause 6 for reconsideration by the Committee of the whole House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE UGANDA NATIONAL METEOROLOGICAL AUTHORITY BILL, 2010

Clause 6

3.37
MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, now that we are at committee stage, I beg to move that clause 8 be shifted and brought under clause 6 to be 6(3). 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is not the whole of clause 8 because we are not taking the heading. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Yeah, with the exclusion of the heading; just beginning from the first one, “...shall not be appointed to the board....” I beg to move.
  
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the amendment is that we move the body of clause 8 and fit it as clause 6(3). We had debated this matter and agreed on it that it would be better drafting.
 
MR WERIKHE: Yes, Mr Chairman, that was agreed upon and I concur and accept that.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question that the amendment as proposed by the hon. Odonga Otto be adopted.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER (Mrs Betty Bigombe): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed and the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER (Mrs Betty Bigombe): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Uganda National Meteorological Authority Bill, 2010” and passed it with some amendments. I beg to move.
 
MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER (Mrs Betty Bigombe): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE UGANDA NATIONAL METEOROLOGICAL AUTHORITY BILL, 2010

3.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER (Mrs Betty Bigombe): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda National Meteorological Authority Bill, 2010” be read the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED: “THE UGANDA NATIONAL METEOROLOGICAL AUTHORITY ACT, 2012”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, honourable minister. Well done!

Honourable members, at the beginning of the sitting there was an item on the statement of Government Business to follow for the next week. It is now ready for presentation. May I use my prerogative under Rule 22 to re-introduce this particular item and allow the Rt Hon. Leader of Government Business to present this statement.

3.42
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, in accordance with Rule 25 of our Rules of Procedure, I beg to inform the House that the following will form part of the Government Business for the week of 23rd to 267th April 2012:

1.	Bills for First Reading:

(a)	The Retirement Benefits Sector Liberalisation Bill, 2011.
(b)	The Regional Government Bill, 2009.
(c)	The Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Control Bill, 2007.
(d)	The Pharmacy Profession and Pharmacy Practice Bill, 2006.
(e)	The Uganda Forestry Association Bill, 2010.

2.	Bills for Second Reading:
(a)	The Public Disorder Management Bill, 2011

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, is that Bill you have read before this House? 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: The Public Order Management Bill, 2011. I beg your pardon. 

(b)	The Transfer of Convicted Offenders Bill, 2007.

3.	Ministerial Statements:

(a)	On the progress of the implementation of the parliamentary resolution on the Cotton Sector by the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

(b)	On the performance of Primary Leaving Examinations (PLE) and Uganda Certificate of Education (UCE) and Government commitment to increase teachers’ salaries by Minister of Education and Sports.

(c)	On financing of roads by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

(d)	On the state of the economy by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

(e)	On Youth Venture Capital Fund by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

(f)	On the heat wave in the country, which we experienced recently, by the Minister of Water and Environment.

(g)	On reports concerning the numerous fires/infernos around the country by the Minister of Internal Affairs.

(h)	On the status of the land housing the Uganda Museum by the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Heritage.

(i)	On the status of the Health Sector throughout the country by the Minister of Health.

4.	Motion for a resolution of Parliament authorising Government to borrow $150 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group for financing Municipal Infrastructure Development Programme in selected municipalities by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. I think this is in the spirit of co-operation, but you will recall that the items you have read under two are no longer Government business, but business of the House; Bills that are for Second Reading. But it is in the spirit of co-operation that we will take that. You have helped me make the announcement that these Bills will be coming. They have been on the Order Paper, so they will be coming for second reading next week.

Yes, hon. Wadri, is there business from the Opposition?

3.47
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, hon. Patrick Amama Mbabazi, for giving us the schedule of business to follow.

I have very attentively listened to him, but I have an observation to make to help the Executive in future. Many of the issues on which Government has committed action have been already overtaken by events. There were issues, which were demanded by this House for immediate action like the issue of heat waves, but months have passed. 

I remember the minister was here on the Floor and at that time the heat waves were real and we all felt it and we asked for an immediate explanatory statement from the minister, but it has taken four to five months and now we are experiencing the contrary; the infernos are no more. With the rains, where are the bushes, which are burning now? At that time it was valid.

In future, I appeal that when Parliament demands actionable explanation from the Executive, they do it in a timely manner so that it is relevant; otherwise it is really obsolete and I don’t think that the explanation that they are going to give especially on those two things will be of any relevance to us, because I remember at one time we were all urged as Members of Parliament to go out and sensitise our electorate in the communities about the dangers of the rampant inferno. 

At that time (December and January), the whole country was actually dry and was experiencing those problems, but now with the rains, really, will the country take us seriously if we are going to dilly dally on important issues of that nature and only come when it is too late?

I would like to make this appeal that much as we applaud you, Mr Prime Minister, for having read out the schedule of engagements that you are going to lead, in future, please be conscious of time and the relevance of your actions. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Wadri. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, yesterday I made a statement in my communication that Government should present all the outstanding statements, which have been appearing on the Order Paper and no action has been taken on them and they are many, they are important, and urgent. So, endeavour to ensure that the statements are made before they become irrelevant so that we act on the things that are relevant to our people’s conditions, and not acting in post-mortem. I made this statement yesterday; I am sure it has been communicated to your office. So, that is the spirit under which the honourable Member from Terego has raised these issues.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am also aware that there are a number of questions for oral answer that were forwarded to various ministries. But for months, no answers have been delivered and yet some of them are very urgent. I thought that it should also be included in the business to follow.

Secondly, there is what my honourable colleague talked about; the heat wave. I remember before we broke off for Christmas recess, there was an undertaking by the Third Deputy Prime Minister that immediately in the very first week, upon Parliament’s resumption, that there would be a statement by Government on the status of the disasters in the country – it is not just about the heat wave alone, but also landslides and floods. Up to now, we have never heard any statement regarding disaster preparedness measures and yet the rainy season is on. It is no longer just about the heat wave; now we are going to start singing about floods again. So, the commitments that Government makes sometimes get overtaken by events.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Epetait. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you do not have to make a statement now on this; I think it is just important to take note before you make further commitments, which you will be vigorously pursued by the Government Assurance Committee.

Honourable members, thank you very much for today. This House stands adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 O’clock. And I mean 2.00 O’clock!

 (The House rose at 3.53 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 25 April 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)

