Wednesday, 17 April 2013

Parliament met at 2.33 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.
PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this sitting. As indicated yesterday, we are meeting here to perform a statutory responsibility, which is in the National Planning Authority Act, which was passed by this House. It requires us to make some approvals of things that come from the National Planning Authority and in this case, they have come up with Vision 2040, which will be launched.

The matter was brought to this House on the 3rd of this month.It went to the committee and the committee is now ready to report.I am sure you have received copies of the report by now and that is the main business for which we are meeting today.

There is a second item of the business, a short one, which was introduced because this particular loan request which is coming, the loan arrangement is supposed to expire soon. So, the earlier we act on it, the better. It should also be sent to the committee so that they act on it quickly, to enable the project intended to be achieved to be realised.

Thank you very much for coming this afternoon.

2.34
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I rise on a matter of national importance and certainly, a matter of interest to this House.

Two days ago, five Members of this House who were subjected to a party disciplinary action, had their verdicts read to them and these Members are my brothers; hon. Theodore Ssekikubo, hon. Wilfred Niwagaba, hon. Barnabas Tinkasimiire and hon. Mohammed Nsereko who were expelled from the NRM and hon. Vincent Kyamadidi who was handed a suspension of three months.

You will agree that this internal exercise –(Interruption)

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I am the Government Chief Whip and the Chairperson of NRM Parliamentary Caucus by appointment and even according to the constitution of the NRM organisation.

The NRM organisation has its own internal mechanisms and they are still going on and this is a multiparty Parliament. You are either on the Government or on the Opposition, Independent or the UPDF as the last two are free to sit on any side they prefer.

Whatever decision was taken by the NRM, the party is supposed to communicate to you officially and it is when the communication has got to you as the Speaker, that you will take a decision based on the existing legal regime in this country. So, is the honourable member in order, without any substantive evidence, without any authority, to begin debating what is in a party which he does not belong to, when he does not even know the contents of the constitution of the party, he does not know the code of conduct for the NRM Party? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Member for Kumi and thank you, Government Chief Whip for the matters in the point of order you have raised.

This House can act on information that is authoritatively before it. As the Speaker and the person in charge of the House, up to today, I have not received any communication relating to the subject matter being raised by the hon. Member from Kumi. If he has received any information, which is formal, it is within his rights to bring it to the attention of the House.

I have also seen the newspapers and also watched television yesterday but those are matters I cannot rule on in the House because there are channels through which the Speaker’s authority is sought and that is by formal communication, which I have not received.

The point of order is, therefore, sustainable because I have no basis on which to rule. I have no information that has come from the party in question. I cannot begin entertaining matters on anticipation. It is against the rules of this House.

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PRIVATION)(Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on Table a request for Government to authorise it to borrow Unit of Accounts USD 67 million from the African Development Bank Fund of the ADB Group for financing the support of higher education science and technology projects. I wish to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let the records capture it. As it is the rule of this House, this matter stands referred to our Committee on National Economy to look at the details of the request, its justification and come back to the House within the timeframe provided within the rules, to enable us move forward with this particular request. It is on higher education science and technology project. It stands committed to the Committee on National Economy.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE JOINT REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND COMMITTEE ON BUDGET ON THE UGANDA VISION 2040

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As I said before, this matter was brought to the attention of this House on the 3rd of this month andwas sent to the committee. The committee is ready to report.

2.42
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Ms Rose Akol): Mr Speaker and colleagues, I stand in for the Chairperson of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, who is away on parliamentary duties. I am here to report on Uganda Vision 2040.This is a report of the committees on Finance and Budget.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you start by laying a copy on the Table?

MS AKOL: I beg to lay on Table a report of the joint committee of Budget and Finance on the Uganda Vision 2040. I beg to lay.

The Uganda Vision 2040 was laid on Table on 3 April 2012 by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and referred to the Committees on Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Budget for scrutiny.

The committees have accordingly scrutinised the draft Uganda Vision 2040 and now want to report their findings to the House.

Methodology

In order to prepare the report, the committees adopted the following approach:

Members studied the draft Vision 2040, engaged into dialogue and understanding of issues. The committees met the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and National Planning Authority. The committees also reviewed the National Planning Authority Act for the mandate to prepare this vision.

Background to the rationale for the Uganda Vision 2040

To succeed in the long term, a country needs a vision on how it will change, improve and aspire to be in future. The vision of the country gives it energy. It helps motivate the people to a common goal and purpose. It helps set the direction of sustainable development and the strategy to be followed. The vision provides the rallying point for everyone in the country to work towards a common purpose under an agreed set of values.

As Members may recall, the country went through an envisioning process that culminated into production and launching of Vision 2025. Production of Vision 2025 was undertaken as a project but some oversights and omissions rendered the pursuit and implementation unachievable.

These included absence of appropriate policy, legal and institutional framework. Vision 2025, therefore, remained a beautiful document that was hardly mentioned or referred to as a guide to our national development.

The National Planning Act, 2002 created the National Planning Authority and mandated it to be a custodian of the national vision. 

Given this mandate, the National Planning Authority held stakeholder consultations at the beginning of November 2004 and during these consultations, the committees have been informed that Vision 2025 was exhaustively reviewed and consensus was reached on the need to formulate a new vision for the country. 

It is noted that since the mid 1980’s, Uganda’s economy has moved from recovery to growth due to a number of economic policies and programmes such as the Structural Adjustment Programs (SAPs), Economic Recovery Program (ERP) and Poverty Eradication Action Plan (PEAP) that have been successfully implemented. These resulted into the economy growing consistently at 6.4 percent since 2002 and this has built momentum for take-off.

In order to consolidate and accelerate this growth process, Government in 2007 approved the Comprehensive National Development Planning Framework (CNDF) policy, which provides for the development of a 30 year Vision to be implemented in three 10-year plans, six five-year National Development Plans (NDPs), Sector Investment Plans (SIPs), Local Government Development Plans (LGDPs), annual work plans and budgets.

Consequently, the National Vision Statement, “A Transformed Ugandan Society from a Peasant to a Modern and Prosperous Country within 30 years” from 2010 has been developed. The National Planning Authority in consultation with other Government institutions and other stakeholders have thus developed a Uganda Vision 2040 to operationalise this vision statement.

Uganda Vision 2040 aims at transforming Uganda from a predominantly peasant and low income country to a competitive upper middle income country. The projections made indicate that Uganda will graduate into the lower middle income country by 2017, progressing to upper middle income category by 2032 and attaining its per capita income of about $9,500 by 2040. 

To achieve this transformation, the average real GDP growth rate will be over 8.2 percent per annum translating into total GDP of about $580.5 billion with a projected population of 61.3 million in 2040.

Uganda Vision 2040 builds on the progress that has been made in addressing the strategic bottlenecks that have constrained Uganda’s socio-economic development since Independence, including; ideological disorientation, a weak private sector, underdeveloped human resources, inadequate infrastructure, a small market, lack of industrialisation and underdevelopment of agriculture, among others.

The Vision 2040 aims at consolidating the tenets of good governance, which include constitutional democracy, protection of human rights, the rule of law, free and fair political and electoral processes, transparency and accountability.

The committee notes that Vision 2040 is based on the premise that the country has a number of opportunities including agriculture, oil and gas, tourism, minerals, ICT business, abundant youthful labour force, strategic geographical location, fresh water resources and industrialisation, among others, that are to-date considerably under-exploited.

The exploitation of these resources will depend on the country’s capacity to strengthen fundamentals including; infrastructure (energy, transport, water, oil and gas, and ICT); Science, Technology, Engineering and Innovation (STEI); land use management; Urbanisation; human resource and peace, security and defence.

Flagship Projects

Some key flagship projects include a Hi-tech ICT city and associated ICT infrastructure; large irrigation schemes in different parts of the country; phosphate industry in Tororo; iron ore industry in Muko; five regional cities and five strategic cities; ten international airports; a standard gauge railway network with high speed trains; oil refinery and associated pipeline infrastructure; multi-lane paved national road network linking major towns, cities and other strategic locations; globally competitive skills development centres; nuclear power and hydro power stations; science and technology parks in each regional city; international and national referral hospitals in each of the regional cities.

Implementation of Vision 2040

The Vision 2040 implementation will always be spearheaded by the President of the Republic of Uganda. However, since it is a shared vision, implementation remains a responsibility of every citizen, government, private sector, civil society and political organisations.

The implementation of this vision will be through medium term and long term National Development Plans and annual Government budgets. These will detail programmes and projects that will lead to the achievement of the Vision 2040 targets. 

The vision document proposes a strong parliamentary oversight to ensure that the programmes and projects are in line with the expected outcomes.

As noted above, the implementation of Uganda’s Vision 2040 is within the framework of the approved Comprehensive National Development Planning Framework (CNDF) which provides for the development of a 30 year vision to be implemented in three 10-year plans, six five-year National Development Plans (NDPs), Sector Investment Plans (SIPs), Local Government Development Plans (LGDPs), annual work plans and budgets as illustrated by the diagram 5.0.I think you can all look at it and study it.

Financing of Vision 2040

Mr Speaker, financing of the Uganda Vision 2040 will be through conventional and innovative non-conventional means. These will include; tax and non-tax revenues, revenue from oil and gas, public private partnerships, concessional loans and grants, borrowing from domestic and international markets. The revenue from oil and gas will be used to kick-start major infrastructure development projects to enhance the country’s competitiveness. The domestic and international borrowing shall include; domestic and sovereign infrastructure bonds, venture capital and investment funds.

Key Vision Strategies and Policy Reforms
Aware that Vision 2025 failed to be implemented because of absence of appropriate policy, legal and institutional framework, the National Planning Authority identified key vision strategies and policy reforms that are necessary for successful implementation of Vision 2040. These include:
a)	Reviewing the architecture of government service delivery systems to act as a unit, harness synergies and deliver public services efficiently and effectively.
b)	Pursuing policies aimed at leapfrogging especially in the areas of science, technology, innovation, and engineering, human resource development, public sector management and private sector development.
c)	Developing and implementing a national science technology and engineering system that will help in initiating, importing, modifying and diffusing new technologies.
d)	Front-loading investments in infrastructure targeting areas of maximum opportunities with focus on oil, energy, transport and ICT. 
e)	Accelerating industrialisation through upgrading and diversification to effectively harness local resources, off shoring industries and developing industrial clusters along the value chain.
f)	Making land reforms to facilitate faster acquisition of land for planned urbanisation, infrastructure development and agricultural commercialisation among other developments.
g)	Pursuing a planned urbanisation policy that will bring about better urban systems that enhance productivity, liveability and sustainability while releasing land for commercialising agriculture. 
h)	Strengthening the three arms of Government and ensuring checks and balances and taking decisions that have national interest. First, ministers will not be members of either house of Parliament to foster separation of powers, and second, the Judiciary will be reformed to make it more proactive.
i)	Developing and nurturing a national value system to change citizens’ mindsets, promoting patriotism, enhancing national identity and nurturing ideological orientation.
j)	Accelerating Government reforms in the education system and the curriculum to obtain globally competitive human resource with skills relevant to the development paradigm.
k)	Reviewing and strengthening the foreign policy to enhance collaboration in accordance with existing and future agreements, standards and protocols within the framework of East African Community, other regional blocs, African Union and global community, for the realisation of this vision.
l)	Directly investing in strategic areas to stimulate the economy and facilitate private sector growth.
m)	Developing and implementing a specific policy to attract and retain top rated professionals in the universities to make Uganda a centre of excellence in education in the region. 
n)	Establishing a Uganda infrastructure fund to significantly lower the cost of infrastructure development.
 o)	Developing a universal health insurance system through public private partnership.

Development Status and Desired Targets of Vision 2040

When successfully implemented, Vision 2040 envisages the following targets of the selected development indicators in comparison to the base year, 2010. Table 1 shows development status and desired targets on selected indicators. You have one up to 12 per capita income currently at 2010 – that is the base year – was $506 and the target by Vision 2040 is $9,500. The percentage of population below the poverty line is targeted to be at 5 percent from 24.5 percent as at 2010. GDP is targeted to increase to $580 billion from $17 billion as at 2010. Percentage share of national labour force employed should be 94 percent from 70.9 percent as at 2010. And you can follow the rest on your own up to number 12.

Mr Speaker, these are the key observations 

The committees noted that the Uganda Vision 2040 has been formulated in a nation-wide consultative process involving the Presidency, Cabinet, all government ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs), local governments, private sector, Civil Society Organisations and the general public. The draft Vision 2040 was also validated by a cross section of stakeholders to enhance national ownership and participation in its implementation. To this extent, the process was adequately consultative; the output is clearly a “shared vision”. 

Parliament was consulted on several occasions during the formulation and validation of the Uganda Vision 2040 on 30 August 2012, 4 October 2012, and 15 February 2013. We note that most of the issues raised during these discussions have been incorporated in the document marked Appendix 1 and attached to this report.

The committees observed that long-term planning linked to medium and short-term planning in a cascading manner has been instrumental in guiding faster development in the number of countries to facilitate prudent allocation of resources, implementation, monitoring, reviewing and evaluation of outcomes.

The Vision 2040 document recognises the low levels of industrialisation and value addition in the country. The committees observe that there is need to gazette land for industrial parks and other forms of infrastructure in different parts of the country to ease the process potential investors go through in accessing serviced land for investment. 

Knowledge is widely being acknowledged as a major factor of production especially among the emerging economies. Knowledge is acquired, adapted and disseminated. There exists plenty of knowledge globally, which Uganda may tap into in order to leapfrog and catch up with frontrunners in development. Uganda should not waste time in re-inventing the wheel but rather developing capacity in copying the existing knowledge, that is, information and technology, for expanding and deepening efficiency in the national economic sector.

The committees observed that the document highlights citizens’ negative mindset as a constraint to the realisation of the Vision 2040 objectives. This problem must be addressed.

The committees also observed that good governance is the backbone on which development processes are based to ensure services are delivered to the citizens and that peace reigns in the nation. It is noted that the vision document envisages separation of power by strengthening the three arms of Government. The committees observe that this will ensure checks and balances and taking decisions that have national interest, first. The Vision 2040 envisages a situation where ministers will not be Members of Parliament to foster separation of powers; and secondly, the Judiciary will be reformed to make it more proactive.

The committees observed that Uganda’s environmental endowment largely constituting of water resources and wetlands, biodiversity and ecosystem health, land resources, fisheries resources and forests are facing increasing challenges; including rapid deterioration in the quality and quantity. This is on account of high population growth and economic activities, poor disposal of solid and liquid waste from industries and human settlement among others. 

The committees observed that the desired targets of some selected development indictors like per capita income of $9,500, GDP of $580 billion and a percentage of population below the poverty line at 5 percent as being unrealistic and unachievable. The committee was, however, informed that the projected growth trend of GDP is achievable since other countries have been able to achieve even higher gross income at five-year intervals. 

Data available from World Bank indicates that countries like Ghana, Azerbaijan, Sudan, Indonesia, India and Qatar among others were able to double their output every five years between 2000 and 2010. This, therefore, demonstrates the viability of Uganda’s projected growth and consolidates support for Uganda’s bid to develop its capacity to sustain high output growth every five years in the vision period. 

Recommendations 

Mr Speaker, given the negative mind-set of the population, NPA should immediately embark on a comprehensive sensitisation and mobilisation programme to rally Ugandans around the implementation of the Vision 2040. 

Members of Parliament should take lead in sensitising the citizens on their role in the pursuit of the Vision 2040. 

The business unusual approach could be demystified as one of the critical aspects of this negative mind-set. Uganda’s national development process must be unpinned by a set of values, which all nationals must be taught and asked to respect. These values should form the foundation of our general style on how we go about issues. Examples of values that we need to inculcate in the minds of Ugandans include acknowledging our national destiny; putting the nation first, unity, respect for each other and respect for human rights, good governance, team work, self-help, reliability, transparency, accountability and commitment to continuous improvement. 

Notwithstanding what is already contained in the vision document, the committees recommend that the said values in this paragraph must be clearly articulated and communicated in the final vision document. 

Availability of accurate and up-to-date data is a pre-requisite for timely planning, execution and monitoring the national vision. Additionally, data on population should be regularly updated and a national identification system established to track the demographic changes and qualitative improvement in the population.

The committees recommend that Vision 2040 is considered as part of the patriotism curriculum which is currently an on-going activity in the country. Considering the overreaching effect of planning and monitoring on the economy, the committees urge the President of the Republic of Uganda to consider creating a separate Ministry of Planning to be the home of National Planning Authority, National Planning Commission (NPC) Uganda Bureau of Statistics and the National Council of Science and Technology. This will increase the effectiveness of the planning function and strengthen the implementation of development plans in the country. 

Conclusion

The committees note that sufficient consultations have been undertaken in formulating Uganda Vision 2040. The Vision 2040 document adequately articulates where we are as a nation, where we want to go and how to get there in the long term. The committees on Finance, Planning and Economic Development and that of Budget call upon this august House to consider and approve the Uganda Vision 2040 taking into consideration the observations and recommendations contained in this report. Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson, for that very clear presentation of this subject. Hon. Members, the law requires us to approve and adopt these very broad parameters provided in this document, Uganda Vision 2040. 

You have all seen the draft for parliamentary approval. I have a copy and that is what we should be dealing with now. These are very broad subjects indicating policy areas, where different policies will be emerging, coming back to the House for specific approvals. Debate is now open on this subject. 

3.08
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank hon. Akol. We all have dreams; we all have visions and we all think of where we want to go. The challenge is that some citizens do not have written visions. But as a country, I want to thank the joint committee – the Constitution requires that the country should have a framework; a mirage of where you want to be. But this is not the first vision. I would like to call upon Government – as the committees have highlighted, there are fundamental challenges that may derail the vision for this country. 

The key one that we should all accept is the issue of governance. This country is very rich and if we are organised, Vision 2040 would be achieved in the next 20 years. But we have a huge challenge in governance. The Constitution demands that by now, we should have fully decentralised. But if you look at the decentralisation process, it is in reverse. 

The Constitution demands human rights for every citizen and use of natural resources. But as we speak, we have abuse of natural resources. The disappearance of forest cover in this country is huge. Those are the issues that may derail our vision. 

Therefore, I call upon Government that in the matrix of the implementation of this vision, the five-year investment plan, and the policy will require adjustment. It is not only about adopting this vision today, but the Minister of Finance needs to go back and realign other laws to fit the vision. We have many laws that need to be realigned. The policies and the investment plan need to be realigned to fit this vision.  

I have also personally argued that this Parliament is very big.We need a Parliament of 200 MPs and a Cabinet of 20 ministers. We need to go down to regional governments so that we can all share the limited resources and have resources tagged to where they should be. 

The issue of corruption is very serious and it is one of the issues that can derail this vision. But this vision can be achieved because even others have achieved it. For example, in Tororo, we have the issue of Phosphate. This place was given to Madhivani ten years ago. But up to now, there is nothing on the ground. Seventy percent of Uganda is agro-based. The issue of oil has also delayed for seven years now. As for the railway network, I told the Minister of Finance that there is a group of people in this Government who own trucks and companies and they use their trucks to bring goods from Mombasa to Kampala by road. They do not want the railway system to be revamped. As we speak now, the destruction of our railway system goes on day and night while everybody is seeing – (Interruption)

MR EBIL: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank you hon. Ekanya for giving me this opportunity. In addition to the trucks, there are people who are very powerful and they own buses. They do not want this railway system to work. I talked about this but they do not want us to have the railway, which is the cheapest mode of transport. 

MR EKANYA: So, Mr Speaker and colleagues, that is why in Uganda, we spend more resources on building the roads. The issue of energy is fundamental to moving this country forward. This issue of the quality of education is also fundamental. So, I really call upon colleagues that this is a dream, like we all dream – it is a mirage and we should desire to be there and if we cannot be there during our life time, let our children be there and not our great-grand-children. 

Mr Speaker, the cornerstone to it, as I conclude, is the issue of governance. We need a national dialogue so that the Opposition and Government can work together for achievement of this vision. No amount of tear gas, intimidation and harassment will move this country forward. The only way forward is national dialogue so that we restore issues of term limits and combat corruption. I beg to call upon colleagues that we support this vision so that we are not used by Government as the excuse for delaying the plan and the dream to move the country forward. I thank you very much.

3.13
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the report of the joint committee on Uganda’s Vision 2040. Vision in simple or ordinary words would entail where we want to go as a country. I think that this is an estimation and for this vision to be effective, we must have the mechanisms to reach there and I think that is why Government came up with Vision 2040. 

But before the 2040 Vision, we had the 2025 Vision. I have seen in the report that 2025 has been thoroughly reviewed to find the pitfalls and the way forward. The current Vision 2040 started from 2010. So, the question to the committee would be; since 2010, how far have we moved? What base have we put into place so that you know that out of the 40 years, there are three we have covered and we have been able to set the momentum or to set the ground this far.

My worry, therefore, is that we could reach 2030 and then we say, “No, we encountered problems and now, we are reviewing the same to 2060 or 2080.” So, we must have practical lessons - very concrete lessons to find the pitfalls and not only the vision but it is compounded in the National Development Plan. How far have we as a country, scored on our National Development Plans?

In the report, I am seeing that the country is now growing at 6.4 percent per annum. How verified are these figures because even China now is in the range of 7.7 percent per annum as it had a setback? But for Uganda to be growing at 6.4 - we would be seeing - if this has been consistent, as we were told in the report, we would be seeing positive results. 

You go out of Parliament and look around for yourselves. Where is this development? Where is this growth? Since we state that since 1986, we have been able to achieve 6.4 – in fact, in some other years, we have been recording even 7.2. Where is this growth? Is it universal to all Ugandans or it is a few who are getting richer at the expense of the majority of Ugandans?  - (Interruption)

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: I thank you very much, hon. Ssekikubo, for giving way. The information I want to give you is on page one. The committee has noted in five that there were omissions and oversights that were in the Vision 2025 that were made and these included the absence of appropriate policy, legal and institutional framework.

The information I want to give you is to question as to whether this has already been addressed and whether the performance of the authors of Vision 2025 were evaluated.

MR SSEKIKUBO: I thank you, colleague, for that because what she is stating is that there should have been a thorough evaluation of the pitfalls and then, we see how we want to project this country where we want to move. Short of that, Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I am afraid. 

I am seeing very colourful figures here on page 2 that Uganda by 2017 shall be progressing to lower-middle income category and upper-middle income category by 2032 and that we are estimating to be in the transformation to have an income of $9,500 by 2040and that our growthrate shall be at 8.2 percent per annum translated into total GDP of about Shs 580.5 billion. 

Hon. Members, I trust that the two committees would have really put Government to task to explain this. Why are you building castles in the air? How about the many years of trials and experimentation? Where are the commanding heads of this economy to achieve this? How far have we moved? 

I can tell you, hon. Members, that I am seeing, at the end of the day, the basic recommendation being that we have to have a set of values which all nationals must be taught. Hon. Members, you can teach values even to the university level. Even professors with PhDs but the basic requirement we lack here is walking the talk. I am seeing here that Vision 2040 shall be spearheaded by the President. That is fine but what other complimentary measures are we putting into place? 

I can now tell you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members, that I was reading that the World Bank, for instance, has halted the $ 27.5 million of the Lake Victoria Environmental Management Project due to audit queries. Kenya and Tanzania are way ahead but we in Uganda, our Lake Victoria Environmental Management Project has been halted by the World Bank and this totals to $71 billion. Where is the seriousness? Who has been put to account for this? 

Just last Saturday, we read that the Shs 2.2 trillion for Karuma project has been halted and Government has accepted and none other than the President said that amongst his “yellow” ministers are the culprits and at the end of the day, he said that it was now up to the Chinese Government to find another contractor. The President looking on when ministers have sabotaged such a Shs 2.2 trillion project and we say that we are looking at Vision 2040! We are not serious.

What action has Government taken against the errant ministers who were seeking a bribe of Shs 500 billion from this Shs 2.2 trillion Karuma project? I can quote the President here; recently at the Presidential Round Table Conference, he is quoted saying, “With the high production costs, the economy cannot attract investors. Africa has adopted sectarianism, sectarian institutions against state pillars.” I want to ask, where in this Vision 2040 are the state pillars that will stand the test of time? If the person who is supposed to spearhead the 2040 is only lamenting- the President is lamenting. He knows very well that the high production cost emanates from the high cost of power and the ministers seated in front here- some ministers in front here have sabotaged such a project of 2.2 trillion -(Interruption)

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Member, for giving way. I want to give information that the President, yes, said those words, but the IGG is investigating. So, we have to wait for the IGG’s investigation because even the IGG has halted the process.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, do I need to add anything more to that?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, maybe, this is part of the solution where we have a clear roadmap, what to expect and if it is not done, we can raise questions as Parliament because we would have approved this. Maybe this is part of the solution.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, time is of essence. For how long must we have trials and failures -for how long? The world is moving very fast. I am afraid that the person who is supposed to be spearheading Vision 2040 can only condescend and there is no apparent action that has been done. Where are we as a country? And now you tell us, “Putting the nation first.” This is abusing us. This is not putting the nation first. It is some individuals putting their stomachs and their interests first and this is covered in the name of Vision 2040. Short of that, I stand to be challenged on what action has been taken. I cited the Lake Victoria Environmental Management Project of Shs 71 billion and nobody seemed to be bothered.

I would like to end my submission by challenging none other than the President; by challenging none other than the Cabinet; the Frontbenchers here; lead the country. You are now in charge of this country; do not give us lamentations. You cannot look at all these abuses. We should walk the talk. Why are we coming up with loud sounding nothings and you present such a bogus- I beg your pardon-(Laughter)- and you present such an unbecoming document to Parliament, which you know very well you will not be able to walk the talk with; with which you know very well will not lead Ugandans to prosperity? Each year you keep on peddling the same. We are tired. We need action and we do not want such impressions. We should have real and concrete facts on the ground. Short of that, this is going to end as a mirage; it is a dream to keep Ugandans sleeping forever as poverty eats them up. (Member timed out.)

3.26
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, first and foremost, I would like to thank the committee that has come up with this report. I also come from a point of contention that whether the report is right or wrong, it is something you can start with and move forward. And therefore, we can look at it, criticise it and at the end of the day, it can form a basis to have a better plan for the future. So, there is something to that extent. (Applause) 

But I also want to think we have come from somewhere in this country. I have had the benefit of reading this whole draft report, page to page, and you can get worried. For the last 30 years, this country has seen persistent, consistent economic gambling at a policy level. We started with some barter trade in the 80s: we exchanged transformers for maize. We do not know what happened. Then we went to Structural Adjustment Programmes; then we went to the privatisation exercise; then we went to Poverty Eradication Programmes. Here we come- mark you, there is also the Millennium Development Goals. Many people do not want to mention what happened. They were supposed to be reviewed 15 years down the road in 2015. There is no mention of a thing. 

Vision 2025: that one we read in Economics at undergraduate level. It was what we did left, right and centre. Here, we go again with Vision 2040. I have had the benefit to look at some interesting figures. They talk about employment standing at 70.9 percent. For the first time, I have heard some figures that talk about employment. That means unemployment in this country is at 29.1 percent. And what is this employment? They tell you 65 percent is in agriculture. I represent a rural constituency and when you talk about unemployment and you are saying 65 percent of our people are employed in agriculture, how many hours do those people in rural areas work? In my constituency they work for an average of four hours. And what is the output? 

At undergraduate, we used to have what we call disguised employment. Have they analysed it? They also come to talk about that, that they want to care. 

I have seen in Vision 2040, they want to increase the forest and wetland cover. But look at what this Government is doing- already in plan from 13 percent to 24, they are building the Northern Bypass in a wetland. They are going to construct the Entebbe Express Highway purely in a wetland. I know because I am also a business person around this country. I can trace where it is going to pass. It is going to pass in a pure wetland. The Entebbe Expressway, the markings are there; we can trace it. Therefore, that is what we call soliloquy –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, is there a road that does not cross a wetland?

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Yes. You and I have the benefit- (Interjections)-no. By the way, Mr Speaker-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you saying it is following a wetland? 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: It is following a wetland from Busega up to Entebbe- the Entebbe Expressway- and here, you have a document that says they are going to increase wetland cover from 13 percent to 24 percent. That is a joke. They are talking about forest cover, that they are going to increase forest cover, but what is happening- You have the head of State bent on giving away Mabira. Up to today, the President of this country is adamant that he wants Mabira to go away but he is talking about increasing forest cover? And what is the extent of forest loss every day in this country? I have had the benefit of looking at some numbers here. They say our per capita income is $500. If you get that and put in the current exchange rate and you divide by number of days in a year, that means in Uganda, today, people earn about Shs3,500 per day on average. They want to move from Shs 3,000 to Shs 60,000 in 30 years, if you look at the projected amount. That is an absolute joke. 

Two, which country on earth, and I want to know, plans for 30 years only? Countries today know where they will be 200 years from now and here you have a plan that we are all seated here in Parliament to debate that gives us a medium plan of only 30 years. I think we are just taking this country for a ride.

I understand the President is going to launch this tomorrow, Thursday. And what is the role of Parliament? What if we reject it? That is also to assume that Parliament is just a rubber stamp to which you take your document well knowing it will pass it. It also means that whatever we debate and pass in respect of this issue is not going to be put in what is going to be launched. So, they are just engaging Parliament in some loud thinking, which is disrespect of the highest order to this institution. This must stop. I think the Executive is taking this Parliament for a ride. They want us to pass a document, but which they have planned to launch tomorrow? Wait a minute. Let us be taken seriously. 

This document also talks about a quasi-market approach to the economy. But can we please get things clear; which direction do you want to take this country? For example, what is quasi market approach? It is all about a market economy. I have a Master’s Degree in Economics. What is a quasi-market economic approach? It is all about you wanting to take us as a paradise for the development of this country.

I have read a lot of World Bank thinking that has failed third world countries in this report. And do you know their language? It is about producing an export-oriented economy. But no country is doing that today and surviving.

When you read all this and analyse what has befallen the Arab World with the excitement of oil, you will get to know where we are going. But even with oil, with so many Ugandans are excited, you can have it together with a good infrastructure like the roads, but still continue languishing in massive poverty. That is what has caused that famous Arab uprising. Amidst prosperity, the benefits donot clearly trickle down to the people. When you go to Dubai, Bahrain and so on, you will find super highways, but with the people as poor as they were before the discovery of oil. When you read through this report, it is the same thinking being exhibited. 

But I want to caution the framers of this draft document that for you to really come up – you are not inventing the wheels. We know of countries that have developed what they did – hon. Ekanya talked about this. You must assume basic fundamentals foremost.

Can you assure us that we have peace and sustainable stability in this country when the tensions are still there? You still, for example, have an army that is parochial; a security apparatus appended to the regime and patronised by the President and the party in power. That is not a national army and not a national security apparatus at that because it does not augur well with the cause for stability.

It has also been indicated here that - and as the other man said - it starts with the development of an enlightened political elite. Come on. Are we serious about the leaders of this country? I do not want – I respect people, but how many corruption scandals have we had? How many leaders in this country – you can go to the Frontbench and count one after the other in this country with each one, if not virtually majority of them, having question marks. All of them – they are either selling land somewhere or grabbing money somewhere. You cannot talk about a vision when the bearers or conveyors are not that pure.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, my thinking is that – but also something fundamental talked about here – and I want somebody to explain what they mean – is the fact that they want to have an amendment on the provisions of the Land Act. I have just read it from the draft. This Act is up for a review but it has come with a constitutional amendment. But we have said before that the principle of land should be about a willing buyer and seller. Now they are saying we must move away from that, but to what? Is that going to be about State acquisition of land by force? It is that thing that Parliament will pass –(Interjections)– I have read it –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much. I just want to inform the House that we have a challenge about land in Uganda. While the Constitution states that foreigners are not supposed to own land in this country - what has been happening, given this policy of willing buyer and seller, is that these foreign gentlemen and ladies come here, incorporate companies and acquire leases for 49 or 99 years. After that, they can apply for freehold ownership because the same Land Act states that once someone has developed land, they can apply for freehold ownership. 

Therefore, the earlier we sort out the Constitution as regards land ownership, the better for us. Otherwise, with this development, we shall have our people only working as paupers yet that is the only wealth we have in this country.

MR KIVUMBI MUWANGA: Therefore, Mr Speaker, you can see that the document we are about to pass, good as it looks, requires broad debate and scrutiny. 

But also there is a debate that we have failed to tune in this country, which is not talked about in this document. But in the constituency I represent and in the central region, that is the most important issue. This issue is about federalism. It is about the structure of government you have. You need to know that a lot of people have lost trust in decentralisation including, by the way, the Government of the day because it has reversed 80 percent of the decentralisation initiative by recalling back the powers from these districts to the centre. 

When you read this document, you realise that this Vision 2040 does not talk about the question of federalism and the agitation for it, yet it still raises tension in the Buganda region and the rest of the other parts of the country, for example, the Acholi sub-region, which has suggested to break away. 

I have interacted with leaders across this country and they have expressed the fact that they have lost faith in this country. Therefore –(Interruptions)

MR AMOS OKOT: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Member, for giving way. I want to give information regarding what you have just mentioned about the Acholi agitation to breakaway. It is not true that the Acholi sub-region wants to break away. That was an opinion of some few people with elusive thinking. It is not true. (Laughter)

On the point about land reforms, I also want to inform you that in May last year, the leadership of the Acholi sub-region sat down and tried to review the rationale behind the acquisition of a certificate of land ownership and the motive behind it. 

In that meeting, they formed a committee to study that document well before encouraging people to register their land because the reason behind it is to lure people to secure loans, for which they don’t have the capacity to repay. That is the information I had for you. Thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What was that? Was it counter information? –(Laughter) Is that in the rules of this House? 

MS AOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just would like to give information about break away – it may be Acholi but not Acholi alone. It may include very many other districts and sub-regions.

When we talk about Uganda’s economy as having moved from recovery to growth, where is the Northern region? So, my counter information is that when people say this, we are disgusted. If we are poor, we would rather remain poor alone and let the rich remain in their regions. It is because of annoyance; it is not just because we want to break off, and very many people think that way in the cast region. Thank you. 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, my point of contention is that this document is not deep enough both in time scale and on the depth of issues. I am hesitant to add that it is quite shallow, inadequate and does not answer the deeper call to build a prosperous, united and free Uganda. (Mr Mutende rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The member is concluding; you might have to just debate later. Honourable members, let us first understand this because you might be making statements that are inciting the House and I am in charge of this House and I do not like it. 

The report says this Vision 2040 was laid in this House on 3rd April last year. It has stayed with this House for a year. So, there is a plan to launch it tomorrow and now you want to bring up this issue of rushing; I think one year is not anything to be rushed. Let us be fair to the process, please. 

3.45
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to confirm that I have attended two sessions of consultation in the Parliamentary Conference Hall on this matter. I stand to support the committee and also to support the motion that we actually proceed to approve the Vision 2040. 

Mr Speaker, that said, my attention goes to item 3(5) on page 1 of the report which says, “Vision 2025 remained a beautiful document that was hardly mentioned or referred to as a guide to our national development.” I looked at the reasons they gave, that this was principally because the Vision 2025 lacked the necessary policy, legal and institutional framework. I would not like to see a situation where we also approve Vision 2040 and yet it remains a document that is beautiful but is not implemented. I beg, therefore, to add some proposals to the recommendations of the committee so that we can enhance and improve our mechanism for implementation of this vision. 

The first proposal is on the devolution principle. I would like to believe what my colleagues have said, that unless we have a strong local government system, unless we trust that our local government can actually deliver on the services that are necessary for us to achieve the goals in this vision, then it will remain a dream. We should therefore see a recommendation saying, “restructure and strengthen local governments” so that we transform them from being mere administration centres to units of service delivery and local economic development. 

Whatever it takes - Look at our colleagues in Kenya, our colleagues in Rwanda and other countries where they have restructured and reviewed the entire framework for local government. In Rwanda, I think in 1995 they had 106 districts. Today, they have only 30 and they have made provinces which are stronger. It is the same in Kenya; when you look at the county today, it is different from what it was just two years ago. We need to strengthen our local government units so that they become the engines of delivering this vision. 

My second point is on the question of corruption. Yes, there is something in recommendation No.2 but I find it a bit weak. They are simply talking of enough transparency and accountability. In my view, whatever we achieve, even if we achieve a lot in terms of growth and production, so long as we do not stop the leakages we have in the system, so long as we do not address the issues of regional disparity, we will find ourselves in problems. So, I would love to see a recommendation from our committees on strengthening the fight against corruption, minimising the leakages in the economy and ensuring equity in development. To me, this recommendation of our committees is not strong enough. 

Thirdly, there is the issue of population growth. This vision assumes a population of 61.3 million by 2040. Mr Speaker, look at our current population growth rate of 3.5 per cent and in some cases four per cent per annum; assuming our population of 30 million now - it is long since we had census but the figure we have is 30 to 35 million - is growing at 3.5 per cent to four per cent per annum, then in the next 12 years the population will actually come to 60 million. 

So, you are projecting a population of 60 million in 2040 but if we do not look at the factors of population growth, we shall actually hit this level of 60 million in 2025 and by 2040, we will actually be talking of a population of about between 100 and 120 million. Now, this can easily eat into whatever GDP you are talking about. So, we must look at strong recommendations that aim at monitoring closely the level of population growth and ensuring that the characteristic of our population becomes more productive in terms of quality.

Finally, on the issue of separation of powers on page 8, the committee points out that Vision 2040 envisages a situation where ministers will not be Members of Parliament so as to foster separation of powers. This is an intriguing recommendation but it needs to be explained in full because it can be interpreted in different ways. 

When you say ministers shall not be Members of Parliament, my quick understanding is that as long as you are a minister today, when we have elections tomorrow you do not compete. If you like being a minister, stay there. However, we need to move a step further and even apply it vice versa - Members of Parliament shall not be ministers. So, if you are sitting in this House and you are appointed to be a minister, you resign your parliamentary position. 

Again, Mr Speaker, we need to move a little ahead. Let us not leave this simply hanging. We are talking of 2040; let us not just talk about ministers not being MPs. That, to me, is not adequate. We must be looking at restructuring the entire framework of government. We must be looking at reviewing the size and the necessity of our Cabinet. We must be looking at downsizing the Parliament. We must be looking at downsizing the number of districts. We must be looking at reducing these advisors of the President, the RDCs and the whole framework so that the entire budget is restructured from being only 20 per cent investment and 80 per cent administration to the reverse. 

You must help us, as the National Planning Authority, to look at a situation whereby in 2030 or 2040, at least 70 per cent of our budget goes towards development and only 30 per cent goes to administration. By that, you need to structure fully the entire framework of Government and not just look at ministers not being in Parliament. I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I fully support that we go ahead and pass our Vision 2040. Thank you.

3.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (INDUSTRY) (Dr James Mutende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to support the Vision 2040 but, first of all, I want to allay some of the fears that are being expressed on this Floor that it is a very ambitious programme. It is not overly ambitious. It is obviously a good direction for our country to go and 30 years from 2010 is not too short a time to do a lot of things. 

When you look at the trend that the country is taking, of course it is true there may be some negatives or flaws. No country in the world has developed purely in a perfect line without any flaws or shortcomings. This happens world over; even the most developed countries have flaws. What matters is the trend - how we are moving and what kind of plan we have.

Indeed, anybody will recall and agree with me that never in the history of this country since independence have we had major infrastructure undertakings at a go like this Government has done. Right now, for instance, we are talking about 19 priority tarmac roads around the country. In fact, in the next financial year, we have a commitment by the Government to construct 40 roads. This has never happened before. 

We have increased energy availability from a mere 60 megawatts in 1986 to over 820 megawatts available today. Indeed we have, for the first time in a long time, done away with load shedding on a constant basis. We are still –(Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank the honourable minister for giving way. I was a bit constrained but I thought that this being a serious Parliament with a record called the Hansard we must put the Hansard right. I have heard the honourable minister stating that this is a very serious Government, which in one single financial year has undertaken the construction of 40 tarmac roads. Can the minister cite those 40 tarmac roads he is saying have been undertaken within one financial year? Can the minister really cite these since we are all Ugandans and we can understand where such activities are taking place?

DR MUTENDE: Thank you, honourable, for that intervention. I think- (Interruption)

REV. BAKALUBA: Thank you very much for giving way. The information I would like to give the honourable minister is from recommendation No. 10, given that a lot of tarmac roads have been put in place as well as many other development programmes. However, the first recommendation here says, given the negative mindset of the population, we need to do a lot of sensitisation. If the people actually appreciate what is taking place, the developments and whatever, why do we have this negative mindset among the population? That is why we have this concern. Thank you. 

DR MUTENDE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and Members. Someone will come and talk about the mindset issue but I want to say that a few days ago, the Minister of Finance laid on this Table the National Budget Framework Paper. If my brother, hon. Ssekikubo, had dared to read it, he would agree with me that there is a commitment to make those roads in the next financial year. Indeed, some have already started but there are 19 priority roads that are going to be undertaken for tarmacking and upgrading and these are facts.

A Member raised the issue of a quasi market economy on the Floor and made it look so obnoxious – (Interjection) - Let me just give you some information. I am also giving information to someone who had misled me earlier. (Interruption)

MS AJOK: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the honourable minister. I would like to inform the honourable minister, as he talks of those roads, that we have a road, the Masindi Port-Apac-Lira-Kitgum Road, which has been in Government’s plan for over 30 years. That road was due to be tarmacked with the Tirinyi one. However, Tirinyi got done and is maybe even wearing out and requires repair but even the murram that used to be first class on the Masindi Port-Apac-Lira-Kitgum is no more.

Yesterday, I had the privilege of meeting the honourable Minister for Works and I have no reason to disbelieve him. He said the Masindi Port-Apac-Lira-Kitgum Road is not among those roads. This is despite the fact that this year, the President was in Lango and assured our paramount chief that this financial year, this road would be done. Can you assure this House and the people of Lango and Acholi that this road is one of those you are talking about?

MR SSEMUGABA: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I would like to clarify on the information given by the honourable minister as far as roads are concerned. As you know, when you contract for roads, they are not finished in the same financial year. When the minister states that we are working on 40 roads, it is more than that. These 19 roads are going to be worked on by Contract Financing Funding (CFF) but there are others we are going to work on using private public partnerships. There are also others, which are already ongoing. So, when you total them, they come to that.

On the road from Rwekunye to Masindi Port, Apac up to the northern region, that road is in the batch of those to be constructed under -(Interruption)

MRS OSEGGE: Thank you so much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I would not have loved to do this to my brother but is the honourable member in order to insinuate that one financial year is an expanse of 40 years or so many years? In my understanding and from my little English and economics, a financial year is a financial year. Why would you want to confuse this House and the public by saying that when a project starts this year, it can last for another ten or so years?

We need to be serious. Is the honourable member in order to deceive this House and Uganda at large? We want to be specific because we are talking for the benefit of this country; it is not just a matter of supporting.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the construction of the road that goes to Gulu started around 2007 and it is still going on now. That is what he is saying.

DR MUTENDE: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I believe Members here know that making a road is a long process. As a matter of fact, the construction of a road normally takes a shorter time than designing the road. But when Government commits itself to making a road, it is a commitment and you should bear in mind that it will take a bit of time.

I would like to clear the air about the pessimism expressed when a Member raised the issue of a quasi market economy. I would like to say that there is nothing wrong, according to heterodox economics which is sometimes referred to as intervention economics, for Government to sometimes intervene in market forces. Vision 2040 clearly says that in some strategic areas, Government will intervene through public private partnerships, through direct financing of projects, to make the economy move. This is the direction we are heading towards. There are projects, especially in infrastructure, that are extremely costly – the initial investment cost is very high – and you want to leave those ones to the private sector. This is also set out clearly in the Vision 2040.

Still to give more hope to those who seem to be pessimistic – 

MRS OSEGGE: Mr Speaker, may I inquire from the honourable minister; as far as the roads that have lasted since 2007 – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Guidance is to the Speaker. (Laughter)

MRS OSEGGE: I am sorry, Mr Speaker. (Laughter) Through you, Mr Speaker, I wish to find out what period was allotted to that road; is it for eternity? Don’t we have a period for any road project to be completed? 

THE SPEAKER: That was a clarification for the minister and not guidance from the Speaker. (Laughter)

DR MUTENDE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think you have been guided. As for clarification, I have already said that the construction of a road takes a shorter time than designing a road, especially if it is new. However, it also depends on the terrain and all sorts of things; some roads have bridges and so forth.

Mr Speaker, let me make this point clear; I am simply giving hope to those who seem not to have – 

MRS OSEGGE: Mr Speaker, I am hurt because this is a minister in the government and a Member of Parliament, and not a new Member of Parliament but someone who has been here for some time. Why is he giving us excuses that it depends on the terrain and others? 
Before you decide to construct a road, all kinds of surveys must be done on the texture of the soil and everything else. Is the minister in order to come here and give us excuses? Are we to assume that this Government gets into projects without planning and proper surveys? What is he telling us about? Are you serious? (Laughter) I am sorry but this is a very serious issue. Is the minister in order to insinuate that this Government is so confused that it does not know what steps to take before a project is started?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am actually beginning to wonder what the construction of a road encompasses. I thought before construction starts, the person involved will first carry out a survey and all other things and then incorporate those costs during the bidding process such that you bid for surveying, design - I am not an engineer but I thought it is just basic information that surveying and designing before actual construction is done is part of the work on a road. If I am right, then the honourable member is in order.

DR MUTENDE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I was saying before being interrupted, the Government has proper plans in place to industrialise the country using the available resources. In the Vision 2040 document, for example, it says that Government will set aside land for industrial parks, Government will commercialise agriculture and we plan to do more irrigation than has been done before. All these are intended to boost the economy. There are provisions on how we are going to handle the proceeds from oil and gas and these will be used to boost the productive sectors of the economy.

In summary, (Interjection) I am summarising now. The fundamentals have been addressed to make sure that our economy grows beyond even what is indicated in Vision 2040. Thank you.

4.08
MR PETER OKEYOH (NRM, Bukooli Islands County, Namayingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for its report and I also implore Members to adopt it. I thank the committee for being bold and stating categorically that ministers should not be Members of Parliament. It is a bold decision because if you are not bold enough, you cannot give such a recommendation. Thank you, once again, the committee.

Secondly, there is no way we can achieve this vision without carrying out serious reforms in the education sector. Our education system is geared towards producing more job seekers than job creators. We need to make reforms so that we produce Ugandans who are skilled and can create jobs. That is what can make us achieve this vision. However, if our education system remains more theoretical, then I can assure you that we shall not achieve this vision.

Mr Speaker, I was part of a team that visited Rwanda and while there, one of our colleagues fell sick. When we took him to hospital, we found a Ugandan doctor who is an expert there. I was very saddened but all the same we needed to treat our colleague. When we asked that doctor what we in Uganda need to do, he said we need to have reforms such that doctors are paid well. He said the reason they run to Rwanda is because of better remuneration there. So, I appeal to Government to improve on the remuneration of professionals so that we can retain them and even attract those who are still in the private sector.

Mr Speaker, well aware that I represent a fishing community, I want to say that the fisheries sector is always at the tail end when it comes to agriculture. Whenever we talk about agriculture, we only talk of animal husbandry and crop husbandry and we give little attention to fisheries. Our sister countries, Kenya and Tanzania, have invested a lot in fisheries and are earning a lot of money. On our part, our fishermen are not given incentives and yet we would have earned a lot as a country through fisheries. 

So, it is my prayer that the committee looks at the fisheries sector and seeks ways of boosting it in order to help our people in the fishing community feel proud that they are part of this country and that they are being catered for. Otherwise, this is a good vision and we should support it so that Uganda will reach somewhere far by the year 2040. Thank you.

4.11
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee chairperson for this report. Whoever studied economics could have heard of the statement that poor countries do not plan to fail but they fail to plan although they attempt to plan. 

I have looked at the performance or the targets that we have and I wonder whether we are not starting by failing. I say this because it is projected here that in the year 2017, we shall have reached the lower middle level but 2017 is just three years from now. When you look at the Budget which is about to be tabled, there are indications that various sectors have not had adjustments, including crucial ones like health. When you look at the budget of the current financial year, the indicators are not positive. So, can I get it clear why we think that by the year 2017 we shall have reached the lower middle income level? 

From the figures quoted on employment in the table on page 7, it is indicated that 70.9 per cent of the population of Uganda as at 2010 was employed. I take that to mean that most of these were peasants. Let someone come up and tell us the average income of a peasant Ugandan per day. Can they make a dollar in a day? If the income of a peasant is less than one dollar a day, why should we be happy and say that 70 per cent of our people are employed? If we are targeting 94 per cent employment by that year, then we are also saying that the peasants would have dropped by a proportionate figure, say to 50 per cent. So, where we have people earning less than a dollar - what is only necessary for them to survive - then we should not be proud to say that our people are actually employed. The figures appear to be more or less cosmetic. 

Mr Speaker, it is my prayer and hope that political discussions will not interfere with the Vision 2040. Many strategic programmes in this country have been interfered with because of politics, for instance, education. Some important economic programmes like those in the area of agriculture have also been interfered with because of politics. So, I pray that we will not have political distortion failing these programmes. 

I commend the committee for the recommendations, especially on the point of the mindset. In recommendation No.1, they say that Parliament should play a leading role and that the business unusual approach could be demystified as one of the critical aspects of this positive mindset. Surely, if we do not change the mindset of our people and if politicians do not stop being pretentious to get votes from the people, we may not be able to achieve this vision. However, I pray to the Lord that we live to see this vision achieved. I believe it is possible to achieve this in 30 years. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.16
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I will start by stating my position. We are not against the vision but from the way it was formulated, it has issues that need to be addressed. On whether they can be addressed today and tomorrow we launch the vision, that is another matter. 

The vision mentions land reforms to facilitate fast acquisition of land for planned urbanisation, infrastructure, development and agriculture commercialisation. I have had the benefit of looking at the laws governing land in this country and the problem is not the law. Even as we speak now, you will agree with me that Government has been squandering public land. Individuals have acquired big chunks of land and there is no development. So, which entities have been giving out land to these individuals? It is the district land boards and Uganda Land Commission. 

As I was coming from Arua last weekend, I was shown a big chunk of land belonging to individual, who acquired the land through Uganda Land Commission as an investor, and I was shown other big chunks belonging to individuals. These people were even encroaching on the national parks – (Interjections) – Let me finish my point. So, what is the problem? Is it the law or the laxity of Government on the people who acquire such land? This means that if anybody under the guise of an investor wanted land, they will get it but what is the capacity of that investor to develop that land. 

Why are we failing in this respect? A middleman applies for land and gets it and then starts hawking, that he is the one selling land to the investors. I am convinced beyond reasonable doubt that this does not call for a change in the law. It only requires Government to get serious on how it deals with land.

When it comes to urban centres, almost all the land which would be used for planning and development of the cities has been taken over by people who have no capacity to develop it. I would like to see Government say that whoever acquires land from Government for a particular purpose and no investment is done, that land should revert to Government after a particular period of time – (Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you for giving way. In paragraph 24, the committee observes that there is need to gazette land for industrial parks and other forms of infrastructure. The information I would like to give you is that Namanve was de-gazetted as a forest reserve and gazetted as an industrial park. However, recent findings show that it is far from being an industrial park and it has been taken over by individuals and there are housing investments going on. 

So, once we do not have the goodwill, even if we have such measures in place - I wish the committee could draw its attention to this matter - it remains more of a hoax. The gazetted industrial parks have even been taken over by individuals and there is no industrial park to talk about. Thank you. 

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I wish to thank my colleague for giving way. When you read through this document, Vision 2040, on page 26 the authors are advocating for constitutional reforms in order to allow Government to acquire land compulsorily from those who may not be willing to sale. 

The information I want to give is that during the constitutional amendment debate of 2005, this matter came up prominently. Mr Speaker, you were the chairperson of our legal and parliamentary committee and there was a Government white paper that was produced. We went out consulting our constituents and the people of this country and this was a very sticky matter in the face of the people. I would like to inform this House that this proposal was roundly rejected and defeated by the population. In essence, this was a referendum on this particular proposal. I do not think it should be appearing again at this time. The information I want to give is that this was rejected by the people and it should not be brought up again in another form. Thank you. 

MR MWIRU: Thank you, honourable colleagues, for the information. Mr Speaker, you will agree with me that the framers of the Land Act, under section 42, provided for a land fund. The intention was very clear; it was that, if you have investors who want to invest in agriculture, land would be available. If we had to address any problems relating to land, we would go to the land fund, get money and deal with that situation but up to now that has not been worked on. So, I want to rest my case by stating that the issue is not the laws; the issue is the implementation.

Secondly, when you go to strengthening the three arms of Government and ensuring checks and balances – Mr Speaker, I am your student - you taught me at one time - and you did teach us separation of powers and not checks and balances. According to Montesquieu, separation of powers is when you have three arms of government doing distinctively different functions but co-operating with each other. 

What is the danger of these mere checks and balances? This curtails our capacity to perform even as institutions of Government. When you read the Constitution, it gives Parliament the mandate to determine its emoluments but this does not happen because you have to go back to the Minister for Finance. If we were to facilitate this matter, we would have a situation where we would say that in these arms of government, each should have a percentage of the national budget. That would stop the micro-management, which we are actually having in this country, where one arm of Government controls the other arms of Government in the way they execute their mandate. Actually, in my opinion, instead of doing checks and balances, it should be separation of powers.

Finally, when you go to (n), they mention the establishment of a Uganda infrastructure fund to significantly lower the cost of infrastructure development. I will handle this with the transport sector. 

Parliament, on several occasions, has passed laws establishing funds in this country. Section 21 of the Uganda Road Fund Act established the Road Fund but what are we seeing. Money that is supposed to go to the Road Fund is collected by URA, some of which reaches the Treasury and some does not reach. So at the end of the day, we keep on borrowing to work on roads and yet Uganda as a country has enough money which we have accumulated within the Road Fund and we would have actually worked on the transport sector but that is not taking place now. There is also the fish fund, and now we want to create another fund. 

To think that this is not an academic exercise which we are actually engaging in, we need to be very serious if we are talking about these funds. At one time when I asked the minister a question for oral answer, he said on the Floor that there is a problem with the law. There is no problem with the law. Article 152 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda is very clear. When it comes to funds collected by URA, it is very specific to the effect that those funds should not actually be used for any other purpose. With your indulgence, Mr Speaker, I beg to read Article 153 of the Constitution on the Consolidated Fund: 

“(1) There shall be a Consolidated Fund into which shall be paid all revenues or other monies raised or received for the purpose of, or on behalf of, or in trust for the Government.” Most importantly, clause (2) says, “The revenues or other monies referred to in clause (1) of this article shall…” - and the word “shall” is mandatory - “...not include revenues or other monies- 
(a) that are payable by or under an Act of Parliament, into some other fund established for a specific purpose.” 

What are we saying? When the law established some funds, it is unconstitutional for Government to hold onto those funds instead of these funds going into a particular fund for a particular purpose. Now we are looking at this vision and asking how we shall achieve it. We are looking at money. I know that what is in the mind of the minister is that we shall borrow. You know, everything that we plan here in Uganda has a rider of borrowing; we do not even look at raising local revenue. 

Mr Speaker, whereas I support the vision because I cannot oppose it, I am saying that some of these issues must be addressed. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I need to give some guidance on this debate. Please let me guide you so that we can debate. First of all, let me start with the issue raised by the honourable member for Jinja Municipality East and the information given to him by the honourable member for Kumi County. 

In 2005, yes, I was chairing the legal committee. The matter that was before the committee was the issue of compulsory acquisition of land for private investment. The argument of Parliament then was that if we have abandoned public investment, why should the Government acquire land for other people’s private investment? Government has already sold and privatised everything and so why should we again acquire land for investment? That was the argument then. It is different from what is suggested here. What is here is for urbanisation and other things that I have seen. There is a difference there. Okay?

Secondly, let me now go to what the law says because the way we are conducting this debate is as if it is a ministerial policy statement. This is not ministerial policy statement that has to be dealt with in this financial year. The process that led to the formulation of this policy – The copy the honourable member for Kumi is holding is actually an older version because two versions have come to this House and this is the third and final draft. This is the third and final draft that is supposed to be launched tomorrow – (Interjection) - Yes, this is the one that was laid here but it has improved. They interacted with Parliament twice and I participated in launching the debate during one of the meetings at the Parliament Conference Hall here.

Section 8 of the National Planning Authority Act, 2002 says, 
“(1) The Authority shall be the national co-ordinating body of the decentralised planning system.

(2) 	The decentralised planning system shall be regulated by statutory instrument issued by the Minister.
(3)	The minister shall, by statutory instrument, provide for submission of development plans to the Authority.

(4)	A district planning committee shall initiate and prepare district development plans in the manner prescribed by the Authority.

(5) 	A Ministry or sector shall prepare a plan, and shall submit it to the Authority whose duty shall be to harmonise all the plans from various Ministries or sectors for the purpose of formulating a national plan. 

(6)	A plan formulated by the Authority shall be submitted to the Minister who shall cause it to be submitted to Parliament for approval and adoption.”

So, these are broad frameworks. The specific discussions that we will be holding on the specific policies when they are brought to this House are different from the debate we should be conducting on these very broad principles. These are very broad principles. Specifically, if there is going to be acquisition of land, we cannot use this document to acquire land. There has to be a specific legislation that comes to his House to make that provision for acquisition of land, not this document – (Interjection) - That is what I am trying to do. Can I finish and if you are not satisfied, then we can go on with that?  

These are very broad principles showing the bigger picture, but the specific policies that will come to the House, whether through the budget or through legislation, will have to have their own scrutiny process in this House for them to pass into law or into a public policy to be implemented. These are just broad principles and we cannot say that from the day it is launched tomorrow, it becomes Government policy to start being implemented because it is not implementable as it is. This is what I thought that I should guide so that the debate can be structured around here. 

MR AMURIAT: I thank you very much for this opportunity. The guidance that I want to seek from you is how we are going to approve or pass this document. As far as I am concerned, and listening to my colleagues who have so far debated the motion, some Members have expressed reservations about part of the document. Many of them have agreed in principle to support the Vision 2040 but they have got exceptions.

As far as I also know, tomorrow is committed to the launch of that document that you hold, Mr Speaker. Now, suppose Parliament has got its reservations about particular points in this document, shouldn’t we express our reservations? If we do express those reservations as we have done, would we then pass this document as an omnibus document as having been accepted by Parliament? Would we go clause by clause - if I may refer to those line items as that – and agree or disagree so that the position that we come out with here would probably be an amended version of that document based on the understanding of the representatives of the people and therefore that amended version would then be the one that would be launched by the President?

I think these events have been put too close to each other. We should have debated this motion last week and then allowed some time for the printery to make corrections based on our understanding of the document. I seek your guidance on this matter, Mr Speaker, because to me I believe what I have described is the right way to go. Thank you very much, Sir.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is a very important document not only to this Parliament but more so to the country and it is quite detailed. I listened in well, Mr Speaker. You said that this is not implementable but it broadly spells out the Vision 2040. However, I see it as a draft for parliamentary approval. 

Conversely, wouldn’t we have said it is meant for parliamentary adoption, so that we are safe? Later, once we have exhausted the chapters as you have put it, then we can have parliamentary approval. But parliamentary approval in our usual usage means that we have scrutinised, we have made amendments, additions and subtractions and then we say, “Yes, here we are; it is with our approval.” In such circumstances, did we do it the wrong way that it is for our approval now? 

A Member asked much earlier that suppose we wanted to make some additions, as indeed from the Floor you have seen we are making our supplementary additions and subtractions, do we have room for this? Now isn’t it proper and appropriate therefore to say the Uganda Vision 2040 has been adopted by Parliament but not necessarily approved by Parliament? I seek your guidance, Mr Speaker. (Hon. Byarugaba rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you rising on clarification?

MR BYARUGABA: Yes, Mr Speaker. I thank you very much for this opportunity. I want to observe the following: One, a lot of consultations have been going on, not only with Members of Parliament but also with local governments and other national stakeholders. 

Two, this document was referred to our honourable Members of Parliament sitting on various committees, a report was produced and brought before this Parliament- (Interjections) – “Joint Committee Report on Uganda Vision 2040 - Sessional Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Standing Committee on Budget.” 

I think I would rather go with hon. Ssekikubo’s amendment that this Parliament adopts this report. This is a framework; it is not cast in stone so it is liable to change as we move along. I would also like to see Isingiro being reflected - my road, my water - but this is a framework. I want to thank you, Mr Speaker. We have actually done a lot of justice on this paper; we should just put the question, we adopt this document and we move on. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the language of the law says “for submission to Parliament for approval and adoption.” It uses both words. As I said at the beginning, this is a document that - It is not all policies that Parliament is consulted on before they are formulated. Give me one policy that has come to this House for the House comment, its comments are incorporated in the policy before it is brought back for its approval. It is not there. That is why this is a distinguishable situation.

With public policy, there are the four corners - formulation is by the Executive, approval is by Parliament, implementation is by the Executive, oversight is by Parliament; fair and square. That is what is done. But this is not a policy –(Interjections)– Wait, please. Please respect the Chair; even if you may be older in age to the Chair, respect the Chair. 

The issue here is, does this provide a general broad principle on which specific policies which will come back to the House for approval can be based. That is the question we should be asking. Is it broad? Does it cover sufficiently? The ministerial policy statements are going to be coming here. By the end of June, they should be here to go to committees. Those are different from these ones. So, even the kind of debate we should be conducting on this one should be different. Now we are going to specifics to discuss this as if it is a policy for implementation once approved. It is not. It is not. So, that is what I need to guide you on.

MR OBOTH: Mr Speaker, aware that this is Vision 2040; and being aware that this is not a ministry policy statement on the basis of the guidance you have just given; and being aware that this was a vision arrived at after wide consultative discussions were made – Mr Speaker, I want to refer to the basis of where Parliament specifically was consulted on key observation 22. It states, “Parliament was consulted on several occasions during the formulation and validation of the Uganda Vision 2040 on 30 August 2012, 4 October 2012, 15 February 2013 and the committee noted that most of the issues raised during these discussions were incorporated in the document, appendix 1.” Mr Speaker, I do move a motion without any notice for the question for the adoption of this report to be put. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the question be put for the adoption of this Uganda Vision 2040. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report Adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the House is adjourned back to committees. We will proceed from there until the time initially scheduled for plenary to resume comes. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 4.43 p.m. and adjourned until 25 April 2013 at 2.00 p.m.) 

