PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTTHIRD SESSION - THIRD MEETINGFRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA12592SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSFriday, 12 April 2024brings everybody together. It will bring Hon. Odur, Hon. Nambeshe, Hon. Francis, Hon. Obua, Hon. Atwijukire and even Hon. Ssekikubo together. (Laughter)  Irrespective of your political or religious affiliations, sports are - now, we even have a Shadow Minister of Education and Sports.Let us get a lasting solution. We have a problem, which was raised yesterday by Hon. Nambeshe and Hon. Odur, and I am happy that the Minister of Education and Sports is here. I get disappointed when I see idle people posting that the African Cup of Nations (AFCON) will be played in Rwanda. I do not know if you have also seen it on social media that AFCON is going to be transferred to Rwanda. It can be transferred because of our problem. It is not a must that Uganda should host AFCON. If we do not fulfil what we are required to do - we are taking this issue as a joke. Let us get serious with it. Next item.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF PREPAREDNESS OF MANDELA NATIONAL STADIUM, NAMBOOLE, FOR THE FORTHCOMING CHAMPIONSHIP OF AFRICAN NATIONS (CHAN) AND THE AFRICAN CUP OF NATIONS (AFCON) TOURNAMENTSTHE SPEAKER:  Are you the minister?DR BWANIKA:  No, Madam Speaker. In your communication -IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentTHIRD SESSION - 24TH SITTING - THIRD MEETING Parliament met at 10.00 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I welcome you to this morning meeting. I appreciate you for the dedication. I know the time you left the House yesterday, and thank you for the dedication. As people’s servants, we need to work hard. We have statutory deadlines that we must meet and that is why we have to make sure that we finish on time. Being the custodians of the law, we should oblige to what is required. Honourable members, my attention has been drawn to the recent reports about the rise in water levels in Lake Victoria. Considering the big population that neighbours the lakes, I urge all the authorities to devise a way and deploy appropriate early warning and response system to prevent any disaster. Most of our people live around the lakes and rivers; so we should be able to prevent disaster. Before we go to the ministerial policy statements, we have a very urgent issue to handle regarding the Ministry of Education and Sports. When we talk about sports, it 12593THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024THE SPEAKER:  We have already moved. Thank you. Honourable members, you will recall that yesterday, Hon. John Baptist Nambeshe from Bududa raised a matter of national importance and it was backed by Hon. Odur; on the status of preparedness of Mandela National Stadium, Namboole, on the issue of the forthcoming CHAN and AFCON tournaments and the World Cup qualifiers that was supposed to be played in Namboole. However, instead of playing in Namboole, the stadium is said not to be ready, they preferred to play out of the country, which has a financial implication on the country. Aside from that, Morocco offered to host Uganda vs Algeria, but Algeria said that they could not play in Morocco. So, it creates a problem. When you talk about Tanzania, well you can go there but the coach of Algeria is from Tanzania and yet Uganda is supposed to play with Algeria. As mentioned by Hon. Odur, there are advantages of playing at home compared to going out there. So, we would like to find out from the minister on the status of the stadium and how best we can be helped. Thank you. 10.08THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I would like to thank Members of Parliament for the love they have towards sports development in this country. I take those comments in good faith. You may recall that in 2020, the Confederation of African Football – THE SPEAKER:  Procedure.MR KAYEMBA-SSOLO:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. The statement is not yet uploaded on our iPads. Are we proceeding well? THE SPEAKER:  We have just received the statement and we are uploading it. However, first listen to what the minister is reading, and by the time he finishes reading the statement, it would have been uploaded. MR OGWANG: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. You may recall that in 2020, the Confederation of -THE SPEAKER:  Since you are the shadow minister, I can give you my copy. MR OGWANG:  The Confederation of African Football (CAF) inspected Mandela National Stadium in preparation for the World Cup qualifier matches, and issued a report thereafter, recommending that we renovate the stadium in order to comply with the international standards to be able to host the national team matches for the Federation of International Football Association (FIFA) World Cup and the African Cup of Nations (AFCON) qualifiers and competitions.The Parliament of Uganda approved and appropriated a budget of Shs 97 billion for the construction of a boundary wall, renovation and upgrade of Mandela National Stadium in the Financial Year 2021/2022.In March 2022, a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) was signed between the Ministry of Education and Sports, Mandela National Stadium and the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs for the renovation and upgrade of Mandela National Stadium by the UPDF Engineers Brigade and the contractor commenced works on 1 August, 2022. The expected date of completion is 25th May 2024. Briefly, the scope of works includes:1. Preliminaries comprising site surveys, assessments, mobilisation, bush clearing, construction of temporary site offices, stores and other general items; 2. Stadium works comprising demolition and removal works, doors, windows, finishes, fittings and fixtures for ground, first, second and third floors and arena; 3. Construction of a garbage collection centre, removal and provision of new athletes’ warm-up area with world-class facilities;12594SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTS4. Renovation of the Sports Hotel;5. Mechanical, Electrical and Plumbing works completely with installation, external works and other facilities. Detail of funding is as follows: Contract sum was Shs 97,900,678,182; Funds received as of today is, Shs 80,136,938,512 (80 per cent); Outstanding balance is Shs 17,763,739,670.Madam Speaker, in 20 months, the contractor has completed 90 per cent of the works and this includes; most of the civil, mechanical, plumbing works, key installations that is to say Closed Circuit Television (CCTV), electronic access control (turnstiles), sanitary appliances, spectators’ seats, pitches, dressing rooms, doors, windows and equipment for the maintenance of the pitches and running track was procured and delivered. We are upgrading the Sports Hotel of 72 rooms to a three-star standard. The contractor is currently fixing furniture and equipment for the match officials, media facilities, medical and anti-doping rooms. Madam Speaker, with a shortfall totalling Shs 17.7 billion of the contract sum, the contractor has encountered challenges to complete the works, which include the following; delivery and installation of the floodlights, LED screens, technical benches, bleachers for persons with disabilities (PWDs), the second batch of the public address system, some of the civil and mechanical works.Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Education and Sports has repeatedly appealed to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to release the funds for the completion of works and on 28 February 2024, the Permanent Secretary and Secretary to the Treasury communicated additional expenditure limits for the second quarter – THE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, just a minute. Can we have the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development here? Please, continue as he comes.MR OGWANG:  The Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury communicated additional expenditure limits for the second quarter of Financial Year 2023/2024 among which was Shs l7.76 billion for the completion of works at Mandela National Stadium.While the ministry warranted and invoiced these funds by 25 March 2024 to date, no funds have been credited to the bank account for Mandela National Stadium, Namboole.To be exact, my senior minister has written three letters from December to date. That is what we have as far as Namboole is concerned. Once the Ministry of Education and Sports receives the requisite funding, our priority shall be to work on areas that were highlighted as a necessity during the recent inspection by the Confederation of African Football (CAF) which was funded and invited by the Ministry of Education and Sports so that we comply with requirements to host the upcoming World Cup qualifiers in June 2024 and African Nations Championship (CHAN) in September 2024. This is the current status of works at Mandela National Stadium as we prepare for the forthcoming African Nations Championships (CHAN) and the African Cup of Nations (AFCON) tournaments. I beg to submit, thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable minister. In yesterday’s presentation, there was an allegation. The person can bring it himself, there was also a letter that was laid on the Table on the disqualification of Uganda from hosting the forthcoming CHAN. Yes-10.16THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe):  I would like to salute the minister for the swift response and for appreciating the concern that was raised. However, the letter that I laid, the pre-inspection report, is crystal clear about the breathing space it would extend to us.[Mr Ogwang]12595THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024They have stated clearly that they have not approved- you had up to- the date is even past and it is indicated on that letter. I do not know where the minister gets the information that if they expedite the works, they have another entry point to be allowed.Secondly and most importantly, now that the minister knew that he had been frustrated by his colleague in Cabinet in the docket of Ministry of Finance, why didn’t you report back to the House in good time? We would have had no issues to raise here. Maybe, the House would have prevailed on the relevant ministry - and that is the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development - to do the needful.THE SPEAKER:  There was also a statement from Hon. Odur that the minister had promised this House two, five, or ten times –10.18MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I usually take ministers seriously but Hon. Peter Ogwang is one minister whose statements I find extremely difficult to accept as being a true reflection of the state of affairs in the sports subsector. The records are very clear and I can cite so many examples. He was here and told us about the High-Altitude Training Centre in Teryet - that it was 97 per cent. When he went there himself after some time, he found something else. He promised three times in 2023 that Namboole would be ready and about twice in 2024 and that has not come to pass.Hon. Ogwang went to Lira and purported to present an Egyptian contractor to construct Akii-Bua Stadium; he told the people of Lango that the works would begin in one week. It is now approaching two to three months but there is nobody on the ground. Therefore, with this evidence, I find that- MR OGWANG:  Madam Speaker, point of order. With due respect, Hon. Odur, I have been here longer than you- THE SPEAKER:  Can I first hear from him? We want this thing solved.MR OGWANG:  Madam Speaker, permit on a point of order. With due respect, Hon. Odur, first of all, it is very unfortunate that he has submitted a falsehood about my visit to Lira saying that I made a statement in Lira that Akii-Bua Stadium would be constructed within one week. Please, Madam Speaker, is he in order to allege a falsehood before Parliament that I made such statements while in Lira? THE SPEAKER: Did he say that the minister said the construction would start within one week? Can you substantiate?MR ODUR:  Madam Speaker, usually when I speak, I am very serious. (Laughter)  I can challenge Hon. Ogwang that if I table evidence, either he or I will have to resign from this House. You went to Lira; it was covered in public. Even Members of Parliament from Lango were there. You were there with the LC V Chairman. You took a “contractor” and you announced to the people of Lango that the contractor would start work in one week’s time. It is now coming to three months. THE SPEAKER:  Can I listen to the chairperson of - MR OGWANG:  Madam Speaker, first of all, I have Hon. Tonny Ayoo here, whom I would request to come here to confirm –(Interjections)- please, I am talking about Hon. Tonny Ayo because I was there and you were not there. I want him to confirm what Hon. Odur is talking about.THE SPEAKER:  You are not going to start exchanging on the Floor. Honourable chairperson of Lango Parliamentary Group, what was the statement? Honourable members, can we listen?10.22MS JUDITH ALYEK (NRM, Woman Representative, Kole):  Thank you, Madam Speaker – 12596SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSTHE SPEAKER:  Hon. Ogwang, whatever we are doing, we are trying to help you. MS ALYEK:  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to say something about the visit of the Minister of State for Education and Sports (Sports) to Lira – THE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister for sports, can you listen? MS ALYEK:  Yes, Madam Speaker, it is true that Hon. Ogwang went with the Egyptian contractor to Lira to hand over the site. (Interjections)  I have not yet finished my statement, Madam Speaker. I am still giving the background. When he went with the Egyptian contractor, he went to hand over the site to the contractor. I was not there, but Hon. Ayoo was there, representing Lango Parliamentary Group. On the statement by Hon. Odur, about giving one week, I was not there; I did not hear about it - (Interjections)-  yes, he has to produce the evidence here.However, the issue is that Akii-Bua Stadium must be constructed. We want it, we need it and it must host AFCON. That is what Hon. Ogwang said – that Akii-Bua Stadium would host AFCON. So, when the construction is going to be started, I do not know. We are only waiting for the construction of Akii-Bua Stadium to start. I think we are still within the time limit, Madam Speaker – THE SPEAKER:  We are not within the time. We are actually – maybe you are behind news. We are late for AFCON.MS JUDITH ALYEK: Madam Speaker most obliged. THE SPEAKER:  Can I hear from the Government Chief Whip; we want to hear the Minister of Finance. 10.24 THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Hamson Obua): Madam Speaker, the standard practice by the office of the Government Chief Whip is that every minister appearing and not appearing on the Order Paper is called. We called all ministers last evening when the Order Paper was released. When you directed me to ensure that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is in, I personally called two ministers: one, the senior minister who indicated to me that he was busy handling some State assignment; and our friend who is normally here, Hon. Musasizi, who indicated that he was out of station. In such circumstances, the senior minister indicated to me that he was going to look for one of the ministers of state to come to Parliament with immediate effect. THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, the issue we are talking – yes, procedural matter? MR ATWIJUKIRE:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. With all due respect to my senior and supervisor – and with a very good heart, intention and spirit. Yesterday, I raised a point of procedure on the absence of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Yesterday, it was Hon. Bahati taking notes.We should not look at these things in one piece. We received the ministerial policy statements and we are processing them. The same ministers that do not come here issued a corrigendum without an amendment on anything. Madam Speaker, shall we continue proceeding like this? Do they respect the processes of this House? Thank you very much. THE SPEAKER:  Maybe we also need to find out: Do they have a feeling for Ugandans? We are saying it is only sports that brings everybody together. If you cannot be mindful of sports – the First Lady writes to you the first letter, the second letter, third letter: What about if I write? Will you even read it, if you cannot respond to what the First Lady has written to you? (Laughter)12597THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024Honourable members, we asked for – even accountability – I do not want to talk about accountability now. First, we want the Shs 17 million and, then, we will conduct a forensic audit. Honourable Government Chief Whip, as servants of the people, we are going to wait for you to bring for us the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – I am not taking your information. (Laughter)  We are going to suspend the House for 10 minutes to have the minister here.(The House was suspended at 10.27 a.m.)(On resumption at 10.54 a.m., the Speaker, presiding_)THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery this morning, we have students and teachers from St Austin High School from Wakiso District. You are most welcome. They are represented by Hon. Medard Lubega-Sseggona and Hon. Betty Ethel Naluyima. Thank you very much for coming. Honourable members, we were on the issue of sports. Since the money was budgeted for and was appropriated, the remaining issue was a release for us to be able to finish Namboole. Can we understand from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development the issue of the money? The whole blame now is going to finance - the other people are not able to do whatever they are to do because they are saying there is no money. Can we have an assurance that – and when you are giving an assurance to Members of Parliament here, it is by extension to the country. This is to the effect that AFCON will take place in Uganda after you release the Shs 17 billion today for us to be able to finish Namboole National Stadium. That is all we need of you. After we have released the money, then we will task the sports minister to ensure that the deliverables are delivered.Yes, honourable minister? By the way, Hon. Lugoloobi has institutional memory. He was in this House when that money was allocated. He has been a lifetime chairperson of Budget Committee. 10.58THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FI-NANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT  (PLANNING) (Mr Amos Lugoloobi):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Indeed, as you mentioned, I was a very strong advocate for the rehabilitation of Namboole then and worked very closely with honourable colleagues to make sure that the work there begins. However, for this particular issue that is on the Table, I have just had a discussion with my senior, Hon. Matia Kasaija, on the issue of the balance of Shs 17 billion. The Shs 17 billion should actually not be a problem. I want to commit to this country and Parliament that the Shs 17 billion, which is a balance of the Shs 97 billion that was recently approved, will be made available to ensure that the Namboole rehabilitation project is executed.  We are going to trigger the process today to ensure that the money is made available. Madam Speaker, I hope that meets the requirement of the House.  THE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, we want to thank you very much. We have the ministerial policy statements and one of them is yours. Today being a Friday, we are going to give you an hour, as we handle other ministerial policy statements, to first go and trigger, then come back for your ministerial policy statement, so that by the time we leave here, we have evidence of the trigger. (Laughter)Honourable minister, please go and start the trigger and give us evidence of the trigger when you come back for your ministerial policy statement.  Honourable members, what we want is the money and evidence of the trigger. I have given permission to both ministers to go. 12598SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTS11.01THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCA -TION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang):  Madam Speaker, the Minister of Fi -nance, Planning and Economic Development has requested me to go with him so that we all work within the available means to make sure that we complete the final project as far as the Shs 17 billion is concerned. THE SPEAKER:  Let both ministers go and trigger and give us evidence before we finish the House. Remember, you have a ministerial policy statement; so, please come back. I do not want a question on sports. Please honourable ministers, can I see you off. Shadow minister, would you like to join them? (Laughter)Honourable members, we will get evidence of the payment because the warrant was already done and so we shall get evidence of what he calls a trigger. After that, a forensic audit must be done on Namboole. We need to know how that money was used.  11.03MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. In light of the debate that we had this morning, I want to seek your indulgence that you request the honourable minister of state for sports, now that he confirmed that he went and handed over the site, to bring the contracts and all the documents related to the construction of Akii-Bua Stadium. This is to avoid this ping-pong of “I did this; I did not do this.” Those documents will show the scope of work, the type of stadium they are going to build, how much money and the duration. If it comes to Parliament here, it will settle that matter and Lango and the other ones will be at peace.  THE SPEAKER:  We will do that. It is not about Lango; it is about Ugandans. Ugandans are more interested. Some of us even do not know Akii-Bua, but we are interested in knowing that there is a stadium somewhere called Akii-Bua because Akii-Bua is a brand.  When he comes back, we shall ask him to do that.  MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF REPORTS OF SECTORAL COMMITTEES ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2024/2025I) THE COMMITTEE ON HEALTHTHE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much. Honourable members, you are aware that we are on the ministerial policy statements and we should be able to finish them. As I said before, these statements are going for harmonisation and reconciliation in the Budget Committee.  I do not think we need to over examine them. Let us have how much you asked for, how much is being given to you, what your challenges are, and the recommendations of the committee. As brief as that, so that we are able to move.  Honourable chairperson, I hope you are getting what I am saying.  I have been hearing about corrigenda. I thought when a corrigendum is brought, it is laid on the Table and forwarded to the Committee on Budget. This business of passing behind doors and taking a corrigenda direct to the Budget Committee – we do not regard it as corrigenda. Let it be laid on the Table and then we refer it to the Budget Committee.  Chair? 11.06THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Charles Ayume):  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I beg to lay the report of the Committee on Health on the Sectoral Ministerial Policy Statement and the Budget Estimates for Financial Year 2024/2025. I beg to lay with the accompanying minutes. Madam Speaker, I thank this House for the money that they have given the health sector for the last three financial years. The results are very evident. We have halved maternal mortality from 330 to 189; that is one of the best rates in the region. Last year, we did our maiden kidney transplant, in December and so forth. Money has been put to good use. 12599THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024Colleagues, I would like to draw your attention to page 0. Those are the V otes under the sector. Madam Speaker, there are 29 V otes, meaning we have a lot of work to do. I beg that instead of reading verbatim, I draw your attention to where I think the core issues are. THE SPEAKER: You should actually do that because you have only 20 minutes. DR AYUME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You have guided well. On page 4, we have the ministerial half-year financial performance for the Financial Year 2023/2024. That is self-explanatory. We move to page 5, the health sector half-year budget performance for the Financial Year 2023/2024. Again, it is in a table form, self-explanatory. Page 6, the key physical performance by the Ministry of Health for the Financial Year 2023/2024, that is half-year, July to December. Page 7, health infrastructure improvements/rehabilitation and capital development of health facilities. They are well listed there, Madam Speaker. Page 8, upgrade of health centres II to health centres III, over the last financial years. 239 out of 340 health centres III have been completed, as of December 2023, and the detailed report has been submitted as Annex A. Madam Speaker, page 10 shows the overall health sector budget proposals for the Financial Year 2024/2025. There has been a nominal change of Shs 276 billion. Last year, it was Shs 3 trillion. This financial year, the proposed budget is Shs 2.7 trillion. Madam Speaker, we move to page 11. It shows the external project financing; that is by the development partners. It shows the scope as in Financial Year 2023/2024 and 2024/2025. There has been a reduction of Shs 331 billion, due to the exit of some projects. Madam Speaker, page 12 shows the V ote specific budgetary allocations. Like I had mentioned, we have 29 V otes, so those are the allocations by V ote. Madam Speaker, I draw your attention to page 14, on V ote specific wage allocation. Row 16 which shows local government; there has been a drop of Shs 788 billion, which was not catered for in the budget estimates. The reason that has been given is that this budget cut is due to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development doing the payroll audit exercise, so they have not captured it in the budget estimates. We foresee a situation, that this money for wages for local governments, in the first quarter, may cause a challenge of failure to pay health workers in local governments. Madam Speaker, I draw your attention to page 19, on under-funded and unfunded priorities. I would like to make a correction there, that the total is not Shs 1,820 billion, but it is Shs 1,784.2 billion. I request that it be captured for record purposes. On page 20, Madam Speaker, is the committee’s observations and recommendations. Under the Ministry of Health: V ote 014, we can proceed to the recommendations; 1. Lack of critical human resources for health Madam Speaker, on page 21, we have a table, provided by the Ministry of Health. It shows the wage requirements for senior consultant, medical consultant, medical officer special grade for regional and general hospitals and the national referral hospital. It is Shs 94 billion. The committee recommends that the Government should address non-wage related attraction factors like housing, in order to be able to attract and retain some cadres of staff, especially in hard to reach and distant areas. The Government should ensure that adequate financing is provided to fill the vacant positions in all the health facilities in a phased manner, beginning with those with less than 50 per cent staffing levels and increasing progressively to 12600SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSa minimum of 70 per cent, based on the current staffing norms. 2. Inadequate funding for regional equipment maintenance workshops The committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that Shs 12.3 billion, required to fully functionalise the regional equipment maintenance workshops, should be provided in a phased manner starting with Shs 6 billion, in the Financial Year 2024/2025, to support this function. 3. Inadequate funding to support renovation and equipment of health facilitiesMadam Speaker, I draw your attention to page 23. The Committee recommends that an additional Shs 30 billion is provided by the Ministry of Health, for the completion of previous works and renovation of critical existing sites upgrade. Madam Speaker, just to underscore that point, last year, money was given, but it was shared and approximately Shs 400 million shillings was allocated to each site, and that is not enough to complete the sites. Therefore, we need that allocation of Shs 30 billion. Government – THE SPEAKER: Doctor, maybe what you need to say for the sites is that there is one for organ transplant, where patients will be put to recover, and give us - which sites are those you are talking about? DR AYUME:  Madam Speaker, this is for health centres, but on the issue of organ transplant, I will come to that. THE SPEAKER: Okay. DR AYUME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. ii.  The Government of Uganda should procure a loan or grant for addressing a problem of the dilapidated health centres IV , and 125 constituencies that do not have health centres IV . Madam Speaker, the committee thinks that this should really address the issue of health centres IV , the way we did for health centres III. iii. For Karamoja Subregion, funds have been provided under the Italian-Karamoja Infrastructure Development Project. The procurement process, which is ongoing, should ensure that credible contractors are sourced, and the project is completed in the stipulated time. It is one of the annexes. 4. Non-functional ambulance systemi. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health should be provided with Shs 12.8 billion, for the Financial Year 2024/2025, to enable it to establish, in a phased manner, the national ambulance system. ii. It should be provided with Shs 54 billion to procure 158 ambulances for the constituencies that have not been allocated any ambulance. (Applause)  The existing fleet has 83 type B ambulances and 14 ambulances. Madam Speaker, for reasons that are very obvious, it would not be very wise for us to go into the next two financial years if some of these constituencies do not have the 158 ambulances. (Applause)  Therefore, we beg that this is a matter of importance. iii. An additional Shs 17.6 billion to enable it to maintain and functionalise the current fleet of ambulances under the Emergency Services Department. Madam Speaker, ambulances, both road and water, are very expensive to maintain. From Koboko to Kampala and back using an ambulance, it costs about Shs 900,000 for fuel. From Kalangala to the mainland and back in a motorboat, is 200 litres, which is about Shs 1 million. The money that we are requesting for should be provided for the maintenance. 5. Page 24, functionalisation of the community health programme[Dr Ayume]12601THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024The committee recommends that Shs 6 billion be provided to the Ministry of Health to enable it promote the Community Health Programme by offering training, retooling of VHTs in the community health programme and expansion of integrated childhood case management in 61 districts. 6.  I would like to draw your attention to page 25, the Organ Transplant CouncilAs you are aware, we did our maiden transplant in December 2023. I would like to thank the House for passing the law. (Applause) However, in the law, it stipulates that for any transplant to take place, there has to be a council. The committee recommends an additional Shs 5 billion be provided for setting up of the Organ Transplant Council. These funds will be used for training, benchmarking, setting up of offices and emoluments. The initial figure is predicted to reduce in the subsequent years when the council generates revenue from accreditation, inspection and licensing fees. Madam Speaker, Rubaga is ready to start the liver transplant and Mulago is ready to start the kidney transplant. So, we are ready. 7. The interns and senior house officersThe committee recommends that Shs 35 billion for allowances of medical interns and senior house officers be provided, to train them adequately, considering the crucial role they play in service delivery and of course, to prevent predictable strikes.8.  Inadequate funding for Uganda Red CrossThe committee recommends that an additional Shs 5.82 billion be provided to URC to be able to execute the emergency medical services and blood donor recruitment. This money was cut last year by 80 per cent from subventions. 9.  Surgical and medical campsI would like to draw your attention on page 27, which is a table and the source is the Association of Surgeons of Uganda. They do surgeries as part of their pro bono activities annually. Last year, they were in Lango and they did 1,414. The previous year they were in Bukedi, they did 564. The importance of these surgical camps is that they help to reduce the backlog in our regional referral hospitals. The committee recommends Shs 600 million be provided to Ministry of Health as a subvention for surgical and medical camps annually. The output is enormous. I beg Members to read about Health Service Commission. V ote 127: Uganda Virus Research Institute (UVRI)On the issue of lack of funds to pay off  squatters at Kamwanyi Land, the committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that Shs 5.4 billion be provided to UVRI to pay off the squatters and secure the land for the much-needed development. UVRI is seated on 70 acres, 5 have been encroached upon and they are losing grants in millions of dollars because of that encroachment. V ote 115 - Uganda Heart Institute Delayed commencement of works at the Naguru-Nakawa land.The committee recommends as follows: (i) Uganda Heart Institute should expedite the process of procuring a contractor so that works can commence at the Nakawa-Naguru land. Mulago National Referral Hospital is already congested, therefore, Uganda Heart Institute needs to have its own operational space. I would like to thank this House for passing the loan of US$ 70 million from BADEA-OPEC fund and Saudi fund with co-financing of US$ 3 million from the Government of Uganda. V ote 114 - Uganda Cancer Institute. I would like to draw your attention to page 32. There are many recommendations, but I will tease out a few. 12602SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTS(i)  An additional Shs 8 billion be provided to increase the medicines and sundries by the Uganda Cancer Institute. This will also cater for the new sites like the one in Gulu.(ii)  Shs 10.87 billion be provided for functionalising the regional centres in Gulu and a satellite one in Mbarara, to bring cancer services closer to the people. Mbarara is already doing cancer services as an outpatient service. (iii)  The Government of Uganda should explore a possibility of acquiring a loan or grant for the construction and operationalisation of the Arua and Mbale cancer regional referral centres. In the manifesto, it said four; Gulu has taken off, so we need money for these three.(vi)  Shs 62 billion be provided for clearing the outstanding obligation on establishment of a nuclear medicine facility/PET centre.  Madam Speaker, we do not offer PET scanning services in the country, and many people who can afford them have to go to Aga Khan or Kenyatta Hospital. This money can be paid back in 10 years because it will not be free. Most likely Shs 500,000 to Shs 1 million. V ote 116 - National Medical Stores (NMS) I would like to draw your attention to page 34. Table 14 shows the funding gap of NMS in billions of shillings. That is self-explanatory. The committee recommends that:(i) An additional Shs 262.19 billion be allocated to the National Medical Stores to enable the entity boost supplies of essential medicines and health supplies in a phased manner, beginning with Shs 87 billion this financial year. (ii)  The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should front load operational funds to National Medical Stores to facilitate timely delivery of essential medicines and health supplies in advance to avoid delays. Madam Speaker, the paradox is that we have drugs in the warehouse of National Medical Stores in Kajjansi. The issue is money for operations and I think the House needs to make a pronouncement on that. (iii) The committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that an additional Shs 4 billion be provided to NMS for the procurement of kits of glucometers, BP machines and thermometers for the 3,000 health facilities across the country that belongs to the government. It is very common to go to Health Centres IIIs and IVs, and there is no BP machine. You cannot even measure your blood glucose. (iv)  Shs 25 billion be provided for procurement of rapid diagnostic kits for malaria, HIV and other diseases.(v)  The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Health should clear the Shs 52.2 billion domestic arrears for service fees for handling donated supplies, COVID-19 vaccines and related supplies. Therefore, costs for handling donated supplies should be factored in the funding negotiations and arguments. Madam Speaker, NMS also makes some money through warehousing and surcharge services. That is the amount of money the Government owes them. (vi)  Funds should be provided to National Medical Stores for retrieval and destruction of expired COVID-19 vaccines and related supplies. (vii) Shs 20 billion be provided for procuring of PPE supplies for the country.(viii) Health facilities should enforce strict controls governing stock management practices. Health facilities should provide accountability for essential medicines. This will safeguard theft, irrational prescription and poor stock practices.[Dr Ayume]12603THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024V ote 151: Uganda Blood Transfusion ServicesThe committee recommends that Shs 2.6 billion be provided to Uganda Blood Transfusion Services for purchase of eight centrifuge machines and Shs 600 million for assorted blood collection and IT equipment to equip the regional blood banks in Arua, Gulu, Fort Portal, Mbale, Masaka, and Mbarara. Three regional blood banks are more than 90 per cent complete. That is Soroti, Arua and Hoima. They were built with funds from the Uganda COVID-19 Response and Emergency Preparedness Project (UCREPP), meaning there will be a need for money for wage and operationalisation. The committee recommends that Shs 12.276 billion required by Uganda Blood Transfusion Services to recruit 164 staff be provided. This will raise the staffing levels to 41 per cent and solve the challenge of heavy reliance on voluntary services. V ote 418: Kawempe National Refinery HospitalKawempe National Referral Hospital, the issues are self-explanatory, but the major challenge is:1. Inadequate staffing levelsThis hospital delivers 60 to 100 mothers daily and 27 Caesarean sections with a staffing of 37.4 per cent. The committee recommends that Shs 6.1 billion be provided for the recruitment of additional staff to enable Kawempe National Refinery Hospital to reach the 68 per cent staffing level. 2. Overhaul and remodelling of the hospital plumbing system This is an issue the committee has noted in the hospitals of Kawempe, Kiruddu, Naguru and Entebbe. These hospitals are as old as 10 years but the plumbing has given way. We need to take an interest in value for money because plumbing giving way after 10 years is very unacceptable. V ote 417: Kiruddu National Referral Hospital1)  Inadequate wage for recruitment of health workers which is the same as Kawempe. 2)  Inadequate funding for the burns and surgery unit.The committee recommends that Shs 2 billion be provided to mitigate the shortfall because patients under plastic surgery and burns require a lot of specialised attention and treatment. 3) Purchase of landThe committee reiterates its recommendation that Shs 5 billion be provided to Kiruddu National Referral Hospital for the purchase of 5 acres of land to enable expansion services, namely wards for burns and plastic surgery, ophthalmology, general dialysis and ward expansion. To underscore that point, Naguru, Kiruddu and Kawempe were health centre IV on a one-acre piece of land. The Government built upwards of seven stories. There is a need for land for the expansion of these hospitals. V ote 401: Mulago National Referral Hospital1) Staffing in Mulago National Referral Hospital can be underscored by the intensive care unit. The hospital was expanded and increased to 44 ICU beds, but 21 are working. In the adult ICU of the 27 beds, only 14 are working. The committee recommends that an additional Shs 529 million be provided to Mulago National Referral Hospital for priority recruitment of 10 ICU critical staff. That is the annual cost.  7)  Incomplete renovation of Lower Mulago HospitalThe committee recommends that Shs 15.5 billion be provided to Mulago National Referral Hospital to complete civil, electrical, plumbing and IT works to ensure full functionalising of the hospital. 12604SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSWe cannot as a National Referral get ISO certification and even for AFCON, Mulago is supposed to be the hospital so for now, we have already failed that part I think this money has to be provided – I hope the Minister of Finance and Hon. Ogwang also take note of that.8) Completion of the 150 staff housing unitsThe committee therefore recommends that an additional Shs 4 billion be provided to Mulago National Referral to have the 50 units completed to cater for the urgent need to house critical care workers. This will probably address the issue of absenteeism. 9) DialysisThe Committee recommends that an additional Shs 2 billion be provided to Mulago National Referral to carter for the shortfall of dialysis services. On the private market, dialysis costs Shs 500,000.In Mulago, it has been subsidised to Shs 120,000, the rest is subsidised by the Government and that is per session, by December, we had run out of supplies so, we needed more money. 10) Neurosurgery commoditiesThe committee recommends that Shs 600 million be provided to Mulago National Referral Hospital for the procurement of neurosurgery commodities throughout the year. THE SPEAKER: Doctor, just a minute. On the dialysis, you had a problem with human resource. Is that covered now? DR AYUME:  The issue of human resource for the hospital is a general one and it is captured in the human resource request for the hospital. THE SPEAKER:  For the general hospital? DR AYUME:  Yes, and the workers in different departments are part of that, including dialysis. Mulago National Referral Hospital has 40 to 60 boda boda  accidents daily and most of those will have head injuries but we do not have a budget line for consumables. So the neurosurgeon’s hands are tied, meaning some of those people die. My humble plea to this House, is that if there is anything we should appropriate, is that Shs 600 million because even by the time they call the next of kin you are past the time for intervention. So Shs 600 million be provided to Mulago National Hospital for the neurosurgery department so that neurosurgeons we have can conduct emergency brain surgery.V ote 416: Naguru Regional Referral HospitalThe challenges are the same, like Kiruddu and Kawempe, and the recommendations are the same.11. Procurement of a CT-ScanTheir CT scan broke down, so the committee recommends that Shs 500 billion for the purchase of a new updated CT scan which will fetch the hospital some more non-tax revenue.Butabika National Referral Mental HospitalMadam Speaker, the challenges are the same: inadequate budget for medicines and supplies. The recommendations are well stated out there. However, under bullet (3) on insufficient budget for food, the committee notes that since food is part of the treatment and the hospital takes full charge of the patients’ feeding and cognisant of the increase in food prices, an additional Shs 2.2 billion be provided to Butabika National Referral Mental Hospital to mitigate the shortfall for feeding. Lack of funds for the completion of the perimeter wallMadam Speaker, the patients in Butabika are very well known. They may not differentiate the boundaries of Butabika, so, it is good that we house them safely. THE SPEAKER: So, is the wall not complete?[Dr Ayume ]12605THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024DR AYUME: Madam Speaker, the wall of Butabika Hospital is not complete and their land has also been encroached on. So, the hospital –THE SPEAKER: Won’t the patients run out? (Laughter)  Where is Hon. Macho? (Laughter)  This is a very serious matter. We need the wall fence to be finished because we know the nature of patients that we are handling in that area. So, that should be handled. DR AYUME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Given the fact that mental health illness affects 13 per cent of Ugandans, we can also use this as a study population. Any of us here can be a candidate. THE SPEAKER: We can actually start from here. (Laughter)DR AYUME: Madam Speaker, I would now like to move to regional referral hospitals – that is on page 51.Observations and recommendationsUnderstaffingTable 17 is self-explanatory. Bullet (2) is on unspent wage of regional referral hospitals, as of Mid-Term Financial Year 2023/2024. On page 53, there is a table showing unspent wage. The committee had a challenge, that much as they have now been cleared to recruit, by the time workers are deployed, it will be June. So, of that Shs 17.23 billion in table 18, around 80 per cent is going to go to the Consolidated Fund. The committee was thinking: can this money be re-voted?I am not a custodian of the Public Finance Management Act, but I will let the House guide on whether the money that has not been spent on wage can be re-voted to other areas of the health sector that need a one-off expenditure. On page 53, there is the upgrade of Entebbe Regional Referral Hospital. The committee recommends that Shs 8.1 billion and non-wage recurrent of Shs 6 billion be provided to enable the complete transfer of Entebbe Hospital to a regional referral hospital. Madam Speaker, remember that Entebbe was a district hospital for Wakiso, but it is now a regional referral hospital. So, we need that money to enable it to operate fully.Madam Speaker, I would like to draw your attention to page 54 on dilapidated infrastructure in regional referral hospitals. The committee recommends that:1. The Ministry of Health should assess all regional referral hospitals and quantify the amount required for rehabilitation;2. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development reinstates Shs 20.3 billion withdrawn from regional referral hospitals for development. This money was cut last year and hospitals such as Soroti Regional Referral Hospital are in a very dilapidated state;3. The assessment be done in regional referral hospitals about the status of mortuaries in Financial Year 2024/2025. For Financial Year 2024/2025, Moroto and Arua regional referral hospitals should be prioritised for the construction of modern mortuaries, due to the very dilapidated state of the existing ones. Therefore, Shs 1.5 billion should be provided for the two mortuaries;4. Shs 11.8 billion be provided to the Ministry of Health to enable it carry out the much-needed expansion and rehabilitation of Soroti Regional Referral Hospital, phase one. For those of you who have been there, it is in a very dilapidated state and remember, they separated conjoined twins. So, there is a lot of work being done there; and5. The Government should look into the possibility of acquiring a grant or loan for the rehabilitation of dilapidated hospitals.12606SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSMadam Speaker, bullet (7) on page 56 is on incomplete construction of oxygen plants. There is a table there, which shows the status of oxygen plants across the regional referral hospitals. The committee recommends that:1. The UPDF should finalise with the construction and equipping of all oxygen manufacturing plants at all regional referral hospitals; and2. The Government should provide an additional Shs 1.5 billion for the maintenance of oxygen plants at regional referral hospitals. Unstable power supplyMadam Speaker, the issue of unstable power supply is across all health institutions. The committee recommends that:1. The Ministry of Health and Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development should ensure that hospitals are connected to dedicated power lines and charged industrial rates;2. A cost-benefit analysis of solar-powered hospitals should be undertaken by the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development;3. Shs 9 billion should be provided to the Ministry of Health for procurement of power stabilisers for 15 regional referral hospitals. To put this into context, there was a power surge last year at the Uganda Heart Institute. People who were on critical life support machines were left in a very critical state and we had to borrow machines, overnight, from two neighbouring countries, thanks to air transport.When the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development gave us money to replace the machines, we returned them, in the spirit of Pan-Africanism. However, this should not be the case. We need these power stabilisers.Madam Speaker, on page 58, Table 21 shows the incomplete projects in regional referral hospitals. We put it in table form to show you that there are projects that we started in 2017, but have not been completed. There are many challenges, in terms of variation in costs, due to inflation and contractors being on site outside their contract duration, which can present legal challenges. The committee, therefore, recommends that:1. The Ministry of Health should not authorise any new project for regional referral hospitals until the stagnated projects are complete and fit for use. (Applause)  For any exceptional case, Parliament should be provided with evidence of availability of funding until completion;2. The Government should avail the Shs 79.123 billion required to complete the listed projects. Going forward, all new projects should be undertaken with consultation from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Ministry of Health. Madam Speaker, when you look at that table, Masaka Hospital, for example, requires Shs 590 million - that is the cost of a brand new car - to complete its Intensive Care Unit. Gulu requires about Shs 3 billion to finish the interns’ hostel – and so forth. So, we can start with the low-hanging fruits. General observationsNon-tax revenue collectionsThis is self-explanatory, but on bullet (1), under non-tax revenue collections, the committee recommends that:1. The Ministry of Finance should adjust the NTR ceiling and also return NTR funds to the hospitals;2. Funds collected from NTR can be used by hospitals to improve service delivery, especially in the private wing, and to maintain hospital equipment.[Dr Ayume ]12607THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024THE SPEAKER: Maybe the recommendation should be that the Public Finance Management Act should be amended to the effect that institutions like hospitals should be able to retain their Non Tax Revenue (NTR) to be able to operationalise; it is an operation of the Public Finance Management Act, not just purely the finance ministry. DR AYUME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think this will- THE SPEAKER: Can I have the report finished? DR AYUME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The way you have guided will help in ensuring that we operationalise private wing services. 2. Private wing servicesRecommendationsi.  The budget for private wing services should be enhanced to match with revenue collections.ii.  There should be a deliberate effort to support hospitals with capital development funding to construct and provide private wing services. To put this into context, the private wing of the Mulago Specialised Women and Neonatal Hospital generates Shs 6.4 billion annually and yet we are not using it to full capacity. Projections show it can give us Shs 20 billion including Mulago National Referral Hospital once complete. iii.  The Ministry of Health should revise the current private wing policy guidelines that prohibits recruitment of contract staff. The contract staff can purposely be used in the private wing. If you get a consultant from Nakasero, he can be contracted to come and offer services instead of being a full employee of Mulago National Referral Hospital. 3. Functionality of lower level health centresThe committee recommends the Ministry of Health should plan to build capacity and equip lower level health facilities to manage within their facilities and this really speaks to health centres III and IV . If we equip them and make them functional, we will not have the spill over that we see in regional hospitals. 4. Health financingThe committee also interacted with health development partners and we are in agreement that the health sector should look for alternative sources of domestic financing. The committee therefore recommends as follows:i.  Increase in taxes for harmful products such as alcohol and tobacco smoking. If the tax on harmful products is increased by 20 per cent, additional revenue could increase from $95.3 million in Financial Year (2022/2023 to $126.49 in the Financial Year 2026/27.ii.  The Government should consider a national motor third-party insurance fund capitalised by the revenue collected from motor third-party collections. If only 5 per cent of gross premiums collected from motor third-party insurance are earmarked for the motor third-party fund, an average of Shs 2.9 billion could be generated per annum.iii.  The Governments should consider ring-fencing social media tax for upgrading of health centres and for community health financing as the community health strategy launched remains largely unfunded. We have a community health strategy as a health sector but this has never been operationalised. Finally, as I conclude - 5. Intensive Care Units (ICUs) in regional referral hospitalsTable 22 shows ICUs in regional referral hospitals. I draw your attention to column 3, that is, Masaka Regional Referral Hospital. It 12608SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSstalled because of Shs 590 million, Mbale, Fort Portal and so forth. The point I am trying to underscore is that between Katuna and Kampala we only have one ICU in Mbarara and it has four beds. If it is full, then we can make phone calls to the Creator because sometimes when you are in an ICU state -(Laughter) -  you may not travel by road, but you may need to be airlifted. The police told us we are-THE SPEAKER: You do not have to put him to order. A doctor will see you dying and will say, you will be fine. Dr Chris Baryomunsi is here. He is basically saying that if we cannot improve on the ICUs, what else can you do? You will have to go and deal with your Creator. DR AYUME: Thank you, Madam Speaker.As I conclude, Government’s policy on health emphasises access to high quality health care by all Ugandans as a means of guaranteeing their contribution to the country’s socioeconomic transformation. In line with the Government’s commitment to preventive health care as opposed to curative services which are costly, more emphasis should be on ensuring equitable access to well-equipped health facilities, trained and motivated health workers in addition to improvement in the healthcare delivery systems.The committee recommends that a total of Shs 2,707,957,290 that excludes Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA), Uganda AIDS Commission (UAC), and Local Government Primary Health Care (LG PHC), of which Shs 1.3 trillion is recurrent, and Shs 1.3 trillion is development expenditure, be provided for the health sub-programme under the votes listed in those two tables. The mantle of delivering health services rests in this House but I conclude by saying, our pregnancies in this country have run away, especially the teenage pregnancies and I think we have an epidemic of teenage pregnancies. The beauty about it is that we have Women Members of Parliament so we need to take a deliberate stance as this House to address this issue. Otherwise, with a population of 1.5 million -(Interruption) THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ekanya, you are asking: What about men?  You are the ones creating teenage pregnancies. (Laughter) DR AYUME: Madam Speaker, we get one - (Mr Ekanya rose_)THE SPEAKER: What is your point of procedure? MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, our record has captured that a one Ekanya is involved - (Laughter) THE SPEAKER: You are a man; it is men who are causing teenage pregnancies. MR EKANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Laughter) THE SPEAKER: It is not Hon. Ekanya as a person but men. DR AYUME: Madam Speaker -   THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, listen to the committee chairperson because the point he is raising is very crucial. The person who is becoming pregnant at that early age may be your daughter. It could be out of rape. Committee chairperson, please continue. DR AYUME: Madam Speaker, our population is 1.5 million deliveries annually. In 10 years, those are 15 million people but are we generating enough industrialisation to be able to look after that population? Sometimes it is the Parish Development Model and things like that, but we need to look at the upstream factors, address the issue of the population and a hospital like Iganga gives birth to 7,200 deliveries annually. So in three years- to put it into context, that is a subcounty. [Dr Ayume ]12609THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024I beg to conclude and I thank my committee members and the Minister of Health for the support. Thank you. (Applause) THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, when you listen to what the committee chairperson said on the issue of the cancer institute- you find the patients lying down; they even have nowhere to be accommodated. It is too congested. Therefore, if we love Ugandans, we should be mindful of what we should do in Uganda Cancer Institute. I visited the dialysis centre, as you heard the chairperson say, I went to the Intensive Care Unit, the Uganda Cancer Institute, the Women’s Centre – we have the best equipment in Uganda. Some of our people have been saved from Mulago National Referral Hospital and if you want to go to a hospital where you can get equipment, go to Mulago.We have the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) equipment but we do not have the staff. Can’t we provide money for staff recruitment? When you look at the issue of the interns, we are failing. We are going to continue with that issue day in and day out - generally the staffing issue. Dilapidated hospital structures from subcounty to the regional level – then you find somebody drawing a picture; “This is a dilapidated hospital in Bukedea” as if I am the one supposed to renovate it. I am not the Government; so, we must work on these hospitals.Even the projects that we have started have not been completed. Can we have them completed? By the way, Lubowa Specialised Hospital project has started. (Laughter)  I went there. Then you have unstable power. How can you have unstable power in a hospital? Assuming an operation is taking place, what happens? There are people in the ICU and children in the intubation centre. You find no water in the hospital. Women are delivering and there is no water, what happens? Imagine a dilapidated regional referral hospital!Members, we must take issues concerning our health sector very seriously. When you are talking about such, it is not about your constituency. Honourable member for Nakaseke, first tell me - the ambulances - Honourable minister, there was an issue; that you gave out ambulances and some constituencies got three and others never got. Since you are going into the budgeting process, it is high time constituencies that have not, got ambulances. Hon. Allan Mayanja?11.59MR ALLAN MAYANJA (NUP, Nakaseke Central County, Nakaseke):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. My concern is on the page – (Members rose)THE SPEAKER:  All of you want to talk about health? Then nobody should repeat what another person has said. If you know that somebody has said what you wanted to say, do not repeat it. We are not debating for constituencies; it is for this country. Let me first introduce my visitors. In the public gallery this morning we have students and teachers from Brentwood Nursery and Primary School, Kisaasi. You are most welcome. (Applause)  The little angels are there. They are here to witness the proceedings, and you are very smart. Thank you so much for coming. In the VIP gallery this morning, we have members of Mbale Public University Establishment Committee and the LC V Chairpersons of Bugisu Subregion. You are all most welcome. (Applause)  They are represented by all the Members from Bugisu; there they are. Hon. Opolot - they are represented by us; Hon. Opolot being my MP and Kachumbala being in Mbale. You are most welcome and thank you so much for coming.MR MAYANJA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. My concern is on page 22, and it is about inadequate funding to support renovation and the equipping of health facilities. The report shows that almost 125 constituencies do not have any single health centre IV , including Nakaseke Central. I totally support the recommendation by the committee that the Government should provide adequate 12610SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSfunding to this issue, and the committee recommended that the Government should get a loan. On top of that, the Government should also stop unnecessary expenditures in different entities. Secondly, page 23 is about the non-functional ambulance system. 158 constituencies do not have a single ambulance, including Nakaseke Central. Almost Shs 50 billion, as recommended by the committee, I support this. When you look at Nakaseke Central, we have Kikamulo Health Centre III; it is overwhelmed, the population is too high, and in Nakaseke Central we do not have any health centre IV and it is a shaming, yet this is where the Government of NRM fought from. Among the Ten Points Program, it promised Uganda that this region should be rehabilitated. We are suffering; NRM abandoned Nakaseke District. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, we are not talking about political parties. As I have always reminded you, when we are in the House, we are all Members of Parliament of Uganda; not of NRM, NUP, FDC. I am happy, much as Hon. Allan Mayanja is a member of NUP, he is a product of NRM. Hon. Amero?12.04MS SUSAN AMERO (Independent, Woman Representative, Amuria):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson and the committee for identifying these pertinent issues in their report. However, I want to speak about Soroti Regional Referral Hospital. The state of Soroti Regional Referral Hospital is very alarming, as the committee has alluded to. There is an issue of Soroti Regional Referral Hospital having land for the construction of a new regional referral hospital. That hospital no longer suits the status of a regional referral hospital. THE SPEAKER:  Of a city. MS AMERO: The hospital should be left as a hospital for the city and a regional referral hospital should be built where the land has been provided by the local government. Madam Speaker, I also raise the issue of the scanning machine. Amuria District Hospital has no scanning machine. Some of these things are very necessary because you cannot look at the inside of someone when you are just using your bare eyes. There are some small things that the Government needs to plan for if we have to look at the health of our people. Madam Speaker, the ambulances have been given to those districts, but I have not heard about budgeting for their maintenance and fuelling. This burden will go to the local people and leaders of those places. You find that an ambulance breaks down and nobody is ready to maintain it. You are, therefore, called upon to maintain it, which is not our work, as Members of Parliament. As I wind up, there are districts from which cities have been carved out. We have not heard about a plan of putting up hospitals – (Member timed out.)12.06MS DORCAS ACEN  (NRM, Woman Representative, Alebtong):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the committee, especially the chairperson for presenting a very good report with very good recommendations. I know you have told us not to be specific on districts, but allow me to begin from Lango where I come from. The entire Lango Subregion have only one regional referral hospital and one district hospital with a huge population that they cannot manage to serve the population well.Also, from the lens of equal opportunities, I concur with the recommendations from the Committee on Health. Overall, within the country, we have 8,272 specialists required in the different departments, but only 307 are available. Therefore, we need that budget to maintain and recruit the staff, which are indicated in that report. We also have subregions like Bukedi with seven districts without any regional referral hospital. That is really bad for our population. In the whole country, we have 172 subcounties without health centres III. As such, people [Mr Mayanja ]12611THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024have to move long distances to access health facilities. This is undermining our progress. I am talking as NRM, with all due respect and humility, we need this. Whether it is NRM or other parties, we need health facilities. It does not discriminate – (Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. When you start talking about your parties, we want services. I used to be in FDC. I started building my hospital when I was in FDC and I have finished when I am in the NRM. Therefore, it is not about a party but let us work as Government and make sure that everybody gets health facilities in every district and region. What you said about Bukedi, it needs a regional referral hospital - (Applause) - The only unfortunate part with Bukedi is that it is very near Mbale Regional Referral Hospital and Tororo. Leaving that alone, they need a hospital. 12.09MR KARIM MASABA  (Independent, Industrial Division, Mbale City):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, when you look at Section 29(3)(a) of the PFMA, it talks about collection, deposit and retention of revenue. There are entities that shall retain revenue whether it is in the form of license, fee or fines, as long as they are authorised by an appropriation of Parliament. One of the challenges we have is that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has failed to acknowledge this and increase the limits that these entities that collect these revenues can have. As Parliament, we need to stand firm on this because it is the law. Many of these regional referral hospitals collect revenue, which have been increasing. Unfortunately, they have had the same limit for over years.THE SPEAKER:  Do we budget for the entities?MR MASABA:  Yes, what I am talking about -THE SPEAKER:  Have the entities brought that request and Parliament rejected it?MR MPUUGA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. The net effect of Section 29(3)(a) of the PFMA - The basis for Hon. Karim’s submission is that the moment Parliament passes a budget and the V ote limits have been indicated, when they run short of operational funds yet they have NTR, then they can write to Parliament and make a request to retain. It was the basis for the motion we moved for local governments to retain revenue here, moved by Hon. Naluyima. Parliament actually carried that motion to allow them to retain their money because of the laggard nature of financial operations from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Therefore, it is up to them to get out from their slumber, be proactive and implement Section 29(3)(a) of the PFMA. THE SPEAKER:  We are not the ones to implement.MR MPUUGA:  No. They should request. THE SPEAKER:  It is them to request and we pass the motion. There is another clarification. MR ATWIJUKIRE:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is an issue that they talked about regarding the distribution of medicines by the National Medical Stores (NMS). I worked with NMS for eight years. THE SPEAKER:  I knew you were going to talk about NMS.MR ATWIJUKIRE:  There is a challenge. Mid last year, remember there was a total stock-out. Whenever we would ask NMS, they would say they have the medicines but they did not have the money to supply them. Now, the challenge comes in when finance ministry says, “Don’t utilise any money in operations collected at source.” Then the finance ministry takes a month before disbursing the money in the new quarter. 12612SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSWhat does that mean? If NMS sends out five trucks or vehicles in a day, you need a turn man and a driver; they all need allowance and fuel. If you do not have, you will have to wait for a month before you send the medicines, waiting for the finance ministry to send the release. What does that result into? If you are sending two vehicles per day, you are delaying the whole cycle and the country will be in a total outcry for medicines. There have been several meetings with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; some chaired by the Prime Minister, to resolve the impasse. Three years down the road, we still come back to the same thing. Even now that we are going into a new financial year, we shall have the same challenges of the same outcries, yet it is a matter of allowing an institution, audit it and then operations flow smoothly.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Karim was still on the Floor.MR MASABA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. The point I was raising is that the finance ministry is frustrating many of our colleagues. We have even a resolution as Parliament that they can spend this money but the ministry tells them to send back all the money. In the end, the financial year will end without them getting this money. Lastly, my concern is on the Shs 20 billion I have seen on page 55 that it was withdrawn. I think the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development needs to explain how they withdrew money for development that was sent to regional referral hospitals. One of the projects – THE SPEAKER: Who is representing Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development?MR MASABA:  The minister went to trigger but they need to explain the circumstances. I remember in the previous session – THE SPEAKER:  Doctor, are you sitting in for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development? Anyway, Government Chief Whip, take our concerns because we passed a resolution in this House that the money should be- what Hon. Karim is raising and then the issue of mere transportation of drugs from National Medical Stores (NMS) to different medical facilities which are always delayed and that causes a stock-out in the system.MR MASABA: Madam Speaker, on the money that was withdrawn, I remember the minister specifically committed that Mbale Regional Referral Hospital would be done and about Shs4.2 billion had been provided to complete the surgical complex. I remember you requested to come and commission it; it is on the Hansard .However, it is surprising that this money has been withdrawn and yet the status of the regional referral hospital - it is quite alarming. We have no oxygen plant, we do not have surgical complex, a lot is happening in Mbale.It is sad that over Shs 200 billion in the same financial year is being sent to Lubowa Hospital and compared to the Shs 79 billion required to complete all the regional referral hospitals; action needs to be taken.THE SPEAKER:  Procedure?MR EKANYA:  Madam Speaker, at the beginning of this budget process, you issued an order to which we expected the Government Chief Whip to ensure compliance. One was that the technical people from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should be here. Today, when you allowed the Minister of Finance to go and trigger, I expected the technical people to be around so that they pick these issues to avoid keeping us in a cycle. Are we proceeding well when the technical people not present?THE SPEAKER:  Honourable Members, I have confirmed that the people seated behind [Mr Atwijukire]12613THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024are staff of Parliament and that is why we have asked the Government Chief Whip to be their secretary, take notes and communicate and he is very good at communication. Ik then Faith-12.18MR HILLARY LOKWANG (NRM, Ik County, Kaabong):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson and the members for a well elaborated report.On the issue of the Italian loan, in 2018, we were invited to Moroto with all the technical people in Karamoja district by district to plan for the loan. However, I am surprised that some of the Health Centres that were budgeted for are missing in the list that was already approved by districts. We need a clarification from the minister on why they deleted some of the Health Centres, including one in my constituency that was allocated Shs714 million shillings. It is not in the list so -THE SPEAKER:  And that is the only hospital you have.MR LOKWANG:  And that is the only hospital that I have, which is a unit, not even a Health Centre II . (Laughter) On the issue of Moroto Regional Referral Hospital, in the entire Karamoja, we do not have a refrigerator in the mortuary. For example, if a person dies, you have to take the body to Mbale, Busitema for preservation. All nine districts in Karamoja, even Soroti does not have. So you have to travel across to access the-THE SEPAKER:  Actually, that is one of the issues they have raised. MR LOKWANG:  Then I would like to thank the Ministry of Health  -(Laughter)  - when they were handing over the ambulances, they said that each ambulance receives only 2 million shillings for fuel and service every quarter but can it really work? I want to appeal to my colleagues that we need to - (Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER: Thank you. First let Ik finish - (Laughter)MR LOKWANG:  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. the minister said that they were going to purchase air ambulances in the future for every region for emergencies. We also need to support the Ministry of Health. It is not fun but this is an emergency issue. When we have an air ambulance, it can go to another region in time to save a person. THE SPEAKER: The Honourable Member for Ik you see there, is always foresighted. When we had just joined Parliament, he said that we should put a flyover. Now we are going to put an underground tunnel. Don’t you see that he is foresighted? So now-12.21MR JOHN MAGOLO (NRM, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the chairperson for the detailed report presented. I would like to make a submission particularly on the issue of water bills, when water is not flowing in the plumbing system, the system depletes faster. And that has always been a challenge.I am very aware that when the Committee on Natural Resources was making a presentation, especially, in the area of water. Hospitals have one of the highest bills but they are not being paid which is a threat to Non-Tax Revenues (NTRs) for National Water.They are going to cut the water from the hospitals and this is a warning that it is going to be very alarming and it is something that needs to be taken care of. I take information from my chairperson.DR OTAALA:  Thank you, Dr Magolo, for giving way. The information that I would like to give you is that the problem that we have with the supply of water to institutions is delayed release of funds from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Planning. Yesterday, when we discussed the report of the Committee on Environment and Natural 12614SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSResources, it was construed that the user departments do not pay their water bills. But in effect, when we interrogated this matter in our committee, we found that the problem is the delayed release of funds from Ministry of Finance. Every time they release the money, the user departments pay the bills. The onus is on this House to compel the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to always release monies budgeted for utilities. That is the information I wanted to give you.MR MAGOLO:  Thank you, Committee Chairperson, for the information.THE SPEAKER:  There is another clarification.MR NSEREKO:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I remember when we were here discussing the stages of our post COVID-19 readiness. We talked about the issue of utilities. There was unstable supply of power and water and I would like to ask honourable colleagues why would the major installations in this country be subject to paying those tariffs?Just like other countries amended it, for example, military garrisons, hospitals and prison services. Do you understand what I am saying? This should be used as a trade-off for rebate. I look at a situation where a police patrol would charge National Water and Sewerage Corporation to safeguard its installation or to do a rapid response. Why? Recently, Madam Speaker, you intervened. Naguru and Jinja Road Police Barracks did not have water and power. This is appalling. We can sit and create what we call a trade-off  for the most desirable installations of society and the Government can do a trade-off so that we are not in the same conundrum – THE SPEAKER:  That is a very good idea.MR NSEREKO:  For example, the failure to have the three-phase power lines for the take-off or operationalisation of the ICU in Fort Portal. The minister said that we do not have three-phase power, even when we have. The issue is: install. Why would we be the producers of power, transmitters of power, collectors of power – now, even at the time that Umeme is going to be out of the picture – and we say we will not have power? I think the Government needs to sit down and – THE SPEAKER: Even when we talk about the trade-off, when it comes to release by the Ministry of Finance, they do not do that. MR MAGOLO:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is an issue I expected to find in the report and that is the Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) scan. This is a very important machine for imaging in a country where accidents have become a norm. For example, in the past five months, I have had about five patients coming to me for support to do an MRI scan and it is not anywhere. We could have had this in regional hospitals so that the people find MRI services in these places, Madam Speaker. The cost ranges from between Shs 1 million and Shs 1.5 million, which is not for the common person we are dealing with.Finally, on the issue of the Uganda Cancer Institute, I would like to thank the committee chairperson for the message about prevention. It brings out the issue of aflatoxins that need a multi-sectoral approach because it is in agriculture, trade and health. We also need a multi-sectoral approach on climate change as extreme weather conditions exacerbate all these issues. That goes back to prevention, Madam Speaker, and we need to take it up to ensure that we approach it holistically. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Committee chairperson, I did not hear anything about the Village Health Teams (VHTs) getting – because they walk long distances – gumboots, bicycles – basically those small things. If it is there, then, that is okay.[Dr Otaala]12615THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024Honourable members, when you speak on this one, you will not speak on the next – teenage pregnancies? 12.29MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is a pity that we are still grappling with this challenge in this country. We went to Terego District and, as a surprise, we found that 2,320 girls had been impregnated in a space of seven months. This is just one district –(Interjections)-  yes, Terego District. Therefore, the rate of teenage pregnancies is extremely alarming. I was there with the honourable Woman Member of Parliament for Arua. Madam Speaker, this is a challenge that is in all our districts. It is very unfortunate because the Government has provided Universal Primary Education and Universal Secondary Education programmes, which we actually thought would keep the girls in school. Therefore, it cannot be a responsibility of Women Members of Parliament only to end these teenage pregnancies. It is for all, especially the male Members of Parliament because it is the men that impregnate the girls. (Interjections) So, let it be an effort by all of us. Let it be all of us. (Interjections)  This is what I am saying: let it be a task for all of us, not only the Women Members of Parliament, to end the teenage pregnancies in this country.THE SPEAKER:  There is a point of order from Hon. Okiror.MR OKIROR:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Sincerely, I am a bit intrigued by the submission of my senior colleague that this is the duty of men. You see, there are very responsible men in this Parliament. When you make a sweeping statement, which is a bandwagon kind of statement, I look at all the men here. Let us not run away from the real issue, that mentorship and parenting are some of the key family fundamentals that we should all undertake.Therefore, is the Member in order to make a sweeping statement to criminalise all men, including the Government Chief Whip – and all these people? (Laughter)THE SPEAKER:  Including Dr Chris. (Laughter)MR OKIROR:  Actually, including the President – because he is also a man.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, Hon. Sarah was saying that the blame is put on the women, yet it should be on both the men and women. However, the point you have raised on parenting and mentorship is very important. Then, there is the issue of talking to and counselling these young girls. These young girls need to be counselled. When you counsel them, you will find that maybe a girl prefers a woman-to-woman talk. That is the counselling we need for these girls to reduce these pregnancies.Hon. Sarah, please, conclude.MS OPENDI:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. My brother, Hon. Okiror, thank you for that clarification. Madam Speaker, he did not pick my point. The point is that all of us should be involved in ending the challenge of teenage pregnancy in this country. Secondly, we have a challenge. We are talking about regional referral hospitals. Mbale Regional Referral Hospital has the largest catchment area – serving Bukedi, Kapchorwa and even parts of Busoga. Madam Speaker, I wish that Mbale Hospital, with some facilities near completion, could be supported so that they are completed. You go to a hospital and find five or six babies on a single bed. Madam Speaker, Tororo General Hospital is now a training centre. It is not properly accredited, but somehow, Busitema University medical students are using this facility. Therefore, I wish the Ministry of Health, aware of the challenge of the catchment area for Mbale Regional Referral Hospital, could upgrade Tororo General Hospital and have consultants there, just like it was done for Mityana Hospital. The senior consultants can train the doctors in that area and also provide the services.12616SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSWe have Rubongi Military Hospital, which is also supplementing the efforts of Tororo General Hospital. However, they lack space. That could also help us. These medical workers in Rubongi Military Hospital are also doing a good job.Lastly, I want to thank the Ministry of Health for the ambulances provided for the 100 constituencies. However, Madam Speaker, there is a challenge of fuelling these facilities.THE SPEAKER:  That was already said. I told you not to repeat what was said. Motion?12.35 MR SOWEDI KITANYWA (NRM, Busongora County North, Kasese):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. Having listened to many of my colleagues and now that some of them are not following your instructions, that they should not be repetitive, I move a motion that the question be put. THE SPEAKER:  Move your motion. MR KITANYWA:  Madam Speaker, I am moving a - THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, we need to finish these ministerial policy statements; that is principle number one. Two, I know you all appreciate the report. Who says the report is not good? I am saying, who is saying the report does not capture what is in the health sector. What is missing? MR ENOS ASIIMWE:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. On what is missing, in 2001, the African Union made a commitment to contribute 15 per cent of their budget to the health sector. Last year, in February 2023, they made a recommitment to make sure that 15 per cent of our budget goes to the health sector. When you look at what they have presented, it is 5 per cent of our Budget, or what we intend to spend in the next financial year. Is it procedurally right to continue not respecting our international commitments and pass a report, which has not captured that element of the commitment we made last year? Madam Speaker, when you send us in these international forums to represent Parliament and even the Government -THE SPEAKER:  This is not the Budget. This is a Ministerial Policy Statement, which is going to be harmonised in the Committee on Budget. MR ENOS ASIIMWE:  I understand that, Madam Speaker, but our resolutions and commitments from here will form the decisions of the Committee on Budget. That is why I was asking why we could not capture it and pass it in the Budget Framework Paper (BFP). THE SPEAKER:  Are you sure it was not included in the BFP? MR ENOS ASIIMWE:  Madam Speaker, it is not. That is why I am raising it. If it was, the chairperson can also advise. Thank you very much. THE SPEAKER:  Okay. Yes, Hon. David? I see all of you want to talk. You will leave this place at 2.00 a. m. 12.37MR DA VID KABANDA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much for this opportunity. Yesterday, we left this place at 11.00 p.m. and we were comfortable. I can see the honourable minister is rushing to come and react on what Members have submitted but this is one of the most important sectors we need to talk about. We did not debate agriculture. A few Members debated on water, Madam Speaker, I request that you give Members 30 more minutes to talk about this sector. Maybe the Honourable MP from Kasese is comfortable and he has health centres everywhere and his people are happy. However, I request that you allow 30 more minutes so that we contribute to this issue. This will help us to legislate on matters that concern our people. I beg to submit.THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Kabanda, I did not allow the motion, which is why I asked what is not included. We did not discuss agriculture [Ms Opendi]12617THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024because it was straightforward. There was nothing to add.  - Yes, Hon. Jane, and then the chairperson of the Committee on Presidential Affairs.   12.39 MS JANE PACUTO (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. What I want to add to this report is that much as we talked about emergency services, we seem to be concentrating on the issue of ambulances. Madam Speaker, this morning in your communication, you informed the country about the rising water. Some of us who -THE SPEAKER: In Lake Victoria -MS A VUR: Yes, and this will definitely affect the River Nile as well and for some of us from districts neighbouring water bodies, this will cause health issues like waterborne diseases. In districts like Pakwach, we have the challenge of Bilharzia.In the Health budget, I expected to hear more of blood banks being taken to such districts that are affected by bilharzia because we are losing many people and many are sick; vomiting blood every other day and we have to take them to Arua and Gulu. Madam Speaker, if this is not addressed, coupled with the issue of other diseases, we are going to lose young productive Ugandans. We need blood banks in places like Pakwach District.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, I hope you are listening. There is information here. I said next is the chairperson of the Committee on Presidential Affairs. Honourable members, there is even an outbreak of the red eye disease. 12.41 THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS (Ms Jesca Ababiku):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I am concerned about car facilitation for the village health team members. I made a tour of my district and established that these people are doing tremendous work. I agree with you with the areas you mentioned, which we should budget for. They are, however, asking for cash appreciation, like what we did for the local councils I (LC1s). I got this when I was touring my district. Two, on the issue- THE SPEAKER:  The LC1s were covered under the local government. We could actually look at the Village Health Teams (VHTs). These people move long distance.MS ABABIKU:  Yes. I support the committee but the expansion and innovation of district Hospitals was left out unlike the regional hospitals. Madam Speaker, I have an alarming situation in Adjumani District. People are delivering in grass-thatched houses. Many of my wards are leaking. I have been in touch with the ministry for the last five years but no action has been taken. Babies are in grass-thatched houses in the district hospital. I plead with Government and the House that Adjumani District Hospital be provided. One day, the roof will fall on the children and the mothers. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Was it in the last budgeting period where you said you needed to increase more health centres IV because of the cost than having a district hospital? Now that you have talked about that, I even have one of the most dilapidated health centres IV in Bukedea District. Hon. Sanon, Hon. Eseru and Hon. Linda.12.44MR SANON BWIIRE (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee and the chairperson.THE SPEAKER:  I am going to allow you to speak, but I will give you only one minute. 12618SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSMR BWIIRE:  Madam Speaker, Government secured a loan to make sure that all subcounties get health centres III but as we speak now, that loan has ceased. In the report, I have not heard anything to assure us the remaining subcounties without health centres III. Which arrangement does Government have to make sure that – for example, in Kaliro, specifically in Kaliro Town Council, which is very big and very soon it may even become a municipality, there is no health centre II? THE SPEAKER:  Or even a city.  MR BWIIRE:  Or a city, because Kaliro is very strategic, now that Saaka Bridge has been completed. Now, people from Pallisa, Madam Speaker, this is where you pass when you are heading to Buyende. It is a very strategic town but there is no hospital.  When the Minister of Health came to Kaliro District, she assured the people that Bumanya Health Centre IV , which the President promised; he pledged that it would be a general hospital - the minister committed that every financial year there would be some infrastructural improvement. However, this year, I have not seen any allocation for that very hospital. That is why I see that this is a disadvantage because Kaliro is very strategic. When you go to Bumanya Health Centre IV , our health workers are so specialised and committed. That is why we get patients from all districts that are neighbouring Kaliro.  Therefore, I really want the minister to clarify, and commit herself that what was mentioned last financial year, you will continue with that commitment, but – THE SPEAKER:  Actually, it is on that same road – honourable minister, because of the failure of that hospital, Hon. Katuntu’s brother got an accident on that same road last week, he could not be saved. He had to be taken back to Pallisa because the road is very good.  Hon. Linda-12.47MS IRENE LINDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Fort Portal City):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee and the Chairperson for their report, which was thorough.  Last year, Parliament appropriated funds for procurement of CT scans, which were procured and installed. These CT scans were installed but we do not have radiologists. When these scans are taken, they have to send the scans either to Mbarara or to Mulago for interpretation.  Therefore, as Parliament, we need to appropriate funds to recruit crucial – THE SPEAKER:  Staffing. It is not just crucial. We need money for staffing.  MS LINDA: For the entire staffing of the health sector.  THE SPEAKER:  This is because when you go to ICU, there are no staff. Dialysis, there are no staff. Even just medical workers. You go to health centres, there are no staff. It is cutting across. Hon. Magoola-12.48MS RACHEL MAGOOLA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugweri): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. The one thing I have not seen stand out in the report – although I would like to thank you very much for what you have presented – is the issue of monitoring and evaluation. The staff in most of the referral hospitals, even the little hospitals, the centres II, you will find that because we do not monitor them on a consistent basis, they do not report for work. A lot of what is installed as hardware does not serve the people because the people supposed to monitor and do the job are never available.  Therefore, I am requesting that we look into a budget for consistent monitoring, either by the ministry or the district.  I am not sure where it would go.  12619THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024Another thing that I noticed with this is that the systems in place, the way we work as a Government, brings in all the issues of not delivering. This is because if the system is saying we have to deliver through so and so, then there is no medicine because one aspect in the system is failing delivery of drugs. We probably need to sit down and look into changing these systems and making services available to the people. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  When your time is over, it automatically goes off. You just need to request to switch on or give it to another person. You are the ones who all want to speak. When you talk about monitoring of health workers, the presumption is that you are employing people who are responsible and they must deliver. If we are going to spend money on getting other people to monitor you – anyway, we have the State House Monitoring Unit, and others. We have directors in these hospitals who should be able to monitor, supervise and ensure that everybody is working. Let us have Hon. Faith, Hon. Osoru, and Dr Bwanika.  12.50MS FAITH NAKUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak):  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  My assumption is that when we do Ministerial Policy Statements, they should speak to the presidential pledges. In 2022, when the President visited Morulinga in Napak District, he made a commitment to Bishop Damiano of Moroto Catholic Diocese that he would contribute Shs 600 million to St Kizito Hospital, Matany, to take care of the cost of treating the gun violence victims, both soldiers and civilians.  At that point, the hospital was at the verge of closure but the President told them to tarry on and save the situation. This was because over 3,000 people would have died.  Now, the committee has not captured that.  At what point do these pledges fit into the Budget?  THE SPEAKER:  Thank you.  12.51MS MOURINE OSORU (NRM, Woman Representative, Arua City):  Madam Speaker, I thank you. I have two concerns: When we had a tour in most of these referral hospitals, we have realised that there are insects, the cockroaches encroaching and invading all the drawers that we have in those hospitals. You can imagine a patient is sick and then a cockroach runs over his or her food.  THE SPEAKER:  They do not fumigate?  MS OSORU:  No, they do not fumigate. I want to bring this to the attention of the Minister of Health to take note of that such that they can also appropriate for fumigation. Secondly, the labour suites that we have in most of the referral hospitals are now very small. They need expansion. We have moved to those labour suites and we have realised that most mothers give birth on the mats, which is very unacceptable. Lastly, Arua Regional Referral Hospital does not only serve the –  (Member timed out.)12.52DR ABED BWANIKA (NUP, Kimaanya-Kabonera Division, Masaka City):  Madam Speaker, about one year and a half ago, this House approved a loan of $ 70 million for the Uganda Heart Institute. Up to now, this money is not deployed. We are paying commitment fees. The Minister of Health should come on the Floor of Parliament to answer. We procured ICU equipment. They are there in hospitals. They are not deployed because of infrastructure. We are putting this money to waste. You are talking about Masaka and we need only Shs 590 million for the infrastructure. We must have our priorities right.Lastly, how can we be a nation without a PET scan? We are sending our people to Kenya and to India because we do not have a PET scan. We need only Shs 62 billion to ensure that this vital equipment for diagnostics is in this country. I pray and – (Member timed out.)12620SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSTHE SPEAKER:  I remember the late Hon. Cecilia Ogwal used to talk about a PET scan and up to today – the minister had promised that it was going to be bought but it has not been up to today. Can’t you – I have seen my sister Anifa saying that there is no money. Please, put it in the budget and we see whether it is a priority or not.  When I see you putting something, which is not a priority as a VHT – a VHT is a priority. VHTs are priorities. Can we have Hon. Esenu and Hon. Hanifa, I will come to you. 12.54MR ANTHONY ESENU (NRM, Kapelebyong County, Kapelebyong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the committee for the report. However, I challenge the Minister of Health that in Kapelebyong, literally every health facility needs to be refurbished. Some of them need to be condemned because they are collapsing, they have broken walls and leaking roofs. The one ambulance we have is busy every day, transporting mothers either to Soroti or Amuria. Four subcounties in Kapelebyong do not have a health facility. We need them included in your budget. I thank you. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Hanifa and Dr Kamara – 12.55MS HANIFA NABUKEERA (NUP, Woman Representative, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson and the committee for the report. My concern is about the oxygen cylinders in the hospitals. While you budget for fuel for ambulances, I request that you also budget for fuel to transport oxygen from the plant in Namanve. In Kawolo General Hospital, we have many cylinders that are empty, yet many health centres around depend on it, as a referral hospital. Many victims of accidents along Jinja Road are referred to Kawolo General Hospital. When you get here, there is no oxygen – THE SPEAKER: Dr Chris, there is one meeting in this House. We are talking about teenage pregnancies and you are there. (Laughter)MS NABUKEERA: Madam Speaker, I pray that the oxygen plant is given a priority as hospital equipment in the budget. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Thank you.12.56DR NICHOLAS KAMARA (FDC, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson for a good report. (Member rose_)  I was invited by the Speaker. I am giving information. The point I would like to make is about the oxygen plants. In Kabale Hospital, we have three oxygen plants. One was brought during COVID-19 times. The second oxygen plant was donated by UNICEF but both are down.Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) started constructing a new oxygen plant but it has never worked. I heard that all over the country, oxygen plants are not working. We should put money in the Budget to make sure that these oxygen plants are maintained and oxygen supplied properly in our regional referral hospitals. I beg to submit. THE SPEAKER: Thank you for your information. Hon. Ameede, Hon. Mwijukye and Hon. Aguti – Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have students and teachers of Kampala View Private School, Wakiso. Please, stand up. You are very smart. You are most welcome. They are represented by Hon. David Sserukenya and Hon. Betty Naluyima. Young children, your very good mother is there. Thank you, please sit. 12.59MR AGNES AMEEDE (Independent, Woman Representative, Butebo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I applaud the committee for the extensive report. 12621THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024I have a few things to observe, regarding the management in the Health Sector. This follows an interaction with the constituents. One of the greatest headaches in the constituency is when you have a line of people seeking help from the MP with various health needs. I interrogated one of the enlightened constituents on what he thinks is the greatest problem with our referral hospitals, to be specific, Mbale Regional Referral Hospital. He said that the hospital is mostly managed by intern doctors; there is no supervision by senior doctors. This, therefore, calls for a policy shift. (Interruption)THE SPEAKER: Point of order from a doctor.DR NICHOLAS KAMARA: Madam Speaker, the interns are the doctors who work on a daily basis. It is very easy for you to find them in the wards and think that they are not supervised. Is the honourable member in order to state that my colleague doctors and consultants are not doing their work, when they are actually doing supervision work, and that it is only the interns who are always in the wards, on a day-to-day basis? MS AMEEDE: I am so much in order because I was building a case. (Laughter)THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you should differentiate between a consultant and an ordinary doctor. Please, conclude. MS AMEEDE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me more time. I was building a case. Right now, the policy is that hospitals are run by directors who are medical doctors. If there is a policy shift, these critical staff would concentrate on doing medical work so that the other people manage the hospitals because they are not many. An example is the Director of Mbale Regional Referral Hospital. He is a great physician but he is preoccupied with the management of the hospital, yet he would be offering his critical skill as a physician. Lastly, the management of hospitals as far as case management is concerned, follow-up and supervision is wanting in this country – (Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, your time is over. However, I would like to tell you one thing; if we can have doctors running the hospitals and others in charge of administration – If you went to Mulago National Referral Hospital, you would appreciate what Dr Byanyima has done. She has managed Mulago Hospital. It is in order because it is these medics who know what is required, in which ward, and where, and what should be done. I do not think that would really be a problem. Further information from a doctor and a former consultant.DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Just to agree with you – we have many doctors who are not employed. As Cabinet, we made a decision to employ all Ugandan doctors, and deploy them down to the level of a health centre III. What we need to do is to mobilise resources so that they pay them. Therefore, a director can still be a medical doctor supported by a hospital administrator, and we deploy more medical officers and medical consultants.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Connie?1.04MS CONNIE GALIWANGO (Independent, Woman Representative, Mbale City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the committee chairperson and colleagues for a very good report. However, I noticed that there is quite a number of equipment that the Government has put in hospitals, which might get to waste. For example, the printer for the CT-Scan in Lira Referral Hospital cannot print because the films that were given to them are not compatible to that printer and therefore, the equipment might break down because a thorough study is not yet taken to maintain it. 12622SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSSecondly, there are certain facilities that Government has built, which are – (Member timed out.)1.05MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. My father died at Mulago Cancer Institute and I was there for seven years. You see people waiting for a patient to die, they will tell you, “the other one is about to die, so you can wait.” Waiting for somebody to die so that you get a bed – (Interjections)  I am talking about an experience that I went through.  I stand to support that we give more money to Mulago Hospital because I have been there. I see a lack of beds and I would want more beds at the Uganda Cancer Institute.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, my father also died in Mulago but I would think it is unfair for us to say that the medics say, “Wait, the other one is about to die.”MR MWIJUKYE:  Maybe let me make it clear: It is not the medics- Madam Speaker, if I can conclude -(Interruptions)THE SPEAKER: Order on who? –  (Members rose_) I have already corrected the issue. They do not always say that; “So-and-so is about to die.” No, that is not correct. MR MWIJUKYE:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to conclude on the issue of the mothers. I purchased ultrasound scans through the help of Hon. Dan Kimosho from China and distributed them to my health centres III but they are not operational because of staff. On the issue of staffing, let us also look at the health centres III because women move from Buhweju up to Mbarara, to check the status of their pregnancies. They have to spend about Shs 30,000 to get a service that is just Shs 5,000 and it becomes expensive for them, in areas where the health Centres IV do not have ultrasound scans. I request the chairperson to include the issue of staffing for those cases in health centres III.1.07MS FORTUNATE NANTONGO (DP, Woman Representative, Kyotera): (Hon. Ekanya rose_)  Affirmative action. Madam Speaker, thank you for this opportunity. I would like to emphasise the point of funding for the renovation of health centres. We have a very big challenge, especially in Kakuuto, a health centre IV- this is a border district, which serves a very wide region. We have only two wards, one ward serving both males and females. However, just recently, the ceiling fell on the patients. The hospital does not have funds to renovate the ceiling and it is we, Members of Parliament, who have to do this work that the Government should be doing. I support the committee report to renovate these health centre facilities so that they can be up to the standard. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Yes, can I hear from the Leader of the Opposition before I allow your motion? You clap for the Leader of the Opposition.1.09THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the compliments. I want to applaud the committee and the committee chairperson for a very good report, though it has some omissions, especially when it comes to the national ambulance system. As you are aware, in the country we have hard-to-reach districts, for instance the islands. I salute you for this time remembering the islands because I have seen some plans for 14 boat ambulances but how about other hard-to-reach areas like the mountainous terrains? THE SPEAKER:  Like Bududa? MR NAMBESHE: Bududa, with the mountainous terrain, even in the Karamoja Subregion, for instance. We have raised this [Ms Galiwango]12623THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024over and over again. We have places, which are not accessible by other means of transport except maybe aircraft ambulances.THE SPEAKER:  There is information.MR NAMBESHE: You will give me information later.  (Interjection) Okay, please.MR MAPENDUZI: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, the information I wanted to give is in line with what the committee has left out. In 2014, the Government started a huge construction project at Gulu Regional Referral Hospital to accommodate 54 staff and injected Shs 7 billion but the project has stalled for the last seven years. And there is a balance of-THE SPEAKER: Since you were the chairperson LC V?MR MAPENDUZI: Yes. To this day, the project has stalled at 70 percent. The regional referral hospital requires an additional Shs 4 billion. MR NAMBESHE: How is this connected to the ambulance? The information is not in any way related. (Laughter)MR MAPENDUZI: Madam Speaker, I have not concluded. Unfortunately, he has not allowed me to finish but what I wanted- THE SPEAKER: It is in the report; there is Shs 3 billion allocated for that. MR NAMBESHE: Madam Speaker, the next point is where the report mentions the Government discharging a very good job in investing in hardware, infrastructural developments and the health care service delivery.However, what is appalling, is when we are having serious staffing gaps, especially critical human resource and yet a huge sum of money – I think my memory may not serve me well but it is about Shs 250 billion, which has been allocated to enhance the wage bill but up to now, such funds are still lying unutilised. Moreover, we need specialists like anaesthetists and other consultants because they are very few. That is a grave concern that this House should condemn in the strongest terms possible. Mbale Regional Referral Hospital is central and serves many regions, including Kenya but it is disturbing, especially if you see the deplorable state of where the works had reached on the surgical complex and the corruption that has even caused the funds that had been allocated to be withdrawn, or rather withheld, or both. Up to now, the oxygen plant, which was meant for that referral hospital was diverted to another region. Look at the challenges that regional referral hospitals are grappling with, especially water and sewerage. Of those districts that have been mentioned and are beneficiaries of the allocation to address those challenges of water and sewerage, Mbale is conspicuously missing. I do not begrudge Entebbe, Masaka or even Hoima but why on earth would you leave out Mbale Regional Referral Hospital? I would implore the committee to reconsider having Mbale included among the beneficiaries of this fund –(Interjection) -  Information? No, hold on. (Laughter)  This is to address the challenge of water and sewerage. THE SPEAKER:  Can we hear from the minister now? MR NAMBESHE:  … to respond, particularly, to this concern because they have done an overhaul and for water and sewerage systems, there are districts that have been captured to benefit from that allocation but Mbale has been deliberately left out. Madam Minister, I will be happy to get that response. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Clarification? MR ATWIJUKIRE:  Madam Speaker, you emphasised the issue of VHTs and honourable colleagues said it was talked about. However, it is an unfunded priority, yet we are saying they are a critical group for our healthcare. 12624SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSUnfunded priority cannot translate into serious priority. I thought that – even given the emphasis you have made on it – we make a critical decision on that. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, the people who move for you from one corner of the constituency to the other are VHTs. Some of the politicians have reached a level of buying gumboots and bicycles for VHTs but what about you who cannot afford it? The Government must do it. I can proudly say my VHTs have gumboots, bicycles and whatever, but what about Hon. Faith? Honourable minister, have you heard? Committee chairperson? DR AYUME:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have digested a number of the issues raised. The issue of VHTs was raised by National Medical Stores and it is an unfunded priority – procurement of gumboots worth Shs 5 billion for VHTs. This is because they have to traverse – and it is part of the personal protective gear. Madam Speaker, I will conclude by saying that health is consumptive initially but the gains of investing in health are cost-cutting in the future. We may want all these but at the end of the day, it comes down to resources. Where we put the resources, we should first do a cost-benefit and effective analysis. The running costs of ambulances – I give an example that we should invest in the health centre IV on Kalangala Island because the cost of transporting him in a boat ambulance to the mainland and back is 200 litres, which is Shs 1 million. We need to do a cost-benefit analysis before we prioritise our investments and we need to look at diagnostics, human resource, legislation, infrastructure and equipment. For the issue of Matany Hospital, the Government, through subventions, annually appropriates Shs 600 million to church-based hospitals – the likes of Rubaga, Lacor and so forth. Maybe it is time that those figures are revised to a figure that is commensurate with the pressures on the hospital. We shall look into it. On Adjumani Hospital, the Ministry of Health told us there were issues to do with shoddy work in Adjumani Hospital; so, they withheld development budget going to the hospital.THE SPEAKER: There is a clarification from a Workers’ Representative. MS KUNIHIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Unfortunately, I did not get time to talk about my issues. I am seeking clarification from the committee chairperson. On page 14, they have observed – but they did not give us any recommendation – that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is making variations on the wage pay for local governments in anticipation of the payroll audit. We are getting a number of complaints from districts. People with slips, who have been verified, have already been knocked off the payroll. Districts of Kiryandongo, Hoima and Kiboga – I have received from a number of districts. You have not made any recommendation, yet the ministry is going to stop this money. We want to find a solution and the minister is here; she should commit herself. THE SPEAKER:  After verification of some of these people, money will be provided for them. Whether it comes in a supplementary, wage always takes a first call. Yes? DR AYUME:  Madam Speaker, you have guided well. THE SPEAKER: Presidential committee?MS ABABIKU:  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity, although the health committee chairperson was not positive. (Laughter)  Saying that there was shoddy work in Adjumani and the Ministry of Health has made a stand not to do any development, to me, is a poor action taken. This is because, in the end, it is the people who are going to lose services. Therefore, I want the ministry to provide a remedy in two areas: one, to save the lives of the people; and, two, to handle the issue of shoddy [Mr Atwijukire]12625THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024work. Lumping up the two at the expense of the people will cause a lot of damage to us. People are dying and I have just got to know the reason now. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. (Members rose_)  Can we first finish? We are taking three hours on one report. We still have eight reports.DR AYUME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to let Members know that the biggest part of the health sector is in local governments and so, we are duty-bound, as Members of Parliament, to go in, supervise, evaluate, monitor and report back to Parliament. It will make our work easier. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. In your oversight role, you should be able to find out what is not working out well. Honourable minister?1.22THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Anifa Kawooya):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the interventions and the guidance you have given during this session, which are all focused on seeing how, as a sector, we can improve on our service delivery. I thank the chairperson and the committee for a well laid-out, structured and comprehensive report that was very clear and self-explanatory. It did not only give the performance of the sector but went ahead to analyse the critical issues in the sector. It identified the funding gaps and made recommendations on how, as a sector, we can continue to ensure good service delivery. I thank the honourable members – each of you that have contributed and those that wanted to contribute. Most of the issues raised have been the issues that you have raised in good spirit. They have been with us but as you all know and have seen in the committee’s report, everything has been delayed due to insufficient funds in the sector. Since we are in the appropriation process, it is our humble prayer that we at least see how to bridge these funding gaps. Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you. There are many issues that have been raised which are common. For example, we are now going to realign our sector service delivery performance. There are health facilities that need to be upgraded in districts.  The issue of this corrigenda has also come in and the ministry sector is going to be affected by a budget cut of Shs 47 billion. Madam Speaker, you have said that you want this issue brought back. It is our humble prayer because this is going to affect our ministry. Finally, on the issues of equipment like the CT scans, MRI, and Positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP), most of them were addressed by the chairperson in the report when he was answering. I would like to thank him. All these affect us, especially the maintenance. Madam Speaker, we take note of your guidance on the ambulances that we consider the constituencies. As you and the chairperson are aware, most of these ambulances are donations from our partners. However, we are going to do our level best to follow your guidance that in our next allocation, we consider the constituencies. As I wind up – (Interruption)MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have two issues for clarification from the honourable minister. One, she is making reference to a corrigendum. I do not know whether it is within Parliament for our reference.Two, minister, clarify on the ping-pong between the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and the National Medical Stores as far –THE SPEAKER: We had already talked about a corrigendum; we do not know about it. MR MPUUGA: She is referring to it, and that is why I am seeking her clarification and the contents therein that refer to the ministry she is speaking for. 12626SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSOn the ping-pong between the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and the National Medical Stores (NMS), the report clarifies the funding gap, including the failure of delivery of medicines and supplies. NMS says they have the medicines but that they do not have money to supply them. Unfortunately, in the report, we do not have a figure of how much they needed to supply but did not supply. They are inordinately saying that the finance ministry delays making money available for them to deliver supplies. The finance minister is here so, between yourselves, may this House be informed on who is telling the truth? Madam Speaker, you are aware I did a lot of field tours in many districts. The National Medical Stores was supplying drugs that have no demand. I was informed, particularly in Gomba that when they asked for malaria drugs, they gave them diarrhea drugs. See this mismatch. Who is communicating the truth to citizens about supplies and the failure thereof? Thank you. THE SPEAKER: There was also a commitment from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to provide money for the supply of drugs by NMS. So, we need to confirm from the finance ministry if that commitment was fulfilled. MR OGUZU: Madam Speaker, thank you for allowing this. The former LOP raises an important issue, which points to the procurement plans of the various votes, which this House needs to pay attention to. Unfortunately, this was not brought to the fore yet is likely going to affect how we move. My clarification is on stalled projects that the ministry initiated in regional hospitals. For example, in Arua Regional Referral Hospital, in 2018, you initiated the construction of about 21 staff houses, which now require Shs 4 billion to finish. The honourable MP for Gulu also raised a similar issue. This has not been ably catered for.Secondly, the second Indicative Planning Figures, which the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development sent to the various votes show that money for utilities like water and power – (Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you came in a little late. That issue was discussed here and we even agreed on how best to handle it. DR AYUME: Madam Speaker, before the minister comes in, I would like to give information. I beg to humbly disagree with my honourable colleague on the point that some places ordered anti-malarial drugs but were given diarrhoea medication. First and foremost, health centres II and III do not order. We have what we call a “push system”, where we push drugs. Their procurement plans are made at the beginning of the financial year. It is from a health centre IV and hospital upwards, which order. So, Madam Speaker, I thought that I should make that correction. Thank you. MR ATWIJUKIRE: I risk being misunderstood to be a spokesperson of NMS, but I thought I would help the House and the former LOP with this information. What happens is that even if NMS delivered medicine that was not requested, they deliver it with a form, and then a facility is at liberty to reject it. They write down the reason for rejection and coordinate that with the District Health Officer (DHO). What happens sometimes, when I used to follow up that time, is that some facilities also ask for medicines they do not use and when they expire, they now start looking for where to apportion blame. It is quite a lengthy process that we would need to interrogate. Otherwise, it is not possible that you allow medicine when you have not requested it. THE SPEAKER: Can you conclude, honourable minister? [Mr Mpuuga]12627THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024MS KAWOOYA: Thank you very much. I would like to thank my brother, Hon. Mpuuga. The question has been ably answered by Hon. Dan Kimosho Atwijukire about the finance ministry and NMS. He wanted to know the figure. That is the only thing I can say and the report covered it well. The gap in the figure under National Medical Stores is Shs 6 billion. The procurement plan is covered in the report under page 58. When you look at it, it is well spelled out.In conclusion, Madam Speaker, as a ministry, we are going to look at the recommendations in the committee report and see the funding that will come up. Through you, Madam Speaker, we shall see how to implement. It is our prayer that we will be in a position to have these facilities and equipment operationalised. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, when you buy scan machines and all those kinds of equipment, but do not put them into use, it becomes a nugatory expenditure. So, it is better you have adequate staffing to ensure that such equipment is working. MS KAWOOYA: Madam Speaker, I take note of that and the issue of insufficient funding for maintenance, as well as fuel. As I have stated, together with our Committee on Health and your guidance, we shall do our best to ensure that we provide and the equipment is maintained. We are going towards another sector of finding out how we can move with that. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Remember, you committed to the Positive End-Expiratory Pressure (PEEP) machine. It started with the Rt Hon. Oulanyah; it then went to Hon. Cecilia Ogwal. Do you remember? And it is in the resolution.   DR AYUME: Madam Speaker, on the issue of CT scans in regional referral hospitals, yes, as we recruit the radiologists, it is allowed in telemedicine to take a picture from Moroto and send it to a senior specialist in Kampala for interpretation and then send it back. So, tele-medicine is allowed; I was just responding to a colleague. Regarding the issue of the Positron Emission Tomography (PET) scan, I just want to tell Members that it is not one machine - THE SPEAKER: They said it was at the procurement stage. DR AYUME: The PET scan is a project. It is not only a machine; it is a building; a very solid building with bunkers, a cyclotron machine, PET scanner - it is an assembly of many things. Therefore, we want to start with the ground-breaking, in phases.The total cost is about Shs 298 billion, which we all do not need at once but we are ready to start in phases every year; it is a project. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Dr Ayume, I thought the minister said that it was at the procurement stage. Yes, Hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi? DR BARYOMUNSI:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to add information to what the committee chairperson has said, that we work with the Ministry of Health and most of the equipment that is procured now is digital. Like in the area of radiology, the X-ray and CT scans are digital to the extent that if you take an X-ray machine in Kabale Hospital and you do not have a radiologist, you can digitally share it with the radiology department in Mulago, they do the interpretation, a report and send it to in Kabale; that is where we are going. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Health on the ministerial policy statement and Budget estimates for the Financial Year 2024/2025 be adopted by this House.                         (Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Now, you will go and reconcile your report with the Committee on Budget. There are issues that 12628SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSthe House has said are a priority and must be regarded as a priority. Can we have a report from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development? He was supposed to lay evidence on the trigger. We are first handling the Committee on Information, Communications Technology, and National Guidance, but we are asking the finance ministry for a trigger. 1.37THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Amos Lugoloobi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was here this morning and you sent me to go and come back here with evidence relating to the payment of Shs 17.76 billion for the rehabilitation of Mandela National Stadium. Madam Speaker, I am happy to report that when I went back, I confirmed that the process was already underway, and indeed, this morning, the Accountant-General pulled the trigger and released Shs 17.76 billion and attesting to that - THE SPEAKER: Can you lay the receipt?  MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, allow me to complete my statement. This has been put in writing, and signed by Hon. Matia Kasaija, himself. THE SPEAKER: Who is in Atiak? MR LUGOLOOBI: No, he was still around though he later on travelled and this letter which is addressed to you, if you allow me; is one paragraph, I can read it. It reads: “Evidence of payment of Shs 17.76 billion for Mandela National Stadium Limited. Please find attached the Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT) indicating that the payment of Shs 17.76 billion for Mandela National Stadium Limited is selected for payment” – (Interjection)-  Yes, that is the language used on the EFT - “...this payment will be received on Monday, 15 April 2024 by Mandela.” THE SPEAKER: There are so many transactions in the batch; so they select. MR LUGOLOOBI: This is now with the Bank of Uganda to release. So, on the part of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, it has already moved and I have supplied a copy of the EFT, clearly endorsed. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Can I have a look at them before you lay? (Laughter) 1.39MR GEOFREY KAYEMBA-SSOLO (NUP, Bukomansimbi South County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the intervention. (Applause) I thank you and the House because if you had not used extra effort, the sports fraternity would have been in a mess more and more. But again, with the Ministry of Finance, Planning, and Economic Development, every time money for sports is delayed in release. When they think of cutting the budgets, they cut that of sports. I plead, through you Madam Speaker, to the Ministry of Finance, Planning, and Economic Development to always release sports funds on time because these games are timely. When you release money toward the end, the team will have been already disqualified. Similarly, for the stadia we are going to build for the African Cup of Nations (AFCON), to remain with a bid, three stadia have to be already done by 31 December 2025. According to the frustration you are giving us right now, will the stadia be ready? Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: The stadia are going to be ready. What we want to get ready first is Namboole to host the games and then the other ones - I already have a letter here, a blue letter on Summa, that is for Hoima Stadium and then the other one will be for Akii Bua Stadium. Do you want to say something? Honourable minister of - the contractor who subcontracts. [The Speaker]12629THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 20241.14THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oboth):  Madam Speaker, I rise to appreciate your intervention and that of this House. What you have just witnessed and received from the Ministry of Finance, Planning, and Economic Development has taken us more than six months. I congratulate you on behalf – (Interruption) –  for more than six months, I have not reported my colleague, but – I want to take this opportunity to apologise for the delay but now we all know why we have been delaying. We are contractors who can only subcontract what we cannot easily - Namboole National Stadium has never been contracted to a local company. The complex issues there about the fill and what is only what we outsourced but the rest of the work - my client is here beaming and ever since you instructed us to do this - even this afternoon, we are going to have a stakeholders meeting. With this revelation -  THE SPEAKER: Can we have the stadium ready in two weeks? MR OBOTH: My client is here. 1.43THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang)  Madam Speaker, as long as the finance ministry confirms to me - THE SPEAKER: No, the money will be there on Monday; I have seen the slip. MR OGWANG: I request that this afternoon, myself, the contractor, and the consultant - with your permission - I was formerly going to ask you - THE SPEAKER: Can I give you my representative?MR OGWANG:  I have no problem. We have a meeting at Namboole National Stadium to specifically address issues that have been raised by the Confederation of African Football (CAF). We want to come up with a work plan for the completion of those identified issues so that the stadium is ready. THE SPEAKER:  I am going to give you my representative, one of my commissioners, to be part of that meeting. Hon. Mpuuga, I want you to attend that meeting and give me a report. We want that place to be completed in two weeks. MR OGWANG:  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for delegating to us a competent colleague to be part of our meeting. Hon. Mpuuga, you are welcome. Madam Speaker, Members of Parliament who are willing to visit the site, as per the date and the time you will direct - I request that you allow me to take them to our national stadium. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, what is important with this visit is the CAF approval. There are issues that have been raised by CAF. Hon. Mpuuga, there is a letter that was written by CAF that you need to use as a checklist on what was raised. The letter was laid on the Table yesterday, so you should move with that letter. Yes, contractor? MR OBOTH:  I had forgotten –THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Ekanya, do you have any problem with the contractor? [Mr Ekanya: “Madam Speaker, I have serious issues. Clarification, Hon. Contractor.”]  First leave the contractor to speak.MR OBOTH:  Let me make this appeal. On behalf of the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs, and Uganda People’s Defence Forces, we want to be on record. Now that you have done all the interventions, we request you to officially visit us and look at what we have done. Your visit will also motivate our workmen. Next week, you can visit Namboole National Stadium. THE SPEAKER:  Let my advance team first tell me what is on the ground and then, I will get back. Yes, Hon. Ekanya, what is “killing” you? 12630SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSMR EKANYA:  Something is “killing” me. (Laughter)  Madam Speaker, the President of the Federation of Uganda Football Associations (FUFA) requested me to inform the contractor and the Minister of Education and Sports that the stadium cannot be completely ready when the parking facility is not yet ready. You have buses, which are parked down there, and rubbish, which needs to be cleared. We only have two weeks to host this - we need assurance from the contractor that, that place will look beautiful because we have international teams, and these buses should be removed from there. These are very serious issues. THE SPEAKER : Honourable minister, you can make money out of that parking space. When you remove the buses and it is worked on, people will pay for parking. So, remove the buses and clear the place. Thank you for being a courier of the FUFA President.  (Laughter)MR OGWANG : Madam Speaker, it is true - and that is why I am saying that some of these issues are small - one of the issues that were raised in the CAF report was for us to put signage on where the parking will be within the stadium. We must demarcate a parking space for our fans who will drive in with their cars. We indeed have one company: Pioneer Easy Buses, which had – let me not go into the details because that is another debate – whose buses are parked in our stadium. I have directed – THE SPEAKER: Hon. “Contractor”, I will visit the place on Monday and we do not want to get the buses there. I want to get the place worked on.MR OGWANG:  I have requested the contractor to help me officially remove these buses from the stadium because I need a stadium without any hindrance; he is here.THE SPEAKER: On Monday, I will visit the place and I do not want to get your buses there. Yes, committee on ICT?(II) THE COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION, COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCETHE SPEAKER:  Chairperson, Committee on Budget - sorry, it is the minister now. MR LUGOLOOBI:  Madam Speaker, I beg your indulgence to allow me to lay the document I talked about, which is on the evidence of payment of Shs 17.76 billion for the rehabilitation of Mandela National Stadium. The money will be released on Monday, 15 April 2024. I beg to lay. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable minister.MR LUGOLOOBI:  The contractor had created an impression that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development does not seem to be at it. I would like to defray that impression by saying that by the time he started talking about this, this process was already underway. Therefore, the finance ministry should not be blamed, because out of Shs 97 billion, we had released Shs 80 billion. We are not responsible for the delay. This was just the final portion of that requirement. THE SPEAKER:  The final portion that is making us lose out on AFCON. Let us be fair to each other. The First Lady has written to you; she has been asking for this money. Let us have ICT. MR KABANDA:  Madam Speaker, I am concerned and wondering why the blame is being put on the contractor to remove the buses. The one who has an agreement with Namboole - the owners of those buses have an agreement with Namboole management, not the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs. So, why are we pushing the blame to Hon. Oboth instead of asking Hon. Ogwang to direct Namboole management to ask the owners of the buses to remove them? 12631THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024THE SPEAKER:  Who brought the buses? MR OGWANG:  Madam Speaker, I do not want to own the liabilities, which I found in the office because I will not be doing my work. First and foremost, if we are to go into the history of those buses, the Uganda Land Commission leased out the parking where those buses are.THE SPEAKER:  Who is the owner of Namboole? MR OGWANG:  That is what I am coming to. As of now, I am the owner and I remain the owner. THE SPEAKER:  Finance and you.MR OGWANG: Finance and I, are the two shareholders. However, I directed and asked my very good contractor with the force they have –THE SPEAKER: Do not disturb the contractor. You people leased out our property and I do not even think that they declare NTR. Can I have Mr Sewanyana, the Managing Director of Namboole, in my office after the House? MR OGWANG:  Madam Speaker, I am the owner of Namboole. THE SPEAKER:  Can we have those buses leave that place? MR OGWANG:  That is what I wanted to say - that we will do whatever it takes because it is a requirement by CAF to have those buses out of the stadium before they approve the final game to be played in Namboole. So, we will have them out of Namboole. I pledge that, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER:  How could you people enter into –?MR ATWIJUKIRE:  Madam Speaker, there is something that we need to get clear. When my senior brother, Hon. Ogwang, says that the Uganda Land Commission leased out Namboole Stadium, he is precisely telling you that they gave a land title. They don’t just lease out land on paper; they give a title to someone. It is not a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU). Uganda Land Commission does not lease on MOUs. Is that what he wants to tell the House - that that land was titled into someone else’s name? MR OBOTH:  Madam Speaker, the lease expired. The lease, as Hon. Dan Kimosho is saying, is through titling, but the humanitarian face, for the record - as Hon. Peter Ogwang usually says - our scope is to mark the parking. We brought in all the signage from abroad - THE SPEAKER:  And you cannot mark them because the buses are there. MR OBOTH:  We had a meeting yesterday - Hon. Ogwang knows. Maybe today when we go - the ball is in their court. Now, because he knows the contractor is on site with some arms, he wants to arm-twist us - (Laughter) - he should make the place available for us to mark the parking space. THE SPEAKER: The Attorney-General has something to say.1.55THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL  (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi):  Madam Speaker, what I wanted to say may be overtaken by events because I wanted to know the status of the lease and I will then advise the next course of action based on it.THE SPEAKER: Okay. MR ATWIJUKIRE:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Attorney-General can guide us. When ULC gives someone a lease of five years and it expires - there is a process of re-entry. Have we undertaken the process of re-entry so that we are sure that we own this land now? Would the minister table that?THE SPEAKER:  First of all, before Uganda Land Commission leased it out, whose land 12632SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSwas it? I saw Hon. Obua parading the land titles for all that land at Namboole when he was the minister. Therefore, how could the Uganda Land Commission lease out land which belongs to Namboole? Was it with your consent?MR OGWANG:  Madam Speaker, can I seek your permission to allow me to formally bring a statement regarding the matter we are discussing so that we can substantively debate it from the origin up to the end? That would help us to understand the subject matter in detail. I pledge. THE SPEAKER: Do you still have the title?MR OGWANG:  I confirm to the House that I have the title of Mandela National Stadium. THE SPEAKER:  Is part of it leased out?MR OGWANG:  As of now, to be honest, it is not because the five-year lease, which had been given to that company expired. THE SPEAKER:  What is the arrangement between you and Pioneer Easy Bus? MR OGWANG:  We do not have any contractual arrangement or obligation with Pioneer Easy Bus, as of now. THE SPEAKER:  Assuming something happened to those buses, who would be responsible? MR OGWANG:  Madam Speaker, I also want to put it again on record - even if Hon. Oboth, the Minister for Defence - does not want me to say that. One, we have communicated in writing to Pioneer Easy Bus Company thus: “Please come and remove your buses from our property.”That is why I was saying that since I have a competent contractor on site - who is the UPDF - I had reached out to that contractor to help me use the powers they have to remove the buses from the site. Thank you. (Interjections)THE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, the contractor has a scope of work. The contractor has everything and only wants space. I am happy that you have invited me to Namboole. Can I come there on Monday and I do not find the buses? Because the minister said the buses are there illegally. MR OGWANG:  Madam Speaker, I welcome you to Namboole. I will be very happy to have you - as the Speaker - visit a big project for which this Parliament has been supportive. Maybe before I conclude, I also want to say this: For our people in Lira and Lango, I want to reiterate that -THE SPEAKER:  Are we done with the issue of Pioneer Easy Bus?MR OGWANG:  On the issue of Pioneer Easy Bus, we are going to work according to your directive.THE SPEAKER:  Not my directive. MR OGWANG:  No, the directive of African Cup of Nations (AFCON) and CAF. Let me be consistent with the CAF instructions because they want us to have those buses out; they want the parking. Thank you.THE SPEAKER : To get out those people, you must use legal means. I have not ordered you but we want that place vacant. MR KABANDA:  Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give you is that the honourable Minister for Lands is already here. Can she clarify on the issue of ULC leasing out the land of Namboole to someone that we do not know whose contract has even expired and maybe he is just planning to renew it? Can the honourable minister, through the Speaker, clarify whether the land still belongs to Namboole or to someone I heard is called Muganga Albert? I beg to submit. THE SPEAKER: I also want the accountability committee responsible to go and check how much NTR we have received from Namboole for that period. [The Speaker]12633THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 20242.00THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT  (Ms Judith Nabakooba):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I request that we write a report and bring it to the House within the course of next week with all the facts.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, we do not have time. We have an issue with Namboole. We are losing out on AFCON  because of it. That is why the two ministers got out of the House to go and sort it out. Unless you are telling me that you want some few minutes to go out with the three ministers to check what happened and then come back. The owners of that docket are those two ministers - for finance and sports. The contractor is there saying, “Give me space.” I can let the four of you go out, then come back after 30 minutes and report. 2.02THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE  (Mr Tonny Ayoo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to start by thanking and congratulating you for the brilliant strategy that you have used to have the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development click the “hard trigger” that had failed to provide Shs 17.5 billion for the renovation of Namboole Stadium. I pray and believe that you will still use the same brilliant strategy to enable the Government to provide funds for the construction of Akii-Bua and Hoima stadia for hosting A FCON . As you are aware, we are behind time and that same strategy should work. Madam Speaker, I beg to present the report of the Committee on Information, Communications Technology and National Guidance on the ministerial policy statements and Budget estimates for the Financial Year 2024/2025. I invite you to page 8, where we have provided the budget performance for V ote 020: Ministry of ICT and National Guidance. I believe Members can go through that.I wish to also invite you to page 10, where we have provided challenges faced during the budget implementation of the V ote. I would like to read through the ICT challenges facing the country: (i) Automation of Government systems or processes is still very low among MDAs in the country. Many stand-alone ICT systems in government are not in sync or synchronised, but mostly operate in silos – independently – yet they are supposed to work as a system;(ii) Low levels of civic consciousness/responsibility/responsiveness to spur effective participation in the political socio-economic transformation in the country;(iii) There is inadequate ICT uptake across the country;(iv) Community mobilisation and mindset change function in the Government is heavily segmented across sectors, which implies that if the Government does not consolidate resources for community mobilisation and mindset change, the function will continue to be weakened; and(v) There is over-taxation in the ICT sector, including on value-added services. Findings, observations and recommendations Strengthening communication of government programmes and national guidance outreach(i) The committee recommends that the Government collectively aligns all its ICT application development and mandates to the ministry to clear all ICT procurements in one single entry for purposes of standardisation and interoperability as provided for by the national ICT Act; and (ii) The Government should allocate Shs 2.2 billion for the development of local ICT applications for the delivery of e-government services for the Financial Year 2024/2025. 12634SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSCreating employment opportunities for the skilled population by leveraging on Business Process Outsourcing & Innovation (i) The committee recommends that the Government allocates Shs 5.9 billion for the creation of employment opportunities for the skilled population by leveraging on business process outsourcing; and (ii) The committee further recommends that innovation/business process outsourcing centres be established in all regions for ease of access by all Ugandans. Support for integration of e-government system(i) The committee reiterates its call to streamline the management of ICT-related services and the acquisition of hardware and software applications for standardisation; and(ii) The committee further recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provides Shs 4.5 billion for the integration of the e-government system. Upgrading the Parish Development Management Information System (PDMIS)The committee recommends:1. That the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provides Shs 1.5 billion for the upgrade of the PDMIS to enable efficient and effective data capture; and 2. That the ministry prioritises the acquisition of computers for the Paris Development Model programme up to the parish level. Enhancement of the National Data Centre The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provides Shs 16.95 billion to the National Information Technology Authority - Uganda (NITA-U) for the enhancement of the National Data Centre. Provision of ICT services to an additional 700 sites connected On this, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development allocate Shs 26.781 billion to NITA-U for the provision of ICT services to an additional 700 sites connected, which will enable MDAs and local governments to fully utilise the ICT infrastructure. Madam Speaker, on this, the Government has been providing NITA-U money to manage 368 sites, yet 1,700 sites are supposed to be run. So, 700 sites have not been provided with money, causing an accumulation of arrears.Operationalisation of the Data Protection OfficeThe committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development allocates Shs 4.334 billion to NITA-U for the operationalisation of the Data Protection Office. Outstanding domestic arrearsThe committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development expeditiously provide funds amounting to $17.643 million for the clearance of areas owned by Soliton Telmec Company. Madam Speaker, I wish to explain this a bit. The Government, through NITA-U, contracted Soliton Telmec to run and manage the ICT backbone infrastructure. However, since 2019, there has been an accumulation of arrears of up to $17.643 million.Recently, Soliton had written to the Government that they would shut down the Government system because they could not run the generators, pay for electricity and buy spare parts. They threatened to shut down the Government. So, I think this must come out as a priority for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to provide this money. [Mr Ayoo]12635THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024Uganda Broadcasting CorporationContract staff salary Madam Speaker, the committee – THE SPEAKER:  Just hold on. Please, first come back. Sorry, we did not introduce you. In the public gallery this afternoon, we have students and teachers from Kiggwa Senior Secondary School, Busujju County in Mityana District. They are represented by Hon. David Lukyamuzi and Hon. Joyce Bagala Ntwatwa. You are welcome. Thank you so much for coming. (Applause)  As you go back to Mityana, send our regards to the people of Mityana. Thank you. (Applause)MR AYOO:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Under Uganda Broadcasting Corporation, the committee recommends that the Government allocates Shs 10.322 billion to UBC for enhancement of the wage bill. This payment, the committee further recommends, should be made through the Ministry of ICT and National Guidance. The committee further recommends, under UBC, that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provides Shs 3.360 billion for the power bill payment by Uganda Broadcasting Corporation. Annual satellite fees for content contribution to DTT/DTH sites across the country – see  page 37The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development allocates Shs 1.540 billion to cover the annual satellite fee.On the replacement of outdated television and radio studio broadcasting equipment and software on page 37, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provides Shs 14.480 billion to Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC) to repair its obsolete and outdated infrastructure.On procurement of an outside Broadcasting Van (OB Van) for television and simpler OB kits for each radio brand, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development allocates Shs 6.0 billion for the procurement of the OB van and kits for each radio brand.On the upgrade, design and deployment of one beam DTT/DHT satellite transmission system and the procurement of Thomson and Harris transmitters on page 38, the committee recommends that Shs 4.20 billion be provided for the upgrade, design and the deployment of one beam DTT/DHT satellite transmission system, and a further Shs 7.220 billion for the procurement of Thomson and Harris transmitters to enhance DTT/DHT.On the replacement of equipment at the Network Operating Centre (NOC), Kololo, and the satellite uplink, the committee recommends that the Government provides Shs 8.87 billion for equipment replacement at the Network Operating Centre, and Shs 2.973 billion for the Kololo Satellite uplink, and other spare parts.Under the Uganda Communications Commission (UCC), on the levy on gross annual revenues of licensed operators on page 39, the committee recommends as follows: i) The two per cent levy collected by UCC in this regard be earmarked and ring-fenced for purposes of ICT development and rural communication as provided for in the Uganda Communications Act;ii) Parliament and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should repeal Section 2 of the Finance Act, 2024, which amended Section 68 of the Uganda Communications Act, 2013, to enforce recommendation (i) above; and iii) The Ministry of Information, Communi -cations Technology and National Guid -ance should clearly enact a regulation that clarifies on the payment and the applica -tion of the two-per cent levy to telecoms as opposed to broadcasters and redefining 12636SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSthe operators to whom the two-per cent levy applies, excluding revenues from ra -dio and television broadcasters.On the cost of internet, the committee recommends as follows:i) The Ministry of Information, Communications Technology and National Guidance should ensure that the National Information Technology Authority Uganda (NITA-U) internet connectivity is expanded to the private consumers at a rate just like the Government and MDAs rate, which is at $35; ii) The Ministry of Information, Communications Technology and National Guidance, through UCC should put in place guidelines to operationalise the National Broadband Policy to ensure infrastructure sharing especially among the internet service providers in both the private and public sectors; and iii) There should be deliberate inter-programme coordination between digital information and the energy development programme to ensure that electricity is extended to most of the areas of the country as a measure to address the lack of access to electricity in some areas of the Country that has spiked the cost of internet in the past.On high-cost end-user ICT devices and services on page 41, the committee recommends that the Government revises the taxes levied on ICT devices to make them more user-friendly and also enhance their accessibility and penetration across the country in line with the NDP III, and harness on the benefits thereof.On the expansion of the scope of Excise Duty on mobile money transactions on page 41, the committee recommends as follows:i) The Government expands the scope of Excise Duty on mobile money transactions by including all major electronic wallet platforms which will ensure equity and fairness as the tax burden would be distributed evenly creating a level playing field, providing an expanded tax base resulting in increased government revenue; and ii) With the attainment of (i) above, the Government considers reducing the tax rate to 0.30 per cent from 0.5 per cent on mobile money to ensure affordability and continued growth of digital financial services, thus increasing the tax base and tax revenues. Uganda Institute of Information and Communications Technology (UICT) The counterpart funding of the specialised centre for excellence - see page 43 The committee recommends that Shs 6.70 billion be allocated to UICT for the full operationalisation of a specialised centre for excellence.On insufficient staffing levels and wage bill, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provides Shs 5.394 billion for UICT to enhance its wage bill, and in effect the staffing levels as required by the National Council for Higher Education.On insufficient specialised ICT laboratory infrastructure, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provides Shs 1.0 billion for UICT for specialised ICT laboratory infrastructure. On insufficient smart lecture room infrastructure, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provides Shs 1.0 billion for UICT for smart lecture room infrastructure.On Uganda Post Limited (UPL)Madam Speaker, this is on page 46, and the committee recommends that the Government [Mr Ayoo]12637THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024provides the share capital of $4 million as per the statutory requirement which translates into approximately Shs 19.1 billion to Uganda Post Limited to enhance to enable it to undertake the above investment projects that will provide the much-needed business agility and financial help for the institution.Madam Speaker, since the creation of Uganda Post Limited, the Government through the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was supposed to provide additional capital for the company to the tune of $4 million. However, since then and up to now, the Government has never met its obligation of providing the money. That is why we are now asking the Government to commit to the statutory obligation and provide $4 million for the company to run its business.Madam Speaker, I, therefore, wish to present the budget estimates for the ministry as indicated below:Ministry of Information Communications Technology and National GuidanceRecurrent Budget Shs 76,064,048,000;Development   Shs 363,606,000;Total    Shs 76,427,654,000.National Information Technology Authority-Uganda (NITA-U)Recurrent Budget Shs 9,586,411,000Development   Shs 113,723,415,000Total    Shs 123,309,826,000Madam Speaker, we have also provided for appropriation in aid for: Uganda Broadcasting Corporation Shs 13,719,000,000Uganda Communications Commission  S h s 244, 318,000,000Posta Uganda Limited - Shs 26,946,000; Uganda Institute of Communication Technology - Shs 26,888,000; Grand total for V ote 020: Ministry of Information, Communications Technology and National Guidance - Shs 311,931,000. Madam Speaker, I beg to report. Madam Speaker, before I sit down, I wish to lay on Table the report, minutes of the committee that were used during the processing of the report, plus other documents like the alternative Ministerial Policy Statement from the Shadow Minister on Information, Communications Technology and National Guidance. I beg to lay.  Madam Speaker, one of my members, Hon. Nsereko wishes, through me, to request you - I am aware of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament that do not allow a member of the committee to contribute when committee reports are being debated but I would wish that you allow him as a member of the committee, if he has a passionate matter, and as a strong supporter of digital transformation in the country – allow him to make his submission. I thank you, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much honourable member, for keeping time. I wish everybody could keep time like Hon. Tonny Ayoo. We have been doing oversight on all these institutions; now we are only putting them and we know what is happening in every institution. You will find in a technical institution like the Uganda Institute of Information and Communications Technology, even Hon. Okot Ogong will want to talk. (Laughter)  Anyway, I am joking. For me, I have only one issue, on Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC). I want to understand the status of the 236 or something acres of land in Dakabela, Soroti District. Two, we recovered the land of UBC in Bugolobi and I am told there are encroachers. Have they fenced off that land? That is all I want to hear. Yes, Hon. David Kabanda - 2.26MR DA VID KABANDA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity and thank you Hon. Nsereko for accepting to give way. 12638SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSMadam Speaker, I want to make one comment. Recently, I do not know what happens in other countries but I just want to find out from the committee and the minister, is there a way a country can manage social media? Is there a machine that a country can buy or technology, to manage social media? Social media can even lead to the collapse of a nation. There are even some Apps  – when you have many followers, the owners of that App pay you. People post funny comments that mislead a country in order to generate a following. Madam Speaker, I just want to implore the Government to put more emphasis on social media. We are not gagging debates on these social networks but they should be managed well. They should not be closed like they closed Facebook but UCC should come up with a mechanism – (Member rose_)  - Okay, Mr TikToker. (Laughter)  2.28MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Indepen -dent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Hon. David Kabanda and Madam Speaker.  I really want to give this House some information on the ICT sector because when the report was being compiled, we were away in Mecca and it would be for the benefit of the House and probably the country - and maybe, it will answer my comrade and colleagues’ issue. THE SPEAKER:  Since you are the sponsor of Computer Misuse Act. MR NSEREKO:  Correct. The ICT sector is the fastest growing sector in the world that can transform someone from zero to one of the biggest people in the world, if given the opportunity. Uganda has benefited from a few persons, for example, one of our young men that participated in the digitalisation of the health sector through what we call the “health tracker” - what you see on your watches; you walk and it tells you have walked these steps - to gather data.One young man from Kabale, who is now part of the Silicon Valley - those are some of the people that were duly neglected here; no one took care of them. He came up with an algorithm that would detect the heartbeat and it is now being used by medical experts in the world to gather data; it is being used for diagnosis but also for personal tracking. I would like to implore my fellow legislators and leaders to take interest in information and communications technology. This is the third pillar that this Government clearly states should be the driver of economic growth and prosperity in this country. I will give you one example, Agriculture, because ICT is multi-sectoral and you can talk about how it impacts agriculture. For example, in the tracking of animals, animal theft, but also the use of Artificial Intelligence in order to detect an outbreak of an epidemic like Foot and Mouth Disease or other diseases among animals, with the use of ICT sensors, motion sensors, feeling sensors mounted on animals, which would help you save costs in future. I will talk more about agriculture. The use of Artificial Intelligence in determining whether the soil will be productive for a given plant and determining, given the rain patterns, what plant to grow in a given area so that the margin of error is limited through investment in agriculture, in lieu of first having the background of technology and Artificial Intelligence. Honourable members, when I talk about ICT being cross-cutting, then it comes to the over-the-top Apps  my colleague talked about such as social media. The reason we are seeing some people misusing social media is simple. We have not taught them how to use these social media Apps for their own benefit. There are those that use these social media Apps  to make money genuinely without necessarily hurting others. However, there are those that deliberately use them to break the law. As Parliament, we have come up to strengthen our laws through the amendments that we made. We should have the national digital transformation strategy of teaching our people how to use the world of internet to make money to curb unemployment. For example, the President was talking about business [Mr Kabanda]12639THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024process outsourcing, where someone becomes a dispatcher - THE SPEAKER:  The BPLC (Broadband Power Line Communication).  MR NSEREKO:  Yes, a dispatcher of trucks, for example, in the United States, seated in Kampala. If some of you want to come and see these women; we have five women in Kamwokya that are earning more than Shs 18 million per month, just on a laptop, and these are senior four dropouts. Their role is to sit on a computer and dispatch trucks.THE SPEAKER:  Can you conclude? MR NSEREKO:  What I am saying - if we have a deliberate policy, for example, funding this ministry to go and sit down women in rural areas and teach them how to do business process outsourcing and how to work remotely – we can borrow what the Indians and Pakistanis have done. They employ millions of people, earning money, not from the mainstream economy but from the economy that does not sleep in other countries through using ICT.  You can see it is our third national strategy for getting people out of poverty but you have seen how much we have allocated to the sector. Madam Speaker – for the ministry – development budget. How will you get the people to learn how to use these over-the-top Apps  to benefit them? All they know is that phones come in here with these Apps  already there, and all they know is that they will use it for TikTok , WhatsApp,  among others; maybe to harm others or show discontent. At the end of the day, what we get from our uneducated people on how to use social media is as a result of how we budget. If we budget, teach and show them that a woman can sit in Katakwi or Kapchorwa and make money by being a dispatcher of trucks in Texas, definitely there will be a shift. People will shift from using it for rumour mongering to making money. Secondly, we must develop or empower our developers to make our Apps . As long as we have no power to say that switch off that one or switch on this one, definitely, someone else will control what happens to your Government here. This is because I will create an algorithm that tries to show your leaders – For example, you have heard about the debate of the closure of TikTok  in the US. The reason is very simple. Someone just directs the algorithm to show the negative. When it shows the negative, definitely, that is the perception of the people. The people shall perceive it that way because someone else is running your data and knows all your people. When you log in, you put in your date of birth, location, name and then they start sending you unsolicited messages. For example, if there are many potholes in Kampala and I want to change the perspective of people, if you are a tourist going to Kampala, I will only send you pictures of Kampala with potholes and death.  THE SPEAKER:  Yes, the point has been understood.  MR NSEREKO:  Hon. Kabanda, I hope you have got it. Thank you very much.  (Laughter)THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, just before we get into debate, the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development has something to request the House.  2.36THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Judith Nabakooba):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I requested the Rt Hon. Speaker that you allow our report to be read and discussed, then I go and join my colleagues for the meeting in as far as Namboole land is concerned. That is our request.  THE SPEAKER:  We have no problem with that. Let us dispose of this and then, we will get a summary of your report and you go and join them. We will not leave this Parliament before we get a status update of what is happening in Namboole. Honourable members, are you okay with the request? [Members: “Yes.”]   Let us have Hon. Pauline, Hon. Enos and Commissioner. I will 12640SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSallow only six people to debate. There are those who are just coming in now, and you are saying that there are those who have not said anything. We have been here from 10.00 a.m. There are people who have been here since.2.37MS PAULINE KEMIREMBE (NRM, Woman Representative, Lyantonde):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for their report.  Yesterday, when we were discussing the – THE SPEAKER:  Yes, he has been here. After her, you will speak.  MS KEMIREMBE:  Yesterday, when we were discussing the Ministerial Policy Statement for the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, we learnt that we have less tourists coming to our country. I think one of the reasons we do not have very many tourists is because of the slow internet.  In November, I went to Lake Mburo National Park with a group of people but it took us an hour to have access to the game park because we could not have our e-receipt printed. It almost took me 40 minutes. Then later, I showed them my ID and they let us in.  Therefore, if there is that kind of system and these tourists come and find such a challenge, next time, they will not come to our country. I also want to bring it to the attention of the House that UBC always repeat programmes. For example, on Wednesday night, they had a talk show where they hosted Hon. Todwong and Babu and some other panellists. Surprisingly, yesterday, at around 10 that programme was on again. I do not think that people will keep on watching repeated programmes. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable minister, when you reach my village, it is unfortunate that you do not know where your patient comes from. Even just a phone call, the network is very bad. You cannot even send a message. Yes, Enos -  2.39MR ENOS ASIIMWE (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to first thank the committee that brought this report. It is very good.  My concern is on the integration of e-Government systems. They have clearly captured it as one of the main challenges they have in the sector. I implore Members in this august House to emphasise integration of Government systems. I will give you an example; at least in the sector where we supervise, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is going to spend almost Shs 50 billion on systems. And this money does not even stay in our economy. It goes to Oracle, and all these other international companies. URA is spending almost the same amount, actually Shs 62 billion. What is very annoying is that URA alone is spending Shs 15 billion to monitor telecommunication companies using a system that I believe that NITA-U can manage and run effectively. Honestly, we are losing a lot of money if we do not integrate our systems and we possibly save this money. Even when it stays in our economy, it changes a lot.  The report talks about the cost of Internet coming down because of the backbone infrastructure. Some time back, there was a letter that I actually brought here – Cabinet, wants to transfer the backbone infrastructure to Uganda Telecommunications Corporation Limited (UTCL), moving it from NITA-U to UTCL, yet UTCL is going to be sold. Or they are already in the process of getting an investor.Honestly, why should we get backbone infrastructure where we have invested a lot of money and we are continuing to invest and yet, we are also actually testifying –  (Member time out.)THE SPEAKER:  Conclude.[The Speaker]12641THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024MR ENOS ASIIMWE: It has brought the cost of internet down. Why would you transfer it to a private company and then facilitate the private company to charge us more using government funds?  THE SPEAKER:  Are they transferring NBI?MR ENOS ASIIMWE:  Yes. I was asking the minister to also enlighten us on that. Why would you transfer the NBI to a private company, yet it can be well managed under NITA-U? THE SPEAKER:  That is the security of the country. MR ENOS ASIIMWE:  Very much, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER:  And you are giving it to a person you do not know? Isn’t that the company that is involved in guns? Yes. You do your due diligence and find out more about that company. If it is not involved in – MR ENOS ASIIMWE:  No, the company that is going to buy UTCL, or that was recommended – THE SPEAKER:  I am saying do due diligence on that company and find out what it deals in. See if it does not deal in arms.  MR ENOS ASIIMWE: Madam Speaker, lastly, I support the team on digitalisation of Government agencies. And the Honourable Colleague brought it out very clearly. I believe that is the way we should go, because digitalising everything within the public service, will possibly help us to deal with the issue of corruption. This is because if I do not see somebody when I am applying for a job or I do not interface with a human being when I am bidding for a contract, it could possibly limit money changing hands to win Government contracts. Thank you, so much. THE SPEAKER: As we talk about integrating the systems, we should be mindful of the internal controls. You do not integrate everything to allow everybody - like the Integrated Financial Management Information System (IFMIS) – everybody sees whatever is happening. There should be an aspect of internal controls. Yes, Commissioner - 2.43MS PROSSY AKAMPULIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Rubanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the chairperson and whole team for this wonderful report. First of all, I support the chairperson on the issue of giving money to UBC, being our national television. I also implore the minister to continue engaging the UBC team, to know that things are changing. The other time, we heard the President say that UBC should advertise all the Government programmes. However, when you look at the way they do their things and the way they programme, they are not enticing people to watch and follow. Most people do not want to take business there, not because the television is not equipped but because the programming, and whatever is being done is not really enticing for people to follow.THE SPEAKER:  Then how do you promote the private sector for you to be able to get taxes?MS AKAMPULIRA: Thank you, that is exactly what I was saying. UBC has to know that it has to compete with others. The fact that the Government supports them - I support the Government to add them some money but what is the value of the money that we are adding them? I request the minister to take that up. Secondly and lastly, if we, as Parliament and the Government, work together to know that ICT as a whole is one of the leading sectors that could bring money to our country and at the same time employ our people. Therefore, it is upon us to work together, plan properly and implement whatever we talk 12642SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSabout so that ICT can provide for our children. The other time I met a parent who was telling me how that daughter is - (Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, one minute, please. Everybody wants to talk. 2.46MR BOB OKAE (UPC, Kwania North County, Kwania): Madam Speaker, I thank the committee for the report they have given but my concern is on the issue of the network generally. Unless we improve on the network, many programmes of the Government are delayed. Like in the local governments, payment alone can take two days. There are areas without network completely and it is worse with newly created sub counties. There are other sub counties where you move a distance to look for network. As we give money to ICT, they should improve on the network connections in the country. Otherwise, thank you so much and I appreciate the report. THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Ocan. In my village, when I want to speak, I have to climb an ant hill. 2.47MR PATRICK OCAN (UPC, Apac Municipality, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I appreciate the committee for the good and comprehensive report. My concern, however, is on V ote 126; the National Information Technology Authority – Uganda (NITA-U). The mandate of NITA-U, among others, is to provide technical support to the IT sector and to advise the Government on all matters related to IT development. However, how does NITA-U effectively supervise and provide technical support to the public sector, especially to local governments and then the Ministry of Public Service. Looking at the reports of the Auditor-General, 60 per cent of all the qualified opinion related to payroll management warrants utilisation and implementation of approved budgets, is blamed on systems inconsistency. I support the report, but call upon the ministry to compel NITA-U to scale up their support, supervision and then also technical support to all the sectors. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Payroll management is about “garbage in, garbage out.” If Hon. Ocan is not my staff and I include him in the system as my staff, how do you expect NITA-U to know that he is not a staff member? MR OCAN: Madam Speaker, it is within their mandate to supervise and advise the Government on IT-related matters. NITA-U is still well-placed to provide the support. THE SPEAKER: Ministry of Local Government, when somebody enters Hon. Ocan as an employee of that place, all NITA-U does in the system is - when you say trigger, you trigger and the money goes there. How will I know that this trigger has gone to a wrong person who is not meant to be there? We need to be very careful as we bring in the system. Yes, Hon. Peter Okot and then Hon. Boniface Okot- 2.49MR PETER OKOT (DP, Tochi County, Omoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker, mine is a simple one. It regards planning and knowing which should be first and followed by what. In most of the schools, the Ministry of Education and Sports has supplied computers and those computers have remained redundant because they are not connected to the internet. The intention was good, but they are not being used now. Secondly, there is no electricity – so, which one should go first? I implore the ministry to ensure that such facilities reach these secondary schools.  (Member timed out.)  [Ms Akampulira]12643THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, thank you so much for the computers you have given through UCC to some of our schools. However, like what the Honourable has said, how do you give me a computer in a local village in Kachumbala that has never even seen light? We only use paraffin. How will those computers perform? That is what Members are raising. 2.51MR BONIFACE OKOT (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I salute the committee for a good report. However, unemployment remains one of the gravest challenges of contemporary Uganda and to cure this disease, the Government has identified four critical areas for heavy investment. One of these areas is ICT. This particular report is music to the ears of many unemployed youths but I want to particularly point out two issues. One, is my support for the recommendation that the Government allocates Shs 5.9 billion for the creation of job opportunities while leveraging on Uganda Business Process Outsourcing (BPOs) and innovations and, two, is the establishment of regional BPO innovation centres for ease of access. Madam Speaker, BPO and innovation is the present and the future of global employment opportunities because it will enable many Ugandans to be able to work abroad while in Uganda. The projected demand for BPO service is $1.1 billion, with a workforce of over three million people and this is a huge opportunity for an emerging market like Uganda. In Africa, Uganda is one of the most strategic BPO destinations on a count of three strategic advantages –(Member timed out.) 2.54MS MARGARET ALEPER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kotido):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also add my voice to thank the committee for the detailed report. My concern was and is still on computer literacy in our secondary schools. I support a point by my colleague, Hon. Okot, that the ministry and UCC have supported some schools with computers, yet there are many secondary schools in this country that have not even seen these computers. In Kotido District, we have never heard of and seen any computer, yet in the A-Level curriculum, there are students who do combinations including ICT papers. They really do poorly because they do not have these computers. I would urge UCC and the ministry for ICT to consider rural schools. Many of our districts are already – (Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER: Please, finish what you are saying.MS MARGARET ALEPER: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for adding for me a minute. I was urging the ministry for ICT to consider rural schools because we also need to come to the level at which urban schools are. Taking the point of Hon. Nsereko that there are four women – I do not know whether in Kamwokya or Ntinda – who are making money, if our schools are well equipped with these computers, we will realise a bigger population getting employed and making money in this country. Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you. 2.55MR PETER OKEYOH (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I thank the committee chairman. The report indicates that they should reduce mobile money tax from 0.5 to 0.3 per cent. I agree with that. However, the report goes -THE SPEAKER: Are we on tax Bills now? MR PETER OKEYOH: Madam Speaker, it was in the report and I wanted to encourage that when it comes to tax Bills, then, that is when we can actualise that. The report was pointing 12644SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSit out that in order for it to be harmonised, the levy should be reduced from 0.5 to 0.3 per cent. I think we can consider that when it comes to tax Bills – Secondly, Madam Speaker -THE SPEAKER: What was the reason for putting it at 0.5 per cent? Unfortunately, you were not in the House at that time – because we had to vote by voice, not just a sweeping statement. MR OKEYOH: Exactly, Madam Speaker. It had an impact on a number of our colleagues. Secondly, I want to thank you for donating some of the equipment to UBC and those were equipment that were supposed to help Parliament to start a radio. That was a good gesture but I want to know from UBC: how do we, the people from the islands, access the signals of UBC? It is very important that, under PDM, information is given to rural parishes. How will our people in Hama Parish or Lolwe West Parish access this information, with the poor network and poor signals of UBC? I pray that you look at this, if PDM is to be actualised. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, we –(Members rose_)-  okay, not you; your neighbour. Hon. Rose, you will speak. 2.57MR RAUBEN ARINAITWE (Independent, Isingiro West County, Isingiro):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee chairperson for the good report. My concern is on the replacement of outdated TV and radio broadcasting equipment and software. If we want our UBC to remain afloat, we need to replace these old and outdated equipment. Otherwise, we shall lag behind these other new TV and radio stations. Therefore, I call upon Parliament to provide the 14.4 billion, which they are requesting for.Secondly, I thank the committee chairperson for wanting to provide computers for the Parish Development Model (PDM). The PDM is our flag - THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as Hon. Peter said, we had equipment here at Parliament, which we donated to UBC. It was for starting up a modern radio but that is not part of our mandate, as Parliament. So, we thought it wise to give it to UBC and the minister has never even said “thank you”. ( Laughter ) (Mr Arinaitwe rose_ ) No, you had finished. It was for TV and radio. 2.59MR MARTIN MUZAALE (NRM, Buzaaya County, Kamuli):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I begin by thanking the committee for the work well done. Mine is just an inquiry. We gave money to NITA-U for digitalising the country; it was a loan. We need to hear from the minister about the status of that loan because we are paying a lot of money, yet we are not utilising it. Secondly, Mr Speaker, I would also like the minister to explain the status of our satellite that was launched recently. We just picked information in the corridors that it was closed immediately, less than a year. I thank you. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have students and teachers from Nakalama Secondary School, Kigulu County in Iganga District. They are represented by Hon. Milton Muwuma, Hon. Fred Kyakulaga and Hon. Sauda Kawuma. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, stand and we see you. You are most welcome and thank you very much for coming. They are both on this and the other side. Join me in welcoming them. (Applause ) Thank you. 3.01MS ROSE OBIGAH (NRM, Woman Representative, Terego):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the same vein, I thank the committee for such a wonderful report.[Mr Okeyoh]12645THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024Madam Speaker, a country without communication, a country without ICT is a dead one. I want to allay the fears of colleagues about UBC. Recently, I was on both UBC Radio and UBC TV . It is not the former UBC that we knew. UBC has improved. I have been on NBS and I have also been on NTV . So, definitely, you do a comparison. We just need to make some improvement. I request Parliament to give the money to ICT so that we are able to catch up with the rest of the world.Madam Speaker, for most of us, when we reach our constituencies, we are cut off. Everybody would think I am not around, yet I am in the village –(Member timed out. ) THE SPEAKER:  You have one minute . (Laughter)MS OBIGAH: Thank you so much. It will be very important for Members of Parliament to remain on. At times, we attend Plenary online but if we are cut off, how do we attend Plenary in the village? How will the people of Terego gather and say, “Great, our Woman MP is live from Terego”?We have a challenge of computers in Terego; so, as you are supplying computers to other districts, kindly, remember me because I am from a baby district. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Hon. Rose, you are live now. The people of Terego have seen you but when you were voted in, you were voted to come and attend Plenary. Much as we amended the rules, that can happen only under certain circumstances that may not allow you to be on this Floor. 3.03MS MIDIUS NATUKUNDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for their report. I raise an issue on the PDM Information System, where they are seeking Shs 1.5 billion to upgrade and also make sure that the data is effective and efficient in collecting information on the PDM.They are seeking money to give the parish team computers for that programme. However, as we take the computers, there is no network like you said. During the collection of information, the banks through their agents went to collect information but all the time they would go, there would be no network. People move long distances to come and register but they are being inconvenienced, they have lost time, productivity and everything. Before you think about giving computers to the parish chiefs and all those people, we need network first, both the internet and the telecommunication networks so that we can integrate the system if it has to be upgraded. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. My Mukko . 3.04MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. My issue is related to the disturbance of networks, especially those of us at the borderlines. THE SPEAKER:  You always get network from Congo. MR ONZIMA:  Network from Congo and South Sudan. I am 16 kilometres inside Uganda but when I reach home, I get surprised to see, “Welcome to South Sudan”. I do not know how we can harmonise this. As Hon. Rose had said, it causes us a lot of challenges. When you are at home, you cannot get communication on WhatsApp  or any other internet. I request that there be an improvement in the technology to avoid this kind of interference. Thank you.3.05MR WILLIAM MUSEVENI (Independent, Buwekula South County, Mubende):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker, protect me from Hon. Sarah, who is calling me Chinese. I am not a Chinese. (Laughter)  My interest is in the issue that was raised yesterday, where we found out that our game parks do not have internet or network. It is inconveniencing our tourists. Yesterday, we got evidence that 12646SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSsome people checked out before their time and that means losing revenue to this nation. I urge the Government to plan exhaustively where we are earning. Our problem as a nation is that we lack funds. We are depending on donor funds yet we can make our monies here especially from tourists. We have the avenues; untapped revenues. Why can’t the Government -? (Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable Minister of Information, communication Technology, and National Guidance - 3.07THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY, AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Dr Chris Baryomunsi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker –THE SPEAKER:  You are protected when you are in this House and you have all the immunity. DR BARYOMUNSI:  Thank you. I start by clarifying something that has been issued, I think, from UPDF about our debate on Namboole. Madam Speaker, nobody has criticised the quality of work being done in Namboole. People watching out there could have misconstrued the debate. The debate was about Government providing the remaining resources for the works to be completed so that we are ready for AFCON. I am quoting a story, which –THE SPEAKER:  Nobody has criticised or said the work is shoddy. Our issue is the outstanding money that had to be given to the contractor. Some of us did not know that UPDF was the contractor. DR BARYOMUNSI:  Madam Speaker and the House, I thank you for fully supporting the works at the Namboole Stadium. I wanted to give that clarification that the debate is not about the quality of work but the money, which was remaining to be paid, which Parliament has secured this afternoon. THE SPEAKER:  That is still under ICT, so we wanted the minister to clarify because it is coming from the spokesperson of the army, which I think is a little unfortunate. He has something and then, you respond - Hon. Nathan, you will talk about infrastructure. 3.09MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira):  Madam Speaker, I would like to make a few comments. The first one is on UBC as a strategic broadcaster. We do not have to look at UBC in terms of commercial or profitability. Every country needs a broadcaster to be able to allow Government and other departments to communicate information that other commercial broadcasters may not find valuable.The President has been covered extensively and UBC is the only station that I have seen has the patience to wait for the President to finish. Of course, nowadays, you have seen people have been disappointed. We have seen reports of people becoming tired when the President is making a long speech. This would not happen with a national broadcaster because they have the obligation to give coverage to the President. I support that UBC must be funded and we should not look at the profits coming out of it. Just like the reasons partially Uganda Airlines was established, it was established as a road moving in the air. Just like we build a road to move-  you may not see the direct profit from the road but you can get benefits out of it. I want to raise an issue on how reckless we are with our data as a country. All the private-public partnerships, the joint ventures that capture data from us are in the hands of people whom I can say we cannot trust. That is why data is being sold. For example, you have a call coming from abroad asking you to be part of something that may lead to a breach. This is something that, as a Government, we should try to bring back as a strategic security asset for the country that should not go outside there. Lastly, there is an amount of Shs 23.7 billion recommended for community mobilisation and [Mr Museveni]12647THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024mind-set change under the ICT. I have no doubt that the ministry has the mandate to guide but why is every Government ministry whose Ministerial Policy Statements we have been processing putting the same amount of money yet they have told us they are now moving to the programme approach?If it is the Ministry of Information, Commu -nication Technology, and National Guidance with the competencies to be able to guide the country and change the mind, let us put that money in one agency. I implore the Committee on Budget that when they sit, they should look at this issue.MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO: Thank you, Hon. Odur, for making that observation. Honourable colleagues, that is the exact figure we are talking about. If we rechannelled that money to digital transformation and re-skilling of young people and women, we would curb the issue of unemployment the honourable member was talking about. Let us do purposeful budgeting that is result-oriented.For example, young children on vacation can be retooled in how to manage data, do business process outsourcing, usage of the internet, probably hardware and software management; basics of ICT. Thank you.MR ODUR: Thank you for the valuable information. I will conclude by challenging the regulator. Ugandans have been complaining about data theft by these companies that provide data. You buy 100 MBs and within minutes, it is gone. I think the regulator must be sensitive. I recently saw the Uganda Communications Commission accepting money from one of the providers. It does not augur well that I am your regulator and then somehow, you donate money to me. It raises very serious suspicion and I think the regulator should have some minimum standards, where you do not just accept money from whoever is under you.The other question I want the minister to respond to is how far you have gone with the negotiation with Facebook because the other digital platforms that we have in this country are actually quite expensive. Facebook was an opportunity for young people to have digital shops, offer digital services, etcetera but they have been affected. We now have to go through other systems to be able to – (Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us have Hon. Nathan Byanyima, then the minister.3.14MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga North County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am wondering why all of us are crying about communication networks, yet in the licence for all the network companies like MTN and the rest, they have a duty to provide networks to every subcounty. The UCC has relegated its duty to somebody else.The network companies are supposed to reach out to every subcounty. In their licences, there is a component of rural communication so that each and every part of Uganda has communication. If we continue crying about network –When I go home, I see “Welcome to Tanzania” because I am near Tanzania. The other network in Arua is from South Sudan and Democratic Republic of Congo, and Kenya. Honourable minister, look into that matter so that this country can settle with the networks we have. Thank you.DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable members for the support and issues raised. I start by thanking the chairperson and members of the Committee on ICT and National Guidance for a very good and well-presented report. THE SPEAKER: Before you respond, when you watch UBC, it only communicates in English, Luganda and Kiswahili. Originally, if you remember, you would even hear them speaking Ateso, Lugbara, Jopadhola and Ngakarimojong on Radio Uganda. What is happening? 12648SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSDR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me start with that one. For the television stations, there are three major languages; English, Luganda and Kiswahili. However, for the radio stations, we have regional radios. I think UBC runs a string of 11 radios. Where they are located, they use the local languages. I would like the honourable members to check if there are any languages missing. For instance, if there is a radio in eastern Uganda and maybe, some languages are missing, if we get the feedback, we can then engage with UBC to ensure that the whole country gets covered. There are many issues, which have been raised, but in the interest of time, I will quickly comment on them. Let me start with a general comment. I have thanked the chairperson. I also thank Hon. Nsereko for simplifying the message on ICT. I should maybe appoint him a special advisor to the Minister of ICT. (Laughter)Madam Speaker, our ministry’s mandate is divided into largely two. You recall we used to have a Ministry of ICT as a standalone ministry. It was then merged with the Ministry of Information and National Guidance to create one Ministry of Information and Communications Technology, and National Guidance. When you read through the report, you will see those aspects.  In the National Development Plan III, we fall under two programmes; the Digital Transformation Programme and the Community Mobilisation and Mindset Change. That has created a problem in a way because the Community Mobilisation and Mindset Change sub-programme is headed by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development but we are a member of that programme. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has been allocating resources but giving us zero budget for communication and national guidance. Therefore, I appeal to the House to support the report because the committee has observed that, and that is why they are recommending that we allocate Shs 23.7 billion to support the communication and information dissemination, as well as the national guidance part of the ministry’s mandate.We have a digital transformation roadmap that spells out key pillars. Like Hon. Nsereko said, the future is digital and technology has come. For whatever discipline or area of development you speak of, we must integrate ICT in order for us to be effective and make progress. We do recognise ICT as a priority but we are yet to reach there, in terms of budgetary allocations. Therefore, I would like to thank honourable members for the support that you have shown.Before I go into the specifics that I wanted to delve into, we have also realised the challenge in budgeting, which has been observed. I raised this in the Cabinet, which pronounced itself on this. Each ministry is budgeting for ICT but we end up getting a small budget. You find that every ministry has a big component of ICT. The Cabinet has directed that we consolidate this budget under one ministry. (Applause)I have written to the Prime Minister to cause discussions between us and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and we hope to engage the Budget Committee before the completion of the process. The challenge with this is that a ministry budgets and wants to develop or upgrade its system. Instead of engaging NITA-U, which has the expertise, they hire consultants expensively, yet they sometimes do poor work. Yet, if this was consolidated and the ministry, with its agencies, is mandated to oversee ICT services, we would save money but also be able to facilitate digital transformation much better than the way we are doing it. We call for your support so that we streamline budgeting and planning. That speaks to some of the questions, which were raised about NITA-U. How does NITA-U support the Ministries, Departments and Agencies? Sometimes, ministries budget on their own, sidestep NITA-U and hire private consultants, yet we have resident capacity within the 12649THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024ministry and NITA-U. So, we are trying to streamline all this.Let me go to the specific issues, which were raised, Madam Speaker. I will start with your issue on the Dakabela land of 230 acres. This is land in the eastern part of Uganda in Teso. There are investors who have made a request to establish a university. Yes, this is the information I found in the ministry. The Government had expressed positivity towards that but it appears they kept changing the goalposts in terms of what they want to do. I asked the UBC when this matter came to me to give me an update, but land has not been given out to anybody; that is the Dakabela land. THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can we have a look at that land title? I have a very good memory of that land because I looked at it when I was on the Committee on Public Accounts (Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises) (COSASE). Can we have that land title? DR BARYOMUNSI: Much obliged.  I will get all the information and also provide the land title. However, I have been assured by UBC that the land is still intact; it has not been given out. THE SPEAKER: Let us have the land title and then, we can start from there. DR BARYOMUNSI: Regarding the UBC land in Bugolobi; has UBC been able to fence it? The last time I visited it, it was not yet fenced. THE SPEAKER: The last time I received information from UBC was that they were asking to sell it off. DR BARYOMUNSI: No, there has been an instruction - THE SPEAKER: I was very happy that the President responded and said that, that land should not be sold. MR OKIROR: Madam Speaker, I would like to get a simple clarification from the minister. You have asked for the land title but with my humble knowledge as a legal practitioner is that I can give you a hard copy of the land title but what is in the page at the ministry may have different entries. I request that whereas you get the land title, it should come with a recent search certificate to that effect. Thank you. (Applause) THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we are doing all this to help your ministry. DR BARYOMUNSI: Yes, we have a mandate to protect Government land wherever it is and I thank you for that effort to protect this land. So, we shall provide the information that is available. In the same vein, we cannot allow UBC to sell Bugolobi land or any land anywhere - even the President has given that directive. However, they have submitted to me a plan to develop that area. We are yet to look at it and see whether - THE SPEAKER: Do they have the money to develop it? DR BARYOMUNSI: They just submitted the plan. THE SPEAKER: If they do not even have the money to pay staff. DR BARYOMUNSI: We have not yet approved it. We are looking at the plan they have to develop like a satellite city because they also believe that it should not just remain idle land but we should add value; we cannot allow them to sell that land.Thank you, Hon. Nsereko. You raised very good points about the importance of ICT. Hon. David Kabanda asked whether there is technology to manage social media. The answer is yes. We have been studying this matter and recently, we sent a team of technical officers to benchmark. 12650SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSThey have written a report, which we are studying, and the assurance I want to give the House is that we are going to install technology that will help us filter social media because there is a lot of abuse. Social media is a platform we can use to communicate. Like all of us know, there is a lot of abuse and we are going to regulate the use of social media with a view of filtering the wrong, unnecessary and immoral messages, which come through it. Let me also say that through the UCC, we have technology that can trace the originators of messages. When you post something and it is forwarded, we can trace who originated it. We have been tracing most of the negative postings and then, they go into the diaspora. It is mainly Ugandans who live in the diaspora and it becomes difficult to apprehend them. We are trying to get all the technologies to help us regulate and manage social media but also in addition, to educate Ugandans on how they can positively use these digital platforms. With the permission of the Speaker and in the interest of time -  (Mr Nsereko rose_) THE SPEAKER: We are running out of time. We want the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to go. 3.28MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Indepen -dent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Madam Speaker, there is something critical on what he is saying and maybe, it would be beneficial to the whole country and honourable Members of Parliament. Hon. Odur talked about data. These social media applications are real-time intelligence machines. Do you understand what I am saying? The moment you turn on an application, for example, they will know your location. You will use your face in certain applications either for unlocking your phones or something. They will pick your real physical data and now, all countries are becoming curious on what they use this data for.For example, if that data is not well secured, remember you use some payment gateways by using either your fingerprint or your face as a gateway. If one of their networks or one of their servers is compromised, then even your financial data can be compromised. We are only appealing to you as a ministry and part of the - because the regulators are also under you. Why don’t we move fast forward by getting all these people who operate social media applications that can be accessed on our territory to have data centres in our country so that we can monitor what they use for our data? Remember, the new gold is our data. Your voice, your picture and your behavioural pattern is what they use to make a lot of profit. We only implore you, honourable minister. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, can you finalise? DR BARYOMUNSI: Hon. Nsereko, I did not want to go into details but what I said is that we are bringing technology, especially from the Middle East, which many countries are using to manage and it has all those details. Let me quickly move towards the end. What I want to promise about network is that I am going to write to all the honourable Members of Parliament next week and you should submit to us the areas in your constituencies that have poor or no network. (Applause) There are largely two ways through which the network is handled. The telecommunications network is largely private sector led. We have two companies; one is called ATC and the other is Ubuntu, whose work and their business is to put masts and towers all over the country. Like Hon. Byanyima said that when we give them licences in accordance with the National Broadband Policy, they are required to cover 90 per cent of the country. The UCC Act mandates UCC to levy two per cent of the licence fees and retain 1 per cent. That one per cent is now to cover the 10 per cent and they also have a mandate and resources [Dr Baryomunsi]12651THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024to put masts, for example, this financial year, they will put about 63 masts in the country. I will write to you, honourable members, to give me those areas, then we sit with these private telecom companies together with the UCC and map out the country and see how our areas can be supported. In addition, we passed a loan here called the Uganda Digital Acceleration Project (UDAP), financed by the World Bank, which we are asking about. The implementation is now beginning and we have a provision of constructing about 180 masts. Therefore, when we engage the NITA-U, UCC and those private actors, once we have the information on where the gaps are, including the Speaker’s area, we should be able to address that challenge, including the one of Hon. Kwizera, who can only call the Speaker when he is on a tree. I pledge to work on that so that we can reduce that burden. There was an issue with the National Backbone Infrastructure (NBI), which I needed to clarify whether it is being moved from NITA-U to a private company. I know that there is a challenge of time but briefly, we all know that UTL has been a company that I can describe that was on oxygen and surviving on steroids. There has been a process to resuscitate that company. We have since formed a new company called UTCL with the Government having holding shares of 60 per cent, in the Ministry of Finance and 40 per cent in the Ministry of ICT. We have been sourcing for an investor to partner with to revamp and revitalise this company. The Government has identified a company called Rowad  Middle East Technical Service, a Middle East-based company. We had negotiations with the company on the 22nd December, 2023. You must have watched on television - we signed an agreement and we have given it 60 per cent shareholding and Government shall have 40 per cent shareholding. Among the areas agreed upon was that we are going to give them the management and commercialisation of the NBI, not the ownership. Currently, the arrangement is that the NBI is owned by the Government through NITA-U but contracted a private company called Soliton Telmec, which was in the report, to manage the NBI. So, what is proposed is a change from Soliton to UTCL but the ownership remains with NITA-U.  The new company will do the management and commercialisation we do not expect an increase in the cost of the network or internet. It is a change of management from one private company called Soliton to a company where the Government has a share-holding. Maybe, when we have some more time to discuss this in detail. THE SPEAKER: Honourable, I think you need to have a thorough discussion on that issue because it is not a good one. Let us not discuss it here. Learn to protect the image of your country. Do not walk naked before everybody. Honourable minister, the telecom companies contribute 2 per cent to UCC, not so? Is it possible for them to contribute 3 per cent?DR BARYOMUNSI:  Yes. If we change the law, it is in accordance with the Communications Act of 2013. THE SPEAKER:  No, it starts with you. If you say, “We are –”DR BARYOMUNSI: Yes, even five per cent because we get the two per cent and then one per cent goes to the Consolidated Fund, one percent-THE SPEAKER:  And that one per cent would translate to about Shs 180 billion. DR BARYOMUNSI:  The goodwill from us ministers in ICT is in total, 100 per cent. 12652SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSTHE SPEAKER:  Okay, bring the suggestion to us. Thank you. DR BARYOMUNSI:  No problem. Further clarification on the UTL. The UTL was –THE SPEAKER:  Let us discuss UTL later. DR BARYOMUNSI:  We did explain to the committee very extensively. Through UCC, we have been supporting a number of schools with computers but I would like to clarify that where UCC takes computers and there is no electricity, they are supposed to give solar equipment and install a solar system because it does not make any meaning to put computers when you have no power - then it is useless. You should monitor and make sure that where computers are brought and there is no power, they must install a solar system for the computers to work. What I agree with is that the fibre, the national backbone infrastructure, is not yet extended to all districts in the country and you recall that we passed a loan here funded by the China Exim Bank to the tune of $150 million. That loan is to extend the NBI to the rest of the country because now, it covers half of the country and we should be coming to your districts and constituencies with the fibre and also do last-mile connections, connecting district headquarters, schools, health facilities and the other installations. Most of the other comments were points of advice, which we have taken note of and the expressions of support like on BPO creating employment for the young people and the need to support ICT. I have requested my technical team in the ministry and the agencies to work out what is required to have all the schools in Uganda have computers and internet. Like you are raising a challenge of having some schools with computers but our learners have access to computers, while others do not and yet, they sit the same exams. It brings a bit of imbalance. I have requested our technical people to compute for us how much it takes to get enough computers and we cover all the schools, maybe start with secondary schools and also go down to primary schools and then we can plan-MR OGUZU:  Honourable minister, thank you for allowing clarification. I have observed that you are going to implement regional BPOs and I have also known that there is a provision for science parks in various regions. How are you working together with the Ministry of Science and Technology to ensure that we leverage those resources for optimised results. Secondly, you hinted on the loans we borrowed, which should extend the fibre and help to set up some data centres. I have also seen here a budget of about Shs 16 billion for data centres. Is that not a duplication of what is already catered for by the budget? Thirdly, you have-THE SPEAKER:  Which budget? MR OGUZU:  What was catered for in the loans because they are requesting for Shs 16 billion for a data centre and yet, we planned to implement data centres under that loan. I want to know the difference between-THE SPEAKER: We have given these people so many loans, be specific, which loan? MR OGUZU:  Madam Speaker, there was a loan for a fibre backbone that would enable us to construct some data centres too and so is the loan that we got from the World Bank, which is to build masts and also have some data centres and IT services delivered along, through this budget, are already catered for adequately by the loan. I want clarity from the minister so that we do not duplicate. It is about rationalisation of resources. Lastly, we are talking about Shs 2.2 billion for e-Government applications and, also, integration of e-Government services. The 12653THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024report does not say which applications we are going to develop, yet Rule 146 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament requires that we should be able to have detailed procurement plans, which highlight –THE SPEAKER:  We have very many processes or things that we need to integrate; for instance, procurement or the IFMIS that we are talking of. Honourable Minister for Finance, which are those processes that we need to integrate – that if you are dealing with the procurement, you do not need to carry papers from here up to PPDA? If you are dealing with IFMIS - the payment system, the procurement system and all those. MR OGUZU:  Madam Speaker, there are already systems. We know we have the e-procurement system and IFMIS, which are in place. So, it is very important for us to know precisely what those resources will achieve in terms of the work plan. The rules dictate how the work plans should look like. Madam Speaker, if we have to focus on that rule, we will also realise that we should have got even the recruitment plans for the ministry or for the various V otes to appreciate how they are going to operationalise the Data Protection Act. We would further go into examining whether those structures have been approved by Public Service for us to commit resources. Furthermore, we would have needed clarification – (Interjections)MR OGUZU:  To me, the key issue is that there is deviation from what has been provided in the law. It would be good for you to guide on whether we would be proceeding well.THE SPEAKER:  I hope we understand what we are discussing. MS NALUYIMA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the honourable minister for giving way over this clarification. I was very much aroused when you mentioned the matter of the data yet to be collected, concerning schools. I need some clarification. I am not only experienced in matters of local governments but it is also what I am assigned, as I handle local government matters in this country and here at Parliament.Some of the key issues that local governments are facing is the system itself. Apart from secondary schools and tertiary institutions, you are very much aware that primary schools are entirely under local governments. When you even look at the infrastructure that the very local governments are supposed to use as far as computerisation is concerned, what is it going to be envisaged on to ensure –THE SPEAKER:  I thought you were part of that committee. MS NALUYIMA:  ICT? No, I am not. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  There is a point of order.MR ATWIJUKIRE:  Madam Speaker, like the Member stated that she has been aroused, is it in order for Hon. Dr Baryomunsi, the minister for ICT, to utter statements that arouse a Member of Parliament? (Laughter)THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please, conclude. Continue arousing Members. (Laughter)DR BARYOMUNSI : Thank you, Madam Speaker. My sister who is aroused, at the risk of arousing you, again –(Laughter)-  what I said is that I have asked my technical people, first of all, to assess how many schools we have been able to reach out to, how many are remaining and, if we were to give computers to each remaining school, how many computers are we talking about and how much does it cost? Then, we can start planning and budgeting instead of supporting in piecemeal and it takes us 20 years to reach all the schools. Then, to my brother, most of the issues you are raising - the procurement plan and the human resource plan – are in the Ministerial Policy Statement. The committee cannot bring out all the details in the statement here. They release 12654SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSthe issues, which should constitute the report. I invite you –THE SPEAKER:  Upload that report. Members should look at it as they go for harmonisation and reconciliation. DR BARYOMUNSI:  The other comment I want to make in response to his point of clarification is that we give you a budget of this much and also indicate the source of funding. Part of the funding – I think this budget will be 55 per cent domestic resources. We also indicate that there are external sources; grants and so forth.Therefore, for the loans, which we pass here, we also budget for them. When you see that we want to do a data centre, if you go into the details, you will find it is related to the loan that we passed. What we pass here in the Budget is not only for the domestic resources. Even those loans are captured. So, there is no duplication. Lastly, on what you raised, we discuss with the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation and the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives because there are industrial and science parks, which are being constructed. Also from our side, there are the Information Technology/Business Processing Outsourcing (IT/BPO) parks. In some situations, we can just use one space – we put an industrial park and also an IT park in between. We are harmonised and we connect so that there is no duplication and wastage of resources. I would like to thank you for supporting UBC. Let us all support it as a national broadcaster and provide resources. Like Hon. Odur said, many national broadcasters, including BBC, are funded by the governments. You do not allow them to compete with the private sector. Yes, they can do some competition but governments invest resources because, sometimes, they communicate what the private sector may not communicate because they do not attract any commercial value as such. I think the rest of the issues, Madam Speaker, were comments for us to take as a ministry. THE SPEAKER:  Facebook was not raised. It is not his role.DR BARYOMUNSI:  Somebody raised it. I think it was Hon. Odur. Facebook was closed at the height of the electoral tensions last term. Like I have been updating Parliament, through UCC, we have been negotiating, as the Government, with Facebook on the terms. I think the discussions are getting to a conclusion. So, any time, we should be able to allow them to operate again. The progress is very promising, in terms of the negotiations. We have taken note of the other issue. For example, the issue of the network on the border points, through UCC, it is being worked out so that if you are on the border with DRC or Tanzania – the people who are specialists in technology know how to separate the networks. THE SPEAKER:  You see, you closed Facebook, just like America is closing TikTok . You must be sensitive to your country. DR BARYOMUSI:  Absolutely. The point we were making, as the Government, is that all these platforms are here but they should play by the rules of the country. They are here at our invitation. They should not come here and overrule us and override the laws and regulations in the country. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We have taken note of the other comments and through subsequent discussions, we shall be clarifying a number of issues to do with the sector. Thank you for your overwhelming support to the sector.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Chairperson, do you have something to say after the minister? MR TONNY AYOO:  Yes, Madam Speaker. You had asked about Dakabela land. We visited that property and the land but up to now, UBC is not giving very clear information. So, I think as the committee, we shall need to look deeply into the land title because they said - THE SPEAKER:  The minister said that he is going to bring the land title. [Dr Baryomunsi]12655THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024MR TONNY AYOO:  As advised by Hon. Okiror, we will need to look into the details because they told us that the President had allocated it to a university that gave out 91 hectares to Teso University and there is contestation between Teso University and UBC over the 91 hectares of that land. Also, there are private people who have encroached on the land. Those are the facts as of now. For Bugolobi land, we visited and moved around. We only have not gone to check what is in the title and the details of the search but we found the land -THE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, we need the land title for Dakabela. Please, COSASE-  Hon. Allan, can you take it up as a committee and investigate Dakabela land. MR TONNY AYOO:  Madam Speaker, I want to implore Members that as presented by Hon. Obigah, the UBC of today is much better and improved and we need to continue supporting it as the country’s mouthpiece. There is a subsidiary company, the Vision Group, which is also under the Ministry of Information, Communications Technology and National Guidance and they provide television channels like Wan Luo TV that gives news and programmes in Luo, which is listened to by people from Lango, Acholi and Kumam.There is also TV West for Western Uganda. So, it is upon the ministry to work with the Vision Group and Bukedde  so that we can connect the two; UBC and the Vision Group. ( Members rose_)THE SPEAKER:  Yes, that is exactly what I was saying. Do you want to talk after the minister? (Laughter) Your minister has answered almost everything. Minister, I want my land title. Thank you so much, honourable members. I now put the question that the report of the Committee of Information, Communications Technology and National Guidance on the Ministerial Policy Statement and the Budget Statements for Financial Year 2024/2025 be adopted by this House. (Question put and agreed.)Report adopted.THE SPEAKER:  Chairperson and your committee, thank you for the report. Honourable minister, fulfil all that you have promised. Let us now go to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. We have to let go of Hon. Nabakooba to join the other team that is working on Namboole. That is why we want her to defend her ministerial statement before she leaves. (III) THE COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTUREMR MUZAALE:  Procedure, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER:  Come and sit here, Hon. Kimosho. MR MUZAALE: Madam Speaker, I have watched you in that seat since morning; you have not moved an inch. THE SPEAKER: I am going; that is not your concern . (Laughter)  Can I have infrastructure? MR MUZAALE:  As a Nnalongo, I am very -THE SPEAKER: My doctor has not yet complained. 3.56THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Dan Atwijukire): Thank you, Madam Speaker . THE SPEAKER:  Please, give us a summary so that we can take a break and then have the Committee on Presidential Affairs and the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. We will finish all tonight. MR ATWIJUKIRE:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is the report of the Committee on 12656SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSPhysical Infrastructure on the Budget Estimates and Ministerial Policy Statements for the Ministry of Works and Transport and Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development for the Financial Year 2024/2025.Madam Speaker, I want to give just a few highlights on this specific budget and estimates that the area we cover, which of course, includes the national roads under UNRA have a debt of Shs 1 trillion and it attracts Shs 305 million on a daily. The Ministry of Works and Transport and the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development has arrears of Shs 215 billion also attracting interest. In a year, UNRA alone, if that debt is not settled, will incur another cost of 18 per cent, which is around Shs 9.4 billion. Since I am going to rush through the report, I want Parliament to know the status.Important to note also is that in this sector, the budget has been reducing. For example, in the last five years, for UNRA alone, Government of Uganda reduced it from Shs 1.7 trillion to Shs 900 billion. Everywhere it keeps reducing, and that explains the effect on the entire network. Page 5 is the introduction. I will go straight to the V otes that we oversee as a committee and these are – (i) V ote 016 : Ministry of Works and Transport;(ii) V ote 113: Uganda National Roads Authority;(iii) V ote 118: Uganda Road Fund;(iv) V ote 609: Local Governments;(v) V ote 012: Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban DevelopmentI will now go straight to the recommendations on page 20. There are challenges there and outputs, but because of time, I will go to the observations and recommendations. V ote 012: The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. The committee was informed that the Parliamentary Commission intends to demolish Development House, which currently houses the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and construct new offices for Members and staff of Parliament hence, the need for the ministry to relocate its new home.Further, the committee was informed that the ministry was exploring options of signing a Memorandum of Understanding with National Housing and Construction Company Limited (NHCCL) to construct the ministry’s permanent home at Lubowa, which will go a long way in saving Government resources that would have been spent on rent. The NHCCL being a better option than a private developer where pressures of payment can be overwhelming.Although last year, the ministry had indicated that it required Shs 24 billion to cater for rent requirements in the Financial Year 2023/2024 and Shs 102.75 billion in the Financial Year 2023/2024 towards the construction of permanent offices and consequently, Parliament recommended that the resources be provided. However, this was not done due to the resource constraints in the ministry ceiling as well as the guidance in the second Budget Call Circular. The committee noted that the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury (PS/ST) in the second Budget Call Circular informed all the accounting officers that the Government’s discretionary resources had reduced by Shs 3.46 trillion in the Financial Year 2024/2025 when compared to Financial Year 2023/2024.  Consequently, fixed costs would have priority as they finalise their budgets and that due to the need to refocus resources on priorities, no new construction of ministry headquarters or office buildings shall commence in Financial Year 2024/2025, among others.While appearing before the committee to present their budget for Financial Year 2024/2025, the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development informed the [Mr Atwijukire]12657THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024committee that they were against renting due to the current budget constraints and all they requested is Government to provide funding for them to commence construction of a new home, so that they save the country billions of money in rental expenses and can relocate all the sensitive information and infrastructure under their docket at once.The committee notes with concern the need for the ministry to relocate to pave way for the Parliamentary Commission to construct offices of Parliament and recommends that Shs 24 billion be allocated to cater for rent and Shs 102 billion be provided in the short to medium term to the ministry to cater for the construction of a permanent home.2. Construction of low-cost housing Honourable colleagues, you can read through that and I will go straight to page 30. The committee was informed of the poor absorption – Madam Speaker, I would like to summarise but to bring it out clearly, let me go to page 28: Reaffirmation of the international bordersThe lack of reaffirmation of Uganda’s international borders with its neighbours is a security threat as it fuels tensions and threatens harmonious relationships among the border communities. The unclear boundaries are a greater threat to the land registration process and service delivery due to boundary conflicts.Establishment of clear boundaries is aimed at reducing boundary conflicts and survey errors thus increasing efficiency in land registration and harmonise existence of border communities and facilitating inter-border infrastructure development. The committee observed that Uganda’s borders are porous and hence easily accessible by citizens from neighbouring countries who encroach on and occupy land in Uganda.The committee further observed that, whereas the neighbours are always ready to reaffirm the borders, the contrary is true for Uganda. The committee was informed that the ministry requires Shs 51.726 billion in the Financial Year 2024/2025 towards re-affirmation of the international borders and only Shs 0.592 billion (1 per cent) has been allocated, leaving a funding gap of Shs 51.134 billion.The committee, therefore, recommends that the Government prioritises funding towards re-affirmation of borders with at least one international border and two district borders every financial year starting in the Financial Year 2024/2025.Poor performance of externally funded projects Honourable colleagues, we give you the table down, which brings out the performance levels. The committee recommends that responsible staff of the ministry have their capacity built - because there is some poor performance, especially at the ministry. We are making these recommendations against that background. The committee recommends that the responsible staff of the ministry have their capacity built in procurement planning to minimise delays in procurement and increase the absorption of funds in subsequent development projects. The committee further recommends that the ministry should always keep a record of the performance of the contractors to ensure the best performing contractors are considered for subsequent projects.Increased land conflicts and disputes The committee was informed that one of the major challenges faced by the ministry and the Uganda Land Commission (ULC) is increased illegal land evictions, conflicts and disputes. The committee noted that the number of mediations on land disputes conducted by the ministry increased from 141 in Financial Year 202I/2022 to a target of 200 in Financial Year 2023/2024 and by half year only 110 had been mediated. In the Financial Year 2024/2025, the ministry is still targeting to mediate 200 land disputes.12658SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSThe committee was informed that the reinstatement of District Land Tribunals will go a long way in addressing the increasing land conflicts and disputes. The committee, therefore, recommends that the Government considers reinstatement of District Land Tribunals to handle increasing land conflicts and disputes.V ote 156: Uganda Land Commission The committee observed that the Land Fund is created by Section 41(1) of the Land Act, Cap 227 with the mandate to: give loans to tenants by occupancy to enable them to acquire registrable interest under Article 237(9)(b) of the Constitution; by the Government to purchase or acquire registrable interests in land in accordance with the Constitution; and to resettle persons who have been rendered landless by Government actions, natural disaster or any other cause. Over the years, the funds appropriated by Parliament to ULC for Land Fund activities have been for the acquisition of land largely to address the absentee landlords to enable the bona fide occupants to secure their tenure on such land, implying that ULC has only been able to execute only one aspect of its mandate as stipulated in Section 4l of the Land Act. It goes down, but this is what the committee observed and recommended.The committee recommends that ULC prioritises the formulation of land acquisition and compensation guidelines to guide the acquisition of land from absentee landlords before it is given more funding for this activity. In addition, the Government through ULC prioritises the establishment of a land bank facility, which will enable the Fund to meet its funding requirements in the medium to long term since it is currently experiencing resource constraints. The committee, therefore, recommends that Shs 14.96 billion for land acquisition be allocated to the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to address a funding gap in the maintenance of the Land Information System - this is a system for titles - and Shs 6.54 billion and the balance of Shs 8.41 billion be allocated as follows; Shs 4 billion towards strengthening the operations of the office of the Chief Government Valuer and Shs 4.418 billion towards the wage shortfalls and operations of Ministerial Zonal Offices (MZOs).Two – MR EKANYA:  Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance. You issued a directive and you sent Hon. Peter Ogwang - he has just sent me a message that he needs to be with other ministers to resolve the other matter. It is now 4 O’clock and they are supposed to report. How do we proceed, Madam Speaker? THE SPEAKER:  I have told the committee chairperson to summarise and we release – as Parliament, we shall be counted if we resolve the matter of Namboole today. (Applause)  We were given a deadline of 2.00 p.m. to confirm whether the money is there and whether that place is cleared. So, just summarise your document and we send off honourable. MR ATWIJUKIRE:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was on page 32, on the need for an updated Government land inventory. I will go to the recommendation because we realised that the Government does not know its land. The committee recommends and urges the Office of the Prime Minister and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to ensure that various MDAs prioritise survey and titling of their land in order to protect it from encroachment and future land compensation expenses. The following are critical funding gaps. It is there, you can go through it. V ote 113: Uganda National Roads Authority, you can go through it. Major achievements, page 41, budget execution challenges, page 42, half-year budget performance for the Financial Year 2023/2024 is on page 44, major achievements, page 45. I will read our [Mr Atwijukire]12659THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024recommendations at the end. Madam Speaker , I move to page 50.  THE SPEAKER:  Yes. MR ENOS ASIIMWE:  Madam Speaker, considering the need to allow the minister to go, now that we are done with land and housing, why don’t we debate and allow the minister to respond and then Works comes thereafter? THE SPEAKER:  It is the same thing. MR ENOS ASIIMWE:  The remaining report is talking about Ministry of Works and Transport and the minister is here. So, we can allow the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to finalise her part and then – THE SPEAKER:  It is one report.MR ATWIJUKIRE:  Thank you. Madam Speaker, what I have suffered from now is that these gentlemen want to care a lot about Hon. Nabakooba So, they have harassed me but I forgive all of them. (Laughter)On page 50, I give observations and recommendations on V ote 016 – Ministry of Works and Transport. This is very critical, honourable colleagues –  THE SPEAKER:  First listen to what they are saying. Hon. Enos, I understand your problem because you want to get the status of Namboole, being somebody who loves Uganda very much. MR ATWIJUKIRE:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. V ote 016: Ministry of Works and Transport 1.  District, Urban and Community Access Roads (DUCAR)The committee observed that the proposed budget for DUCAR sub programme is projected to decline from Shs 167.5 billion (by Shs 25.2 billion) to Shs 142.3 billion in the Financial Year 2024/2025, mostly due to the decline in allocation to the rehabilitation of district roads project, which is projected to decline by Shs 18.3 billion. The committee notes that the budgetary provision maintains the National Budget Framework Paper (NBFP) position, even after Parliament’s recommendation that the DUCAR budget be restated to its level in the Financial Year 2023/2024.The committee is concerned that many DUCAR roads have not been completed in addition to the work backlog, where planned district road works remain in pipeline due to inadequate funding. The situation is further worsened by the road damages and rains and floods experienced in the second half of the FY 2023/2024, even with such occurrences, districts continue to receive inadequate funds from the Uganda Road Fund for maintenance of roads. The committee recommends that Government reinstate the DUCAR budget of Shs 167.5 billion. 2.  Road Transport Safety.  You can go through, it is clear. The committee recommends that the Government prioritises funding towards its obligations in relation to road transport safety.This is one area that we have talked about many times, but it still stands as an unfunded priority. 3.  Road equipment for the 16 new districts, 10 new cities and urban councilsThe committee was informed that the ministry has concluded the process of procuring 16 commercial graders and 16 wheel loaders for the 16 new districts. The committee observed that whereas the 16 districts will be receiving graders and wheel loaders, it is vital that they get a complete set of road equipment to facilitate them and have good road networks within their jurisdiction. The committee further noted the need for the new cities and municipal councils to have 12660SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTStheir own road equipment, given that sharing equipment with other local governments is normally not practical, given the long waiting periods they have to endure as owners of the equipment are utilising them since funds are released at the same time. This has led to delays in road works, especially maintenance, leaving their roads in poor condition. The committee recommends that:a. Shs 30 billion be provided as balance to enable purchase of missing equipment in the road units for the 16 new districts. b. Shs 11 billion be provided for the purchase of five bituminous units for the urban councils. c. Shs 54 billion be provided for the procurement of road construction units for 10 new districts.Regional mechanical workshops, honourable colleagues, you will read that; these are white elephants, and we made these recommendations. The committee recommends that:a. The Government avails Shs 45 billion annually for routine and corrective maintenance of road equipment to enable them live out their planned lifespan, while also increasing availability of equipment to maintain DUCAR networks; b. The Government rehabilitates all mechanical workshops with an aim of improving their capacity to deal with increased equipment needs as well as cater for the advancement in technology being used in the manufacture of the road equipment; c. The Government considers establishing mechanical workshops in a phased manner at sub-regional level to improve the level of equipment availability. Madam Speaker, the current mechanical workshops are actually parking yards. They do not meet the standards. Page 54 talks about inland water transport safety. You can read that. The committee recommends that Shs 2 billion be availed to cater for facilitation of programmes of public water transport safety awareness as an immediate intervention. 6. Slow pace of construction of the National Building Research CentreMadam Speaker, this is a very critical area because as you can imagine, buildings are mushrooming and collapsing everywhere in our country. This intervention of a building research centre is very critical and we recommend as follows;The committee recommends that Shs 1.9 billion be allocated from the UNRA for consultancy services. I would like to put a disclaimer on this. The budget was so tight that we had nowhere even to reallocate. We had to look for Shs 1.9 billion to be reallocated from UNRA budget for consultancy services, specifically the consultancy modularisation assessment plan under budget output: 000013 HIV/AIDS mainstreaming towards support of completion of the National Building Research Centre. Our logic was that UNRA staff have insurance, and for those that do not have insurance, most of the external source projects have the component of HIV/AIDS. That is what informed our decision to reallocate that money to the research centre. Arrears to contractors This is very important but there is no time. However, I highlighted about it. UNRA alone has a debt of Shillings one trillion, accruing an interest of Shs 305 million daily.  The committee recommends that UNRA prioritises its budget for the Financial Year 2024/2025 towards the clearance of arrears with existing contractors as the first call on their resources before entering into any new contracts.  Retrenchment costsThe committee observed that Project 1616 – retooling of Uganda National Road Authority - had increased by Shs 207 billion, from Shs [Mr Atwijukire]12661THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 20247.029 billion in the Financial Year 2023/2024 to Shs 216.7 billion proposed for the Financial Year 2024/2025. This increment is largely on account of the Shs 200 billion to cater for payment of terminal benefits. They had indicated that there is money for terminal benefits for UNRA staff on the assumption that rationalisation had taken effect. Yet by the rules of this Parliament, we are not supposed to debate or legislate in anticipation. So, we reallocated the Shs 200 billion. The committee recommends that this amount of Shs 200 billion be allocated towards the settlement of UNRA’s outstanding debt obligations. Decline Budget Land AcquisitionThe committee recommends that the Government prioritises land acquisition for projects in the short and medium terms as compared to medium and long term, to reduce the tax burden in the long run through land acquisition at lower prices in the short to medium term.  Additional funding to the Uganda Road FundThe committee, therefore, recommends that an additional Shs 200 billion be allocated to the Uganda Road Fund in the Financial Year 2024/2025. This is Shs 1 billion per district. Originally, it had gone to the Ministry of Local Government but we are saying, that for Members of Parliament to be fully involved, the Road Fund empowers them better than any other law to get involved in this. (Applause)  That is our proposal.  THE SPEAKER:  Chairperson, you conclude, and then the Government Chief Whip will give a position on that the Shs 1 billion. MR ATWIJUKIRE:  The other very fundamental recommendation on Uganda Road Fund on page 59 is that for us to realise the intended purpose of Uganda Road Fund, we must move it to the second generation.  And therefore, the committee recommends and urges the Government to fully operationalise the Uganda Road Fund to enable it to operate with the resources drawn from the second-generation fund as resolved by Parliament. (Applause)  THE SPEAKER:  Do you want a question to be put?  MR ATWIJUKIRE:  Madam Speaker, when you go on, you will see how we are proposing to reallocate Shs 176 billion, which was proposed under local government for maintenance of roads to the Uganda Road Fund. Passenger train servicesThe committee observed that Uganda Railways Corporation currently offers passenger services on only one route, Namanve-Kampala, and operates only twice a day. The committee notes that the alternative mode of transport has the potential to offer traffic decongestion along Kampala-Jinja Road if it is operated more trips to optimise and utilise the railway line. The committee recommends as follows:a.  Uganda Railways Corporation increases the number of trips on the Namanve-Kampala route, given the potential it has to reduce on the motor traffic along the same route;b. Considers increasing the number of passenger wagons to increase and accommodate more numbers on each route; andc. Considers market segmentation for their clients and acquires exhaustive wagons to attract more passengers to utilise their rail mode of transport.  In conclusion, the committee adequately considered the Ministerial Policy Statement of the Integrated Transport Infrastructure and Service Programme (ITIS) and the Sustainable Urbanisation and Housing (SUH) Programme and recommends that the report 12662SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSof the Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the Budget Estimates for the Financial Year 2024/2025 be adopted with the figures as stipulated down on page 61.  Madam Speaker, with your guidance, should I go through the figures? THE SPEAKER:  We shall go through the figures when we are supplying. MR ATWIJUKIRE:  I beg to submit and table the report with all its attachments. Thank you, very much.  THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Can we have Hon. Sekyanzi, Hon. Goreth, Hon Eric, Hon. Kasolo - if you have spoken, kindly sit down. 4.28MR BENARD SEKYANZI (NRM, Budyebo County, Nakasongola):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee and the Chairperson for the wonderful report presented. However, I would like to urge this august House to allow the money for operational works at Ministry Zonal Offices (MZOs) be provided because in the year 2018/2019 they were provided with Shs 50 million for operation, but it kept on diminishing, and even the last quarter they did not receive anything. This has increased the rate of corruption at the MZOs. We, therefore, need to provide this money to reduce the rate of corruption at MZOs. Under the land fund, I request that the money for the land fund, majorly for absentee landlords be provided. In the central region, the eviction rates have risen very much. For example, in Nakasongola District, it is a major problem, yet we are hoping to have an administrative capital city there.Therefore, I urge the House, to allow this money to be provided and it should be streamlined very well so that some areas do not benefit more than other areas. When shall we put an end to these evictions?  Therefore, I request that this be provided such that the Government and the august House be praised. Indeed, we are suffering a lot in central. Thank you.4.30MS GORRETH NAMUGGA (NUP, Mawogoola County South, Ssembabule):    Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is about the poor performance of the externally funded projects.  You realise that for the last financial years, especially, considering the report from the Auditor-General for the Financial Year 2022/2023, we had Shs 14.5 trillion in loans that had not been disbursed. Madam Speaker, this comes right from the time of borrowing –THE SPEAKER: Approved, interest being paid, commitment fees being paid but the loan not being used. The projects are not being implemented. That is what is increasing V ote 130. I was just helping you. MS NAMUGGA: Madam Speaker, this brings us back to responsibility, right from the Committee on National Economy, the one that considers the loans. The reasons for some of these delays include the feasibility studies not being conducted, and all the backup documents when borrowing money. This is our responsibility, right from the time of borrowing. However, it comes back to the Ministry for lands – delays in compensation of landowners and delays in the processing of land titles, which should be considered too.  Madam Speaker, when it comes to the issue of equipment, you realise that much as we have equipment which is going to be supplied to the new districts, we also have a challenge of old equipment in districts, for example in Ssembabule, which was bought them in 2012 and 2017. Most of it is ageing, and when you look at the money that is allocated for maintenance, it is very little. We need to increase the money for maintenance of road equipment – [Mr Atwijukire]12663THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024THE SPEAKER: You need money for tear and wear. MS NAMUGGA: When it comes to the District Urban Community Access Roads (DUCAR) budget, we need to increase the money. I suggest that for districts like Ssembabule, which are in the lowlands, their money should be increased, compared to other districts . (Laughter)THE SPEAKER: What should I say for Bukedea? MS NAMUGGA: For Bukedea, you are fairly okay. (Laughter)  When it comes to Ssembabule, it is unique. For example, for the rains that have just – (Interjections)-  no, Ssembabule has almost been swept away. When it comes to roads, if other districts are getting Shs 1 billion, Ssembabule should be given an additional 10 per cent, considering the nature of its location. That is the truth, Madam Speaker. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: You see the problem is that Hon. Gorreth did not do Geography of Uganda because when you talk about the lowlands, where floods collect – floods come all the way from Bududa, Elgon, and Karamoja and end up in Bukedea. Hon. Eric, one minute. Then, Hon. Kasolo and the Member for Aruu. 4.33MR ERIC MUSANA (Independent, Buyaga East County, Kagadi): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I commend the committee on the good report. Mine is a quick one, and it is regarding the Uganda Land Commission. Honourable minister, you are aware that the Uganda Land Commission has several titles which were bought off from absentee landlords. The thinking was that the other people would receive titles through systematic land demarcation. Under this arrangement, why can’t we provide funds to make sure the idle land titles, under the Uganda Land Commission, are given to the local people, to reduce the fights that you continue reporting on land? A colleague has just talked about equipping and giving more strength to the Uganda Land Commission. We provided some money to the Chief Government Valuer and capitalised Uganda Land Commission, but little money has been given for buying off absentee landlords. We have several mailo land - Madam Speaker, I come from a difficult subregion – Bunyoro. I come from the lost counties. People in those counties are crying. They want to have their land. If we can provide funds to the land fund, the Bunyoro subregion would be happy and hold Parliament in high esteem.4.36MR ROBERT KASOLO (NRM, Iki-Iki County, Budaka):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take the opportunity to thank the chairperson of the committee for the report. I will go straight to the issue concerning the Kampala-Jinja Expressway. Madam Speaker – THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kasolo, you start with Kampala-Jinja Road. MR KASOLO: Yes, I am coming to that, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: No, I want you to talk about both. MR KASOLO: I am going to - THE SPEAKER:  I am happy that the other day the minister said there is no road there when I asked him. Therefore, talk about both. MR KASOLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As you have guided, it is true. For us who use that section of the road, have a very big problem. Right from Jinja to Kampala, indeed, we do not have a road. We struggle to reach Kampala. It is risky. At some point, one may not tell who is coming from which side. (Laughter)  That is the current state of the road that we are using – that is around Breweries Limited. Coming to the issue that I wanted to raise, Madam Speaker, the Kampala-Jinja Express is a project that is known, and which the 12664SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSGovernment has promised to start. Looking at what has been provided, there is a lack of seriousness. Much as we do want – THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kasolo, the loan for Kampala-Jinja Expressway was approved in 2020. Those are the loans Hon. Gorreth is talking about. MR KASOLO: It is good you have guided. Now, the loan was approved but look at the situation. When it comes to compensation, in the report - the chair knows it - they have only provided for 40 hectares to be compensated. That is the proposal. We are not sure if they will compensate for those hectares. However, what is required to be compensated is around 800 hectares. The loan, as you have said, has been acquired, meaning that the Government is not doing its part to have this road. It is good that the minister for finance is here, listening to me. As people who use that road, and considering that it is a road that brings all the merchandise – it is a commercial road. Yesterday, there was a discussion here on what it takes to do business in Uganda. One of the encumbrances is the road infrastructure. So, Minister for Finance, we want to be told, frankly: are you seriously going to work on this road, given that you have decided to compensate for only 40 hectares?THE SPEAKER: And that road takes people up to Kenya. MR KASOLO: Exactly. We want the minister to assure us about how serious they are with the Kampala-Jinja Expressway. We needed it yesterday, but up now it seems there is no commitment from the Government. That puts us in a clear dilemma. We want the minister to pronounce himself that they are serious. Thank you, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Mrs Ebil? 4.40DR EUNICE APIO  (UPC, Oyam County North, Oyam): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My name is Eunice Otuko Apio, Member of Parliament for Oyam County North – for the record. THE SPEAKER: AKA –(Laughter)DR APIO: I thank the committee for its elaborate report. However, I note that this morning, the minister of state for sports, Hon. Peter Ogwang, reiterated a statement that was made here, on the Floor, on 15 March 2024, by the Minister of Works and Transport, Gen. Katumba Wamala, that in preparation for the African Cup of Nations (AFCON), the ministry would work on the road segment that runs from Corner Aboke, that is, Molem-Iceme to Omoro. Madam Speaker, I do not see that reflected in this report so I seek clarification if that is going to be done as stated earlier. Thank you very much. THE SPEAKER. Take note. Hon. Aguti, do you have something? Hon. Santa?4.41MS SANTA OKOT (PPP, Aruu North County, Pader):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the good report presented. I have heard the report indicating that the Government is supposed to compensate those who were displaced because of Government development. I want to find out from the minister whether the people who were displaced in Naguru and Nakawa - although development has not taken place in that area, I understand that the land in Naguru has already been given away to be developed for a hospital - these people were displaced from those two estates since 2006 and the Government promised to compensate them. Others have not gone back to their original homes because they are still waiting for this money.  I want to find out from the minister if that money was budgeted for. If not, can the minister explain why because people have waited for a long time? The second issue, Madam Speaker, is on Aswa Ranch -THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kimosho, remember it was in your report to compensate the Naguru people; so, you should be able to provide for it. [Mr Kasolo]12665THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024MS SANTA OKOT The second issue, Madam Speaker, is that Pader District specifically, Aruu North County at one-time, the Acholi people gave land to the Government and they put Aswa Ranch. The place is supposed to be for ranching; it is supposed to be for animals but last year, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries went there with graders and farm machines and dug a large area for production. They grew their soya beans, maize, and so forth.  In the process, they displaced so many people because they alleged that Aswa Ranch had taken the area where people were already staying.Madam Speaker, in 2016, the people in the lands ministry changed the original boundary; they encroached one mile into people’s land, a lot of property was destroyed and some graves were exhumed. I do not know if the minister is planning to compensate the people whose properties were destroyed by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. Thank you so much. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, in the public gallery, we have students and teachers from Nambula High School, Mukono District. They are represented by Hon. Nabukeera Hanifa and Hon. Kiwanuka Abdallah. (Applause)  Hon. Hanifa is a very good girl. You are most welcome and thank you so much for coming. Let us have Hon. Loy, Hon. Solomon and Hon. Andrew.4.44MS LOY KATALI (NRM, Woman Representative, Jinja):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the chairperson and members for a detailed report. Just one issue concerning the Kampala-Jinja Expressway. I know Hon. Kasolo has talked about it. Just a matter of emphasis, this is the economic road of this nation. It brings in 80 per cent of business in this country. This road is in a bad state and we all know that. It is my prayer, if possible, that the Government try to leave other roads and work on this road that is bringing in business in this nation. We do not want to reach a situation where we shall go on the streets to demonstrate. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: No, we cannot demonstrate. We can allocate money for it.4.45MR SOLOMON ALINGA (NRM, T’oo County, Bukwo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take concern on item number 7, page 28, on the reaffirmation of the international borders. I entirely agree with the committee that if we do not reaffirm our boundaries, it is likely to cause us chaos. I have been on the Floor of this Parliament – and we have got a problem in Bukwo. We have tried to survey land for our institutions because as you know that the Government has a policy not to develop any institution until they have a land title. The problem I have been telling this House is that we have tried as much as possible but the coordinates do not match the physical boundaries of Bukwo District. If you take coordinates in areas of Chesower, Tulen, Lwongon they read in Kween District. In areas of Riwo, the coordinates that you are in Kenya. Our people have completely failed to get the land titles. I entirely agree with the committee that the ministry should take charge and work on these things because if we do not work on them, we may not benefit from the Government service. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Grania and Hon. Musa. Hon. Siraj, have you talked today? 4.47MS HOPE NAKAZIBWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mubende):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me also join honourable colleagues to thank the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. 12666SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSMadam Speaker, through to the Minister of Works and Transport who is here represented by Hon. Byamukama, the committee brought out the issue of performance of contractors. This needs to be taken very seriously. Why? We have contractors that have been awarded some work to be done, like the Lusalira-Nkonge Road which is in Mubende. These contractors who do not perform to the expectation should be changed and we get contractors who are willing to do the work.The other concern I have is about the Uganda Road Fund. We appreciate that the rest of the regions are benefitting from it but there are some subcounties that were created by the previous Parliament and have not had their codes; so, they are not getting the Road Fund.  The minister should take this seriously and know that some sub-counties have to tap into the mother subcounties to have the roads done. We have examples in Mubende such as Kayebe, Kalonga, Kyenda, Lubimbiri and Nabingola should be considered. I know this applies countrywide.The other issue is about the PAPs, people that are affected by some projects.  We have a Government school, Nakawala Primary School that was affected by road works that were supposed to be done; Lusalira-Nkonge that I am talking about but it has not been done and time is moving. The school itself had structures which were marked that they were supposed to be brought down. Madam Speaker, I want to thank you so much for the time given but allow me to talk about the land titles of people who are affected by some programmes. We have Mubende-Kakumiro-Kagadi Road. This road was commissioned a long time but the people who were affected up to now have not been compensated. Some even gave their titles to UNRA but the residual titles have not been returned. In this budget, they should prioritise that. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Hon.  Musa and Hon. Andrew. 4.50DR NOAH MUSA (Independent, Koboko North County, Koboko):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to join my honourable colleagues to thank the chairperson and the committee for the report. I want to address myself to the issue of land acquisition. This is one of the matters that delays Government projects. Specifically, I want to speak about the Koboko-Yumbe-Moyo Road. This road is funded under - THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kabbyanga, never leave your boss in the House. Those are the rules of the game. Never leave your boss in the House. Those are the rules of the game. DR NOAH MUSA:  Madam Speaker, Koboko-Moyo-Yumbe Road is funded under a World Bank grant for refugee-hosting districts. This road, 95 per cent of the project-affected persons have been compensated, but five per cent have not been compensated. This project has suffered a very significant delay and the Minister of Works and Transport informed us that they have already procured a contractor. We are afraid that if the five per cent of the project-affected persons are not compensated, then this project is going to suffer further delay. The second issue I want to talk about is the road equipment for districts. Most of the equipment has reached its economic point of replacement. They are very expensive to maintain. I think that the Government needs to consider replacement - THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, let us not repeat what has already been said. They have already talked about the new road equipment and the ones that were already given that need to be repaired and remember there is wear and tear. Maybe they are even due for disposal.DR MUSA NOAH:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to comment on the mechanical workshops. I support the committee’s position that we should have mechanical workshops at [Ms Nakazibwe]12667THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024the subregional level, especially for West Nile. We have the regional workshop at Gulu, but which serves all four regions: Lango, Acholi, Karamoja, and West Nile. However, accessing the equipment by the district or repair services is very difficult. I support the recommendation that we should have mechanical workshops – (Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Yes, Hon. Andrew Oulanyah? 4.52MR ANDREW OULANYAH (NRM, Omoro County, Omoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the chairperson of the committee for the report. Mine is a comment on the issue of what the woman MP for Mubende raised; the issue of project-affected persons. What is currently happening is that the Government does the feasibility studies and then takes a bit of time before they come back to do the implementation. It is my prayer that the road –THE SPEAKER:  Yet the land appreciates. By the time they come back, these people will be asking for additional money. MR OULANYAH:  Yes, and that is my worry because when you look at that road from Gulu to Rwackoko, through Opit, it has been pledged so many times by the President. The Prime Minister went on record here and said it is a priority road. I am wondering how those translate into the budget appropriations. It is my prayer, therefore, that the ones that are under feasibility study can also be prioritised so that the appreciation does not affect the compensation. I appreciate you. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Koyekyenga. Some of you should wait and speak to the next ministerial policy statements.4.53MS OLIVER KOYEKYENGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Buhweju):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. We all know that the resource envelope is small. However, in this country, there are so many roads that are under the presidential pledges. I have a road that His Excellency pledged a long time ago. It has been appearing under unfunded priorities. Madam Speaker, as you said, we need to first look at the priorities, the Kampala-Jinja Road, and for us – (Member timed out.)THE SPEAKER:  Everybody knows that Buhweju is a very bad area and honourable minister, you have to make sure it is worked on because that issue has come up again and again. Hon. Fred, are you hearing? What have I said? (Laughter)  The issue of Buhweju, you must take it as a priority. Was it the Prime Minister who went there and got stuck? So, you must make sure that it is considered. I know we do not have money, but there are some things we can do - like Hon. Kasolo said, there is no road on Jinja Road! No road at all! You cannot even tell where there is a pothole, that is the road, which takes you up – it is an economic road. Leave alone economic, it is also international. Yes, Hon. Twinobusingye. 4.56MS JOV ANICE TWINOBUSINGYE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiruhura):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues in thanking the chairperson of the committee, for the good report presented.THE SPEAKER:  In the next three reports, we shall start phase one to make everybody start talking. MS TWINOBUSINGYE: Madam Speaker, I thank you and the committee chairperson for the good report. Allow me to mention these newly created town councils and sub-counties that are not appearing anywhere in their report yet they are facing serious challenges. We all know that since they were created they have never received any funding regarding road maintenance and you cannot expect to have good roads without funding. 12668SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSAllow me also to appreciate the committee on mentioning Shs 176 million for the district or local government roads. We cannot talk about development if we do not talk about local government roads. Since the provision of Shs 1 billion, districts have not been getting road funds, and this has affected our roads.Lastly, it is about the presidential pledges. In 2005, Kiruhura District was given a road, that is, Kashwa-Kashongi-Ruhumba Road under a presidential pledge. However, up to date, it has not been worked on. It has been featuring in the development plan, but it is not implemented at all. I request that they go and think about this road so that the Government can work on it.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, we need to break off for lunch first. (Applause)  Even the Presiding Officer gets tired. Can we first get a response from the Leader of the Opposition? 4.58MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NUP, Manjiya County, Bududa ): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I applaud the committee for the report and for the good advice you have given to the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development pertaining to the brilliant idea to shift and build their own home. The idea is brilliant and good, but they should take a cue from the second budget call circular directive by the Permanent Secretary and Secretary to the Treasury (PSST). It was his advice that given the constraints on resources, it would be prudent for the ministry not to think of relocating or rather building their own home because this is the time to refocus resources. The advice by the committee that they should allow the Parliamentary Commission, which is more than ready; the architectural, and structural plans have already been approved; and the funds have been secured, to demolish the Development House and construct a complex, which could even house – because Madam Speaker, I am of the view of trade-offs, where a compromise is reached, that since this ministry has sensitive information, they would occupy the lower floors of that complex, since it could be a secure place. In the meantime, they would go by the advice of the committee to accept, in the medium or short term, to rent with the Shs 24 billion, as they amass financial strength and muscle to construct their own home. That would be the best way to go because if the Parliamentary Commission is ready and they are not, it is better to work through trade-offs.Madam Speaker –THE SPEAKER: Honourable LOP, the other issue is that there is a policy that was agreed upon, that we would have a one-stop centre in Bwebajja where all Government offices would be located so that they are near Entebbe when they are going for meetings. Giving the Parliamentary Commission that land was an instruction from the President. We may not construct now, but there are people who are ready to construct. What your Permanent Secretary asked for was Shs 24 billion for you to rent. What the honourable member is saying is that you can occupy one or two floors on that building, just like the Judiciary has its own building. MR NAMBESHE: Madam Speaker, you have nailed it on the head. I know Bwebajja is a very ambitious plan that may take a bit of time or even when Jesus comes back. Anyhow, the advice would be to go by your counsel, Madam Speaker. Finally, on the Kampala-Jinja Expressway, that road is the highway to the nearest seaport. The time wasted in traffic jam was calculated and the findings were such that most people would not want to operate business on the Kampala-Jinja Highway from Mombasa because it takes long - and that calculation also concluded that as a country, we lose about Shs 500 million per hour in traffic congestion. The allocation to have this loan - by the way, although it is accumulating commitment fees - works should have even commenced yesterday [Ms Twinobusingye]12669THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024because that is the nearest route. Others would have opted for Mutukula through Tanzania, but that is extremely long.The truth is that the traffic jam on this road has made doing business in Uganda extremely costly. So, I throw my full weight behind the recommendation by the committee. Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Mr Lugoloobi rose_)  Information granted.THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister has information.MR LUGOLOOBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thought I should provide some information relating to Bwebajja since he mentioned it. A decision has been made to actually go ahead with Bwebajja in about four phases. So, it may not take as long as we are saying. Right now, we are involved in negotiations with the National Social Security Fund to actually lend to the Government for the construction of this project. The fact of the matter is that this is a budget-neutral intervention, in the sense that we are currently paying a lot of money through renting properties for various Government agencies. The money to repay NSSF is already embedded within the budget in phases. It is now a question of finalising the discussions and we move.Madam Speaker, if you would allow me, I also thought that I should make comments on the Kampala-Jinja Expressway. This is a Public-Private Partnership involving public investment alongside private investment. Where we are today, we have acquired resources involving the African Development Bank, which is providing US$ 229.5 million. This is being negotiated and we are at the final stages. The French Development Agency is providing 90 million euros and we are also getting a grant from the European Union of US$ 90 million. The private players are expected to provide US$ 800 million. The challenge has been that the private players demand for a partial risk guarantee, which the Government is securing because they are not so convinced that by tolling, they will recover the money. So, they have asked for a partial risk guarantee for which we are negotiating with the African Development Bank. They have agreed in principle to provide for us that guarantee, so we are finalising this. In short, the Government is very committed to this project and we are doing everything possible to have the Kampala-Jinja Expressway. It is one of those critical priorities under the Government. If you would allow me also to comment about the poor performance of externally funded projects, which Hon. Namugga talked about. We recognise that there has been a very serious problem in this area. Indeed, the Cabinet tasked the Ministry of Finance and Office of the Prime Minister to deeply examine this problem.We examined every project that is externally funded and found that there are major challenges relating to things that we have not been doing well. Particularly when it comes to loan acquisition, in some projects, you find that we acquire a loan before we complete the feasibility studies and acquire right-of-way, and when we get the money, the right-of-way may not be there, and maybe counterpart funding is not available.So, we go through all these problems of preparing the pre-feasibility and feasibility studies. By the time you complete them, you have lost about two to four years of the project. We are now fixing these problems. The Cabinet decided to form a committee that is going to be closely monitoring project by project, right from the stage of loan acquisition, to ensure that we provide for feasibility studies to be done prior. In fact, we have allocated some money to the National Planning Authority, which has created a unit that is going to be dealing with feasibility studies of various Government projects, to try and arrest this problem. 12670SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSWe also had a problem with the approval process itself. The process of approving a loan stretching from the National Planning Authority, Office of the Prime Minister, the Ministry of Finance, Parliament and Cabinet, is so lengthy. So, the red tape is actually too long. THE SPEAKER: Parliament has never taken long. MR LUGOLOOBI: Yes, but it is part of the process, Madam Speaker. When we calculate the number of days, you realise that it is over 400 days before we secure the necessary approval - (Interruption)MR EKANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Some time back, Parliament and the Government agreed that all agencies involved in the loan approval process, be involved from stage one during initiation, so that if there is any gap, we fill it.For example, during the proposal stage and discussions in the parliamentary Committee on National Economy, we were doing well, but later on, the Ministry of Finance decided to abandon the Members of Parliament and brought them in at the last stage.Madam Speaker, the Minister needs to go back - THE SPEAKER: That is the reason the Parliament started doubting when they talked about commitment fees. If you involved the Parliament from the word go, they would appreciate what you are talking about. MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I may not have another opportunity; the Road Fund has given Shs 1 billion to every district. We have eight Members of Parliament and 56 subcounties in Tororo District but we also receive Shs 1 billion like Namisindwa District with six subcounties. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, don’t you think it is appropriate that this Shs 1 billion for the road fund be given according to the subcounties? THE SPEAKER: First, you are not even receiving it all, why don’t you first appreciate what you have now? Hon. Obua on the Shs 1 billion - I know why I want him to give us a position. 5.11THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Hamson Obua): Madam Speaker, on Thursday last week in respect to the non-release of quarter III and now quarter IV of the Road Maintenance Fund for districts, cities and municipalities, the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development in Charge of General Duties, Hon. Henry Musasizi, made a commitment and an undertaking on behalf of the Government that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will release in quarter IV a total of Shs 500 million to every city, district and municipality in Uganda. He further committed that he was going to adduce evidence to the presiding officer on the releases made to districts, cities and municipalities in fulfilment of his undertaking on behalf of the Government. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Can I hear from Hon. Judith Nabakooba so that she goes away? 5.13THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT  (Ms Judith Nabakooba): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your support. I thank the committee for the good report because most of the concerns have been captured. About the ministry shifting, I would say that this matter has been brought before His Excellency, the President and the Cabinet and the President insisted that we should embark on Bwebajja because of the sensitivity and also the documents that have been there for so long since colonial times and that if we are to shift, we shift once and for all. We request the Ministry of Finance to fast-track the process of the Government campus so that we can shift as a ministry to pave the way [Mr Lugoloobi]12671THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024for other developments. I only request, that if we can be given some funds for the absentee landlords because it is a big issue.There are people whom the Government took their land for the last 10 years but up to date we have never cleared them. We have arrears to the tune of Shs 1 trillion. Every other year, the land fund is given less than Shs 20 billion - (Applause.)  - yet land keeps on appreciating in most of the areas. Where do we get money to pay these landlords? The tenants are challenged, but the landlords are also asking for their money. Therefore, we request this Parliament to consider at least prioritising the Land Fund to enable us to settle not only the landlords’ but also the tenants’ issues in most of the affected areas, especially in Buganda, Bunyoro and some other parts of the West, and in the North, we are now seeing lots of problems coming up. We would say that last financial year they gave us Shs 165.44 billion but this time around again the budget has reduced to Shs 81.82 billion meaning that we are going to operate under what is required. We have been limping - I do not know this time what is going to happen. We have our Ministry Zonal Offices (MZO) which are operating and as a ministry, we are contributing to the revenue of the Government. Last financial year, we contributed almost Shs 600 billion and we had requested the Ministry of Finance to consider at least looking at those ministries that contribute to the treasury and give us money to function better. For example, MZOs cannot operate, machines are down, photocopiers are not there; they are not facilitated to run, yet whatever they do helps the Government to earn money at the end of the day. Therefore, we request the Parliament, if you intervene to add us more money so that our performance can be enhanced and to achieve our role of land administration in the country. The land sector - MS KAAYA: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. Members, currently the districts you notice that they contribute over 40 per cent to the district treasury. For example, in my district, they have contributed over Shs 240 million to the Kiboga District Treasury but for the last two quarters, the department has never gotten any money to help them follow up with land surveys and then also the committee responsible for monitoring - the people who want leases have to be paid by the applicants. I think the problem comes from the poor harmonisation. When we are in the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources, they say that land is outside their mandate yet in the local governments, land is under natural resources. When natural resources receive the money, they over-focus on other issues of natural resources other than land and that is what brings a lot of land disputes, especially in districts like Kiboga. Thank you. MS NABAKOOBA: Thank you, honourable member. the land sub-component is under natural resources, environment and water. The monies that are given to the subcomponent cannot allow us to operate. As we speak now, the land subcomponent was given Shs 27.7 billion, which is expected to run all land-related activities in the ministry and we are asking, why can’t you support us for the land subcomponent to be returned to the urbanisation and housing subsector so that we can prioritise matters of land? Matters of land tickle and we are looking at land as a factor of production meaning that we need to look at land tenure security but also make it more productive and be in a position to respond when called upon.Every other day when I come here, I get petitions from members of Parliament who want me to go to their areas to handle either disputes or attend to boundary issues but at times I am constrained as a minister because 12672SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSI cannot facilitate my technical teams to go and open boundaries in those respective areas. We cannot even go and mediate in some of the cases raised by members of Parliament. So, we are requesting to be looked into seriously and help us to address the challenges we are getting.For example, under the Land Information Management System Maintenance. We also require  some money to run our MZO offices, we are looking at affirmation of not only international borders but also national borders; those are district boundaries most especially in Karamoja, Teso region and other areas but we do not have the funds - THE SPEAKER: You opened the boundaries of Tororo but up to date you have not taken any action. MS NABAKOOBA: Madam Speaker, we shall report accordingly. THE SPEAKER: I know that you have a report; you went up to the United Kingdom (UK) but up to date, nothing has taken place in Tororo - (Applause)  – yet the fights there have continued because of that kind of thing. Can you make a decision, honourable minister? MS NABAKOOBA : Madam Speaker, on the issues of Tororo, boundaries were opened and the reports were shared by all the stakeholders, but they did not agree yet that is the final report that we have. The data from here corresponded with data from the UK. I think even the President communicated with the stakeholders. So, we are still -  THE SPEAKER : Hon. Judith, we need to get time and discuss issues of Tororo because the report and everything is there. Our Iteso are suffering in that place. (Laughter)  Yes, Hon. Fred. 5.22THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Fred Byamukama:  Thank you, Madam Speaker –THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nabakooba, as you leave, be informed that we are going to break off for lunch for about 30 minutes. Everybody will have to come back to the House – and I am marking all of you. We must finish the ministerial policy statements tonight. We have three institutions left but as you leave, we are waiting for feedback on Namboole. MS NABAKOOBA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. The report is going to be availed. I am going to get in touch with my colleagues in Namboole. My technical team is also on the ground. Thank you so much.MR FRED BYAMUKAMA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the good and comprehensive report and I thank the Members for their support. It is true that without good roads in this country, transport becomes a problem and the cost of goods goes high. It is our mandate to ensure that these roads are good. We are happy that, through Parliament, next financial year things are to move on very well. Madam Speaker, I would like to inform you that, leaving alone the debts we have with the contractors of UNRA, our roads and bridges department have carried over Shs 100 billion – they have carried over this debt to next the financial year. There are also some roads that we signed to contractors, but they have failed to report to work because there is no money. The contractors have refused to report to work yet the MPs keep on demanding. We had an incident last year but one, where the Elgon roads were washed away but up to now, those problems have never been rectified. The area Members of Parliament keep on promising residents, and those are residents of our country. I thank the committee for the provision of the balance to procure the complete road equipment unit. As of now, we have the wheel loaders and the graders for the 16 new districts. On the 10th of May, we will give them out because we have no option, but it was looking awkward for a whole district to have those two [Ms Nabakooba]12673THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024pieces of equipment without the dump trucks, the vibro roller and the water bowser, yet they are going to use the Government’s money to work on those roads – they just grade and leave the roads there.We shall provide the 16 districts with this equipment, that is, on the 10th of May, as per the arrangements with the local governments. We have decided to give them our people to drive the equipment as we train them for the period of six months. Once this money is available next financial year, we shall be able to add the missing equipment. Madam Speaker, I am also happy with the recommendation by the committee that it is high time we embarked on rail transport, not only for cargo but also for passenger services. The chairperson mentioned the Kampala-Namanve rail service. We have noted your guidance on how we should increase the number of trips we make. Leaving that, I would like to inform the entire House that we have also thought it wise that as part of decongesting Kampala, as we wait for the Kampala-Jinja Expressway, we are going to provide the passenger services on Kampala-Kyengera-Bujuko route, in addition to the Kampala-Namanve as well as the Kampala-Port Bell routes. In the long run, as we wait for the standard gauge railway (SGR) project and the rehabilitation of the metre gauge railway, we shall be there. Madam Speaker, on the Kampala-Jinja Expressway, it is true and we also feel concerned that time is going by. However, the preliminary designs were made and we got three contractors; two European companies and one Chinese company. I agree with the honourable colleague who said the money provided is little; it can only compensate for about 40 hectares, as he mentioned it. Out of the 97 kilometres required for the Kampala-Jinja Expressway, we have so far acquired 45 kilometres and one would ask a question: Why don’t you start with the 45 kilometres you have already acquired? These contractors – you know, this is a public-private partnership – are to provide 60 per cent of the funds required for this project, which is about $1.2 billion. They are still engaging the finance ministry because there is something that is not clear to them. The finance minister is here and I hope he knows about it. It is high time we worked on this project because as the Speaker has mentioned, this is an international road. We get a lot of goods from other countries. For example, of all the fuel that comes into this country, the highest percentage passes on that road because we get our fuel from Kisumu. All those fuel tanks are on that road. With this project, it will ease the time in which fuel arrives in Kampala. Finance minister, we need to fast-track what those contractors need, so that the project can move on. On the Lusalira-Nkonge Road, we have a contractor – that is, Technovia – to work on it. The finance ministry is completing the financing agreements such that the work on this road can kick off –(Interruption)  MS ACIRO:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, talking of the roads that are already in the pipeline for construction, I am aware we have been in contact with you concerning the road that passes Puranga, Pajule and Acholibur. The concern and the gap that was there was about the money.As you are requesting the minister for finance to clarify that of Jinja, I also request that you give us clarification on that which is for the Pajule-Puranga-Acholibur Road. This is because while we are told the contractor is already there, there is still a gap in funding. So, where have we reached and when are we going to see this project kicking off? Thank you. MR BYAMUKAMA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I come to that, each of us needs tarmac roads, including myself, in our areas. This is because these roads – (Interjections) – yes, because -12674SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSTHE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, most of these things are because of delayed non-disbursement or Project-Affected Persons (PAPs), which they do not plan for early enough. If they plan, the money comes late. We looked at the road you are talking about when I was in COSASE and it has been there for some time. The other reason is when you bring in contractors who do not do the work as required and within the time. Do you still have more to say, Hon. Fred?MR FRED BYAMUKAMA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Lastly, I would like to inform my honourable colleagues that amidst the financial challenges we have, we have a presidential directive. That is why you see most of the roads which were planned for the next financial year will not surface. We should look at those roads, which link us with the neighbouring countries with the view that –THE SPEAKER:  Okay, start with the Kampala-Jinja-Malaba-Busia Highway. MR FRED BYAMUKAMA:  Yes, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER:  Anyway, do not talk about that. When you start going into presidential directives –MR FRED BYAMUKAMA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Those are the comments I got. The others, we shall share with the committee chairperson once again and see that all the proposals you have brought in, are catered for.Otherwise, we remain committed to working on the road network of this country to ensure they are motorable. Once they are motorable , they will reduce accidents and even the time at which you arrive at the planned destination. Also, the cost of goods when the roads are good is low. Even our locals can sell their agricultural products. Thank you. I beg to submit.THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Maximus.MR OCHAI:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is one critical issue to which I seek clarification from the honourable minister -THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Faith Nakut – honourable members, I am going to put a question to this; we have to go for lunch for 30 minutes and come back. I will switch on all my cameras to see who will not come back. (Laughter)MR OCHAI:  Thank you very much for this opportunity. Madam Speaker, this financial year, UNRA committed itself to conclude the feasibility study and detailed engineering designs for the upgrade of Tororo-Nagongera-Busolwe Road - 44 kilometres only. This is a road that connects Bukedi Subregion to Kenya –THE SPEAKER:  Honourable member, this is just a piece of advice: Let us first look at what happens from Tuesday because we are going to start on the Rationalisation of Agencies and Public Expenditure (RAPEX). Maybe you will not be talking about UNRA but another entity. All we need is, first of all, to have money. Let us first leave the institutions and the policies aside. I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the ministerial policy statement and the Budget Estimate for the Financial Year 2024/2025 be adopted by this House. (Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Kwizera, you even say “Nay” with your grey hair? (Laughter)  Honourable members, we are breaking off for 30 minutes; I want all of you back here. Let us go to the canteen for lunch. We are suspending the House for 30 minutes. We must finish all the ministerial policy statements. Thank you.(The House was suspended at 5.34 p.m.)(On resumption at 6.09 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)12675THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024THE SPEAKER:  Welcome back from the health break. Next item?(IV) THE COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRSTHE SPEAKER:  Give us a summary. 6.10THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS (Ms Jesca Ababiku):  Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues. Allow me to lay a copy of the report together with the minutes. THE SPEAKER : We also need the ministers for Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs.6.14MS ABABIKU:  Thank you. Madam Speaker, we have 11 V otes, which fall under different programs ranging from governance, security, human development, community mobilisation, among others. (Member rose_)THE SPEAKER:  In the absence of the ministers for Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs, let us start with the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. Tell your ministers to behave.(V) THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRSTHE SPEAKER:  We are going to summarise these. Sorry, my chairperson. Hon. Ababiku has to travel upcountry. Yes, Hon. Kabanda?MR KABANDA:  Madam Speaker, Hon. Ababiku is the chairperson of the Committee on Presidential Affairs. It is not called a Committee on Kampala Capital City Authority. She is going to represent many sectors, including the presidency and the security. Therefore, you cannot say Hon. Kyofatogabye is representing the presidency and security. He is here to represent Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs. Is it, therefore, in order for Hon. Kyofatogabye to say that he is representing all the ministries?THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, the Committee on Presidential Affairs has eight V otes. It has the Office of Prime Minister, where the Government Chief Whip belongs; it has the Presidency and Security where Hon. Kyofatogabye’s ministry falls. Can we hear from the chairperson herself? Hon. Ababiku was my chairperson for five years. Please, explain your portfolio.MS ABABIKU:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I feel that my two honourable ministers are adequate to represent all the V otes because where the Ministry for Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs is and Kampala Capital City Authority is, that is where the Presidency falls. They all fall under the Office of the President. We have our minister, Hon. Kyofatogabye who is representing the Minister, Office of the President where the ministry falls.THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Obua?6.15THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Hamson Obua):  Madam Speaker, when you look at their headed papers for the sectors under the Committee on Presidential Affairs, you notice that they all fall under the Office of the President. Two, I received notification that Hon. Kyofatogabye would represent the entire Presidency. So, while I am here representing the Office of the Prime Minister, he is here representing the Office of the President and the Presidency including the Minister for Presidency, Kampala Capital City Authority, including those security organs and the Ministry for Security; they all fall under the Office of the President. That is why the Minister of Security, while he was appointed, is appointed Minister of Security, Office of the President. So, Madam Speaker, we are here and we are ready as ministers to proceed with the Report of the Committee on Presidential Affairs.THE SPEAKER:   Yes, Member for Buzaaya? 12676SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTS6.16MR MARTIN MUZAALE (NRM, Buzaaya County, Kamuli):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Now that the minister is here, and the Government Chief Whip is also here, and the minister for ‘sente’ - money is also here, I pray that we proceed. THE SPEAKER:  Attorney-General, come and sit in your right position because he is also - he is hiding . (Laughter)MR KABANDA:  Madam Speaker, I still want to insist on this issue because it is very serious. Every day, an MP complains about either a District Internal Security Officer (DISO) or a Resident District Commissioner (RDC) or when we complain about these people, they never call Hon. Kyofatogabye. They refer us to the Minister for the Presidency and she should come, and if not, the Minister for Security should. Therefore, you cannot say, Minister for Presidency, Hon. Babalanda is not here; Hon. Beatrice Akori is not here; the Minister Without Portfolio is not here; Hajjat  Minsah is not here; the Prime Minister is not here; Rt Hon. Gen. Moses Ali is not here; Rt Hon. Kadaga is not here; Hon. Lillian Aber is not here; Hon. Obote is not here; Hon. Hillary Onek is not here – everybody is not here, including Hon. Gen. Jim Muhwezi. And you say the State Minister for Kampala Capital City Authority and Metropolitan Affairs is going to handle issues that concern our districts? Land grabbing is everywhere. In most of the districts, the RDCs have nowhere to sleep, sincerely Madam Speaker. -  6.17MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Indepen -dent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Madam Speaker, I understand the pain of my brother, Hon. Kabanda, but -THE SPEAKER:  By the way, Hon. Kabanda is right. Hon. Kyofatogabye is the Minister of State for Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs. I do not mind the Government Chief Whip being here but maybe you should take it as a serious warning, Government Chief Whip, that much as we are constrained by time, we may painfully accept, but next time, these ministers should respect the budgeting process because they seem to be taking Members of Parliament for granted. They may also be taking the whole country for granted. People are complaining - like what Hon. Kabanda said - people are complaining about RDCs. Can Hon. Kyofatogabye even transfer “half an RDC”? Seriously, what Hon. David Kabanda is raising is very important. Let ministers take responsibility for their work. People have issues with several institutions; so, you should not just pick Hon. Kyofatogabye from somewhere because he is a free person on a Friday, and - Government Chief Whip, you are still a minister for the next three budgets. We want your assurance that next time when we are passing the budget, you will mobilise your team. - We have not finished this one and that is why I have said three.MR OBUA:  Madam Speaker, the truth is that before we scheduled Parliament to sit on a Friday, there were earlier commitments already made by His Excellency, the President and the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. We all know that as we speak today, the President is in one of our districts; some ministers have accompanied him.The Rt Hon. Prime Minister is in Bududa with some other ministers to launch the relocation of our people who are threatened in that region. That is why I stated in very clear terms that I was notified this morning that in the circumstances, Hon. Kyofatogabye would stand in for the entire Presidency.However, that said, as Cabinet, we take the budget – because we know that this is what will facilitate service delivery in the next year. I undertake to notify colleagues to avail themselves. Otherwise, let us take today as an exception because of the earlier commitments made. Some ministers had to travel with the President while others with the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for the two programmes. 12677THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024Even as I speak, Madam Speaker, you know that tomorrow there is another programme in Atyak. Some of our colleagues have equally left and there are those who are joining them. Therefore, in the circumstances, I pray and humbly persuade you, Madam Speaker, to allow the House to proceed. For us who are here – THE SPEAKER:  It is not about me but the House. Persuade the House.MR OBUA:  I wish to persuade the House, through Madam Speaker, that in the circumstances, we proceed because you have now understood the truth about today, Friday. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Yes, Hon. David.MR DA VID KABANDA:  With a lot of pain, Madam Speaker, allow me to be persuaded by my boss, the Government Chief Whip. (Laughter)THE SPEAKER:  Thank you for accepting. Can we move faster?MS ABABIKU:  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the reconsideration. As you have guided us, I request that we go to page 5 where we have the committee recommendations regarding V ote 001 - Office of the President. Madam Speaker, one of the most important priorities in this recommendation is to consider providing more offices for RDCs. We have 146 districts but we have only constructed 15 offices. So, we have a balance of 131 offices to be constructed. What is provided is to only have one office block. Therefore, we recommend that per annum we provide for five. What we require is Shs 2.8 billion.THE SPEAKER: Which districts have the offices?MS ABABIKU:  Madam Speaker, I can provide the details on the districts that have offices, and they are the following: Lamwo, Abim, Amuru, Kiryandongo, Kamuli, Buhweju, Bundibugyo, Lwengo, Rubirizi, Butaleja, Adjumani, Butambala, Otuke, Luuka and Nakapiripirit. Those are the 15 that have offices. The rest do not have.Madam Speaker, the second issue is Cabinet support and policy development. We have a gap of Shs 1.976 billion. Our total request is Shs 4.579 billion. What was provided for is Shs 2.603 billion and we request for the balance to be provided.Regarding the facilitation for RDCs, our budget is Shs 21 billion, but what was provided is Shs 14.8 billion, leaving a gap of Shs 6.2 billion. That is what we are recommending.On facilitation of the project management team for the Intelligence Transport Monitoring SystemAware that in July 2021, the Government signed an agreement with Joint Stock Global Security. Subsequently, a committee to oversee this project was established by the Office of the President and we request for the facilitation of this committee; we request for Shs 3.5 billion. Support to the Afro-Arab Youth Council for headquarters constructionMadam Speaker, we are about to lose a prime opportunity to construct an office block, a stadium, and a cultural heritage centre, among others, because the Government of Uganda signed an agreement, in August 2023, to host the headquarters and the condition given to our government is to provide land. The duration of the project is only five years.We have only purchased 23 acres and we are left with 27 acres. The money we are demanding so that we comply is Shs 5.4 billion minus that we shall lose this prime opportunity.Monitoring the mainstreaming of the manifesto commitmentsAware that the governance of this country is dependent on the manifesto – THE SPEAKER:  Where did you buy the 23 acres from? 12678SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSMS ABABIKU:  Madam Speaker, we bought the 23 acres in Kitende, Nakawuka and we are left with the balance of 27 acres and the site is the same. That is why we request for this balance.Monitoring the mainstreaming of the manifesto commitmentsAware that the governance of this country is dependent on the manifesto of the party governing the country. For the purposes of mainstreaming and monitoring to ensure that the promises are met and accountability is made to our people, we have a budget gap of Shs 2.0 billion and that is what we are requesting.Interventions by the Office of the President whose mandate falls in different Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs)Madam Speaker, we discovered that the money for Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) which is meant to be under the Office of the Prime Minister was put under V ote 001. Therefore, we recommend that it is shifted to the Office of the Prime Minister where the SDGs fall.Secondly, we also discovered that Shs 4.283 billion, which is meant to be under State House was put under V ote 001. We recommend that it be moved to V ote 002, where State House falls because that is for the facilitating of the Office of the President.Madam Speaker, the facilitation for Resident District Commissioner Secretariat is very important to ensure that the RDCs perform their duties as per the provision of the Constitution in Article 203(3)(a).To facilitate the effective function of the Secretariat, we have a budget gap of Shs 2.24 billion and that is what we are requesting for. Development and Maintenance of the National Leadership Institute (NALI) Aware that this is a national avenue where we can all benefit, it was established in 1987.  There are challenges with training facilities, offices and others. We are requesting that Shs 6.595 billion be provided. State House Under State House - THE SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter .DR BWANIKA:  Madam Speaker, the chairperson is supposed to summarise so that - I would request, through you Madam Speaker, that the Member presents the most important issues; the recommendations. THE SPEAKER:  Look at the recommenda -tions.MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I am now on page 14 and only presenting the specific recommendations. Under presidential donations, we have a budget gap of Shs 30 billion and that is what we are requesting. The beneficiaries are the public, not the office, including the cultural, and religious institutions and individuals. Under logistical and administrative support to the Presidency, we have a gap of Shs 8 billion. Retooling State House We have a budget gap of Shs 35.42 billion. That is what we are recommending. Under the inadequate waste provision, as guided that I -THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Lee, is there a problem? MR OGUZU:  Madam Speaker, I thought the idea of retooling was long abandoned and we are now focusing on serious things. If the committee is leading us into retooling - MS ABABIKU:  No! We have defined what we are going to retool. Those who have copies of the report, turn to page 18, and you will get the detailed aspect of retooling, and this is the nomenclature.  I think my brother does not have a copy of the report. Open your iPad. 12679THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024We have a budget gap of Shs 5.431 billion and for model villages, we have – (Interjections)  - yes. I wanted to explain so that you understand but you told me to summarise.THE SPEAKER:  When the honourable member talks about retooling, the issue of renovation of State House or whichever - tomorrow you are going to be in Government. You need to get that place in a better condition. DR BWANIKA:  Madam Speaker, we need details on the model villages. THE SPEAKER:  The model village like the ones in Mayuge, Gomba and so on. This is State House property. Tomorrow when you become the President of this country, that will be your property; it will not go with President Museveni.MS ABABIKU:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. We request for Shs 4.8 billion to roll out the model villages so that each of the regions can receive two per annum. The skilling programmeWe recommend that more common user facilities be provided to support the 19 established industrial hubs plus the training centres in Kampala. Uganda AIDS CommissionAs guided that I should read specifically the recommendations, the Uganda AIDS Commission requires an extra Shs 1.3 billion, to facilitate the establishment of more six regional offices. Uganda Industrial Research Institute; For the operationalisation of this centre, we are recommending Shs 26.03 billion. Industrial and technological incubation; We are recommending for Shs 1.9 billion. Technology, innovation, and value addition; We have a gap of Shs 2.99 billion.Research and development; We are recommending for Shs 4.97 billion. Ethics and integrity; On page 32, we have a gap of Shs 3.85 billion. Internal Security Organisation; Madam Speaker, on page 35, we have a gap of Shs 42.9 billion. Establishment of technical infrastructure; We have a gap of Shs 26.6 billion, yet we require Shs 12.493 billion to enable the Internal Security Organisation to effectively facilitate their operations for timely information gathering. Construction of the Institute for Security and Strategic Studies; What we require to fix this gap is Shs 22.964 billion.External Security Organisation; We have a bulky report but as guided, let us go to page 40.Foreign Intelligence Collection; We have a gap of Shs 3.187 billion and that is what we are requiring. Retooling of External Security Organisation; We have a gap of Shs 28.883 billion. Budget enhancement to administration and finance; The details are provided and we are recommending for Shs 17.724 billion. Construction of External Security Organisation Headquarters; We are requesting for Shs 30.781 billion. The details are provided in the report. Science, Technology and Innovation; As guided, the recommendations start from pages 44 to 45. Establishment of Uganda’s Bioscience Park; We are requesting for Shs 44 billion to start the establishment. Inadequate funding for Uganda National Council for Science and Technology; Here we are requesting for Shs 3.5 billion. Space Programme; Allow me to explain something because there was a question – 12680SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSTHE SPEAKER:  About space, satellite? MS ABABIKU:  Yes, about space.  THE SPEAKER:  The satellite. MS ABABIKU:  Yes, Madam Speaker. The Government of Uganda has made interventions to ensure that we also get to space. The first initiative was when we sent our three students to Japan.  The programme, or the course content, included a demonstration component. The demonstration component had a lifespan of one year, which has ended. However, we also sent our students to China, and four of them are now equipped; they have the knowledge. This is a new attempt to ensure that we can have space exploration of, at least, five years. The first was a demonstration. Therefore, we shall be in space for five years when we finance this. What we require is Shs 13 billion.On priority setting in science, technology and innovation interventions, Madam Speaker, we made recommendations that re-prioritisation be undertaken because we have too many projects and, therefore, we are spreading our resources thin though this is not helping us to achieve commercialisation as expected.  Anti-tick vaccine clinical trialsWe are requesting for Shs 48.0 billion to do this. We met this team and we appreciate what they have done.  Commercialisation of sericultureWe are requesting for Shs 17.88 billion for the commercialisation of sericulture in two areas – Sheema and Kween, where we have already procured some equipment. We expect these other sites in the other parts of the country to support the two sites so that we start to produce silk. National Science, Technology, Engineering and Innovation Centre  For the operationalisation of the heavy investment by the Government, we are requesting for Shs 19.4 billion.Pathogen economyMadam Speaker, we are requesting for Shs 29.83 billion to support the pathogen economy – research and development component. Presidential Initiative on Banana Industrial DevelopmentThis is one of our babies, with a lot of investment so far. We are requesting that we give them Shs 10 billion. We visited the site and I encourage Members to also visit this site. Kiira Motors CorporationMadam Speaker, this is one of our best projects. To facilitate them to transit to commercialisation, we are requesting for Shs 134.14 billion. They are doing very good work. So far, we have assembled and supported the production of 21 buses. Tondeka  is moving all around Kampala. I believe many people have seen it. This project is one of our best. Proposed budget allocation to the innovation fundWe recommend that the Shs 37.5 billion, which is already in the Medium-term Expenditure Frameworks (MTEF) ceiling, be for the existing projects, but not spread to other components, which are going to be new.We also recommend that Shs 20 billion be provided to support research development in areas of the existing projects if new challenges are discovered in the course of moving from one stage to the other.  Madam Speaker, we have recommended for Shs 20 billion so that if there are other disasters or emergencies, like how COVID-19 came, we will be prepared.  Ministry for KCCA and Metropolitan AffairsOur specific recommendations start from page 57. We are recommending Shs 4.2 billion to support physical planning and urbanisation. 12681THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024For retooling for the Ministry for Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs; Here we are recommending for Shs 1.2 billion.KCCA; As guided, we are moving straight to the recommendations.  This starts from page 62.  Implementation of the presidential directive on city markets; This has components of compensation and re-development or development of new markets. We are requesting for Shs 50 billion. Solid waste management; Madam Speaker, we have a detailed explanation and what we are requesting for, to support this component is Shs 60 billion. Physical planning of the city; Here we are requesting for additional Shs 2.5 billion.  Maintenance of drainage infrastructure in the cityMadam Speaker, we spent a lot of money to develop a drainage master plan, but implementation is a problem. We are requesting for Shs 134 billion.  Road infrastructure development and maintenanceMadam Speaker, we are requesting for more Shs 157 billion.  City sports developmentWe have a gap of Shs 6.2 billion and that is what we are requesting.  Office of the Prime MinisterOur observations and recommendations start from page 69. For facilitation to the Office of the Prime Minister to enhance coordination, monitoring and support to legislation, we have a gap of Shs 12 billion, and that is what we – THE SPEAKER:  Committee chairperson, this aspect of the city sports development appears in your report, but I overheard Hon. Ssewungu saying that it was also brought under education. (Mr Ssewungu rose_)  Isn’t that what you told me? 6.48MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu):  Madam Speaker, it is true and we are against it. They spent Shs 3 billion – money got from the Ministry of Education and Sports basket to cater for education and that money went to KCCA Football Club. That is irregular. Why?  Because no school has ever uses KCCA grounds and KCCA has its own administration structure, which is outside of the Ministry of Education and Sports. We cannot accept that. Madam Speaker, my chairperson is there; our report is coming. Now they want another Shs 6 billion from this side.  THE SPEAKER:  My concern is that you are budgeting for this two-fold. It is coming under education but also, under KCCA. So, which one are we taking?MS ABABIKU:  Madam Speaker, thank you for the information and guidance. If the same team also went and presented to the Committee on Education and Sports, we shall harmonise it at the Committee on Budget. We cannot have two proposals for one activity. THE SPEAKER: So, we should have it under one? MS ABABIKU: Yes. THE SPEAKER: It should be under the Committee on Presidential Affairs.MS ABABIKU: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. On the development of an electronic monetary and evaluation system to support the Office of the Prime Minister, we have a gap of Shs 5 billion. (Interjections)  Madam Speaker, this report was produced, and I have to read it the way it is. 12682SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSOn page 71, we request for Shs 5 billion. If need be, it will be harmonised at the Budget Committee. Operationalisation of the disaster risk management planMadam Speaker, we approved this plan in this House. We received a report from the Department of Disaster Preparedness and now it is time for us to act. We are requesting for Shs 43.177 billion.On the implementation of Kyangwali Resettlement, we are requesting for Shs 4.7 billion. Development expenditure categoryWe are making emphasis on capital development which is missing because many of the projects under the affirmative action programme have ended, like Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF) III and Development Response to Displacement Impacts Project (DRDIP). We request that the Office of the Prime Minister and all the sectors relevant in these areas expedite the process of following up, so that NUSAF IV and DRDIP II are brought on board. On land compensation for refugee settlement, we recommend Shs 96 billion. This covers especially Northern Uganda because we have realised that after repatriation, many people grab properties which are on their land. It is only in Northern Uganda where individuals have been requested to offer their land, except in western Uganda and other parts where the Government offered land. Therefore, we recommend that this money be got so that these properties are handed to the local governments. On commitment to affirmative action programmes, Madam Speaker, we are not doing well. There is poor financing of affirmative action programmes. In Northern Uganda, we have a gap of Shs 35 billion. Under Karamoja affairs, we have a gap of Shs 20.09 billion. Under Luwero Triangle and Rwenzori affairs, we have a gap of Shs 22.7 billion. Busoga affairs, we have a gap of Shs 20 billion. Teso affairs, we have a gap of Shs 20.2 billion. Bunyoro affairs, we have a gap of Shs 20.2 billion. Madam Speaker, we request that these monies are provided otherwise, affirmative action programmes are losing meaning. Storage and management items procured for distribution under affirmative action We are concerned about our store at Namanve. We went there and the situation is uncalled for. We found rats, a leaking roof, and the floor was so bad. We recommend that our four-acre land in Namanve be developed properly so that we have safety of our items stored there. THE SPEAKER: What does it store? MS ABABIKU: Madam Speaker, there are food and non-food items. We recommend that the area is well developed. The affirmative action region programmes should ensure that we have offices in the regions. THE SPEAKER: If it is for food items, why don’t you have silos in different regions? MS ABABIKU: Okay. THE SPEAKER: You can have stores in different regions. Why should you have them here? If you are a Minister for Karamoja, go and handle your matters in Karamoja, rather than things getting lost between here and Karamoja. That is how iron sheets ended up at our gates without us asking for them. (Laughter)  If you had a store in Karamoja, there was no way they would be diverted. MS ABABIKU: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for supporting our position. We said that this store at Namanve; the four-acre land needs to be left to the disaster preparedness department. However, the affirmative action programmes will have their stores at the regional level. [Ms Ababiku]12683THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024THE SPEAKER: If you had accepted what we said; that you respect Article 249 on the disaster management committee, that would be a very important store for you. Since you have decided to do things in an ad hoc way, go ahead. MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On support to Uganda Red Cross Society, we have a gap of Shs 12.56 billion. Uganda Red Cross Society gets subvention from – THE SPEAKER: In terms of drugs and ambulances, it is in hell. In terms of food relief and whatever, it is here. DR BWANIKA: Yes, but Madam Speaker, I have also heard of the anti-tick vaccine. Yesterday, we recommended – THE SPEAKER: That is science and technology. DR BWANIKA: Yes, but we recommended Shs 62 billion to the National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO). NARO are the ones who are in charge of research. The presidency cannot be in charge of research. She is now recommending another Shs 48 billion. THE SPEAKER: The beauty of all this is that it is going for reconciliation and harmonisation. Do you get it? When it goes to the Budget Committee and it has been provided for by another committee, it cannot allow it. Let us receive the report and then you debate it. MS ABABIKU: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for the guidance. I had requested to read the details, but I have been guided so people should be able to read. Fast-tracking the realisation of Government, that is, the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) Apart from the relocation, we have additionally recommended Shs 1.5 billion so that we have Shs 2.5 billion to fast-track our performance of SDGs. Resettlement of victims of disastersMadam Speaker, we recommend that this be rolled out instead of concentrating only in the Elgon Subregion. This is because there are many parts of this country where floods reoccur and people get affected. Budget allocation Office of the PresidentRecurrent budget is Shs 257,128,000,000,  Development expenditure we are recommending for Shs 22,260,000,000. State House, Recurrent Expenditure, we are recommending for Shs 403,078,000,000; Development Expenditure, we are recommending Shs 21,772,000,000. Office of the Prime Minister Recurrent Expenditure, we are recommending for Shs 110, 229,000,000 Development expenditure, we are recommending for Shs 3,776,000,000.The Ministry of Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs Under Recurrent Budget, we are recommending Shs 1,816,000,000 Development expenditure, we are recommending for Shs 38,025,000,000.Uganda AIDS Commission Recurrent Expenditure, we are recommending Shs 16,100,000,000 -THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssewungu, are you okay? MR SSEWUNGU: I am very okay, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Actually, I want you to bring the other petition of the Rwandese. How do they call it? On Tuesday. MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I will bring many of them, when time permits. 12684SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSTHE SPEAKER: On Tuesday, put his petition on the Order Paper. MR SSEWUNGU: Most obliged, Madam Speaker.MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Uganda Industrial Research Institute Under recurrent expenditure, we are recommending Shs 25,299,000,000Development expenditure, we are requesting Shs 6,700,000,000. Ethics and IntegrityUnder recurrent expenditure, we are recommending for Shs 23,662,000,000Development Expenditure, we are requesting for Shs 150 million. Kampala Capital City Authority Recurrent expenditure, we are requesting Shs 227,919,000,000Development expenditure, we are recommending Shs 606,019,000,000. Internal Security Organisation Under recurrent expenditure, we are recommending Shs 194,866,000,000 Development expenditure, we are recommending for Shs 10,680,000,000. External Security OrganisationUnder recurrent expenditure, we are requesting Shs 107,087,000,000 Development expenditure we are requesting for Shs 1,003,000,000. Science, technology and innovationsUnder recurrent expenditure, we are proposing Shs 140,102,000,000 Development expenditure, we are recommending Shs 2,998,000,000. Madam Speaker and colleagues, I beg to submit.THE SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson. Let us get all the reports then we debate. 7.03THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Ms Robina Rwakoojo): Madam Speaker, I would like to present the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the ministerial policy statement for the Financial Year 2024/2025. I would like to lay a copy of the report and I also lay a copy of the minutes.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. MS RWAKOOJO: Madam Speaker, the ministerial policy statements that were considered are the ones of the following V otes:V ote 007: Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.V ote 133: Directorate of Public Prosecutions.V ote 102: Electoral Commission. V ote 105: Uganda Law Reform Commission. V ote 104: Parliamentary Commission. V ote 101: The Judiciary. V ote 148: Judicial Service Commission. V ote 311: Law Development Centre (LDC). V ote 106: Uganda Human Rights Commission. V ote 103: Inspectorate of Government.V ote 119: Uganda Registration Services Bureau. I would like to thank the members of the committee, and to recognise those who are here. Please stand up for recognition. (Laughter)  Do not laugh; the others are out of jurisdiction. Allow me to go to page 30, which is item 10, for the observations and recommendations - THE SPEAKER: No, I have the signatures. Even if it is only one person who has stood, but the Honourable Government Chief Whip needs to make a follow-up on the attendance of your members, just like the Whip on this side. MS RWAKOOJO:  Page 30, Item 10.1.1, Law Development Centre 12685THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 20241. On allowances and other facilitation for part-time lecturers, the committee recommended that the allowances of part-time staff be declassified in the Chart of Accounts of allowances and be provided at different classifications to protect from possible future budget cuts. That LDC be provided with an additional Shs 3.5 billion on its non-wage recurrent budget, to cater for allowances of part-time staff.2. Completion of construction of the LDC multi-storied building The committee recommended that: (i) The Development Committee of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development finalises approval of this project as it has the potential to generate income once completed. (ii) The Government provides Shs 70 billion to the LDC development budget for the completion of the multi-storeyed building across the medium-term starting with the Financial Year 2024/2025.(iii) Operationalisation of the Mbale Regional Campus. The committee noted that the operationalisation of this centre is overdue and requires to be considered.The committee recommended that: The Government provides Shs 2 billion during the Financial Year 2024/2025 to fully operationalise the Mbale Regional Campus. On page 32, Uganda Law Reform Commission Replacement of ageing fleet of vehicles The committee recommends that Shs 1 billion be provided to the Commission to acquire four station wagons to facilitate stakeholders’ consultation, sensitisation of laws across the country. V ote 102: Electoral Commission The committee recommends that additional Shs 756.988 billion be provided to enable the Commission to conduct activities that have statutory timelines before general elections take place.Outstanding Wage Bill The committee recommends that:i)  The outstanding wage bill of Shs 11.16 billion be provided to the Electoral Commission.ii)  Shs 1.66 billion for remuneration of staff  in the 10 new cities and Terego District be provided during Financial Year 2024/2025.The conduct of by-electionsThe committee recommends that Shs 13 billion be provided to enable the Electoral Commission to organise and conduct by-elections as prescribed by law.Uganda Registration Services Bureau, page 35(i) Establishment and implementation of the Directorate of Copyright and Neighbouring Rights (URSB)The committee recommends an additional Shs 2.94 billion be provided to URSB to establish and implement the Directorate of Copyright and Neighbouring Rights, as guided by the Government. (ii)  Data disaster recovery site The committee recommends that an additional Shs 3.5 billion be provided to enable URSB develop a data disaster recovery site. (iii) Rent arrearsThe committee recommends an additional Shs 3.2 billion be provided to enable URSB settle its rent arrears. 12686SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSInspectorate of Government (IG) (i)  Digitisation and digital transformation of the Inspectorate of Government.The committee recommends that an additional Shs 1.7 billion be provided to kick start the digital transformation of the institution. (ii) Insufficient wage allocation.The committee recommends that an additional Shs 0.27 billion be provided to restore the IG’s budget to the current operating level. (iii) Completion of the IG head office building project The committee recommends an additional Shs 27.718 billion be provided to the development budget of the IG to complete the construction of the head office by June 2025. (iv) Replacement of the old and damaged fleet of vehicles The committee recommends that an additional:(a)  Shs 1.260 billion be provided to replace the six damaged vehicles during the bomb blast which occurred on 16 November 2021(b)  Shs 2.940 billion be provided to procure 14 double cabin vehicles.  (v) Additional wage recruitment of critical staff  The committee recommends an additional Shs 4,804,756,400 be provided to cater for recruitment of critical staff and additional operational costs. Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs(i) This talks about completion of the first phase of the JLOS House. The committee recommends that Shs 30 billion be provided during Financial Year 2024/2025 to the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to cater for the completion of the first phase of the JLOS House as this will go a long way to save the Government from spending Shs 30 billion on rent annually. (ii) Recruitment of state attorneysThe committee recommends that Shs 11.407 billion be provided during the Financial Year 2024/2025 to cater for the recruitment of state attorneys to increase the capacity of the ministry in handling numerous cases before them. (iii) Payment of outstanding court awards and court award arrears The committee recommends that the Government prioritises payments of court awards and court arrears to reduce the principal amounts that attract interest by providing Shs 232.875 billion to cater for settlement of the outstanding areas. (iv) Cattle compensation to war-debt claimants The Government had agreed to compensate the war date claimants in Teso, Acholi and Lango subregions for loss of livestock and other properties during the insurgency in the north.The committee recommends that the entire outstanding bill of Shs 463.211 billion be settled across three financial years of 2024/2025, 2025/2026 and 2026/2027. (v) Representation of Government in the East African Court of Justice and community meetings The committee recommends that the ministry’s travel abroad budget line be unfrozen and a provision of Shs 1 billion to facilitate Government’s representation in the East African Court of Justice and East African Community meetings be made. (vi) Operationalisation of 13 regional officesThe ministry currently operates regional offices in Gulu, Moroto, Arua, Mbale, Fort Portal, Soroti, and Mbarara against the Judiciary’s 23 high court circuits. [Ms Rwakoojo]12687THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024The committee recommends that the ministry be provided with Shs 1 billion to rent 13 regional offices. Uganda Human Rights Commission (UHRC)(i) Salary enhancement of staff  The committee recommends that the Government provides Shs 19.59 billion during the Financial Year 2024/2025 to the Commission to enhance staff salary to a level similar to that of its counterparts.(ii) Civic education, values education and human rights awarenessThe committee recommends an additional Shs 2 billion to the non-wage recurrent during the Financial Year 2024/2025 to undertake countrywide civic and values education and sensitisation on protection and promotion of human rights. (iii) Transport equipmentThe committee recommends an additional Shs 2 billion be provided to the commission to acquire transport equipment to help it execute its mandate. (iv) Low funding of the commission The committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should prioritise increasing the budget allocations to UHRC to enable it execute its mandate effectively. The Judicial Service Commission (JSC)(i) Transport equipmentThe committee recommends that the Government waives the procurement of vehicles for the Commission and provide Shs 1.38 billion for their procurement. (ii) Salary enhancement The committee recommends that the Government provides Shs 1.190 billion during the Financial Year 2024/2025 to cater for salary enhancement pursuant to Circular Standing Instruction No. 3 of 2023. Office of the Directorate of Public Prosecutions (DPP) (i) StaffingThe committee recommends that Shs 8.620 billion be provided during the Financial Year 2024/2025 to facilitate the ODPP recruit and promote staff with the aim of increasing the scope of criminal prosecution services across the country. (ii) SecurityThe committee recommends that Shs 1 billion be provided to the ODPP during the Financial Year of 2024/2025 to cater for security at all its field offices. (iii) Transport equipmentThe committee recommends that Shs 7.5 billion be provided to the ODPP during the Financial Year 2024/25 to procure transport equipment. (iv) Computerisation through rolling out the Prosecution Case Management System (PROCAMIS)The committee recommends that Shs 5 billion be provided to the ODPP during the Financial Year 2024/2025 to facilitate the ODPP to automate and computerise its prosecution system with the aim of improving the quality of service delivery. (v) Construction of office and residential premises The committee recommends that an additional Shs 10 billion on the development budget be provided to the ODPP during the Financial Year 2024/2025 to construct their own upcountry offices and residential premises. 12688SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTS(vi) Reduction of case backlog (witness preparation and protection)The committee recommends that an additional Shs 10 billion be provided. Madam Speaker, the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs recommends that the House adopts this report and approve the Budget estimates contained in this report. I beg to report. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, committee chairperson, for the good report. Finance - (VI) THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT7.17THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Ms Jane Pacuto):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to present the report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the ministerial policy statement and Budget estimates for the Financial Year 2024/2025. Before I go into the presentation of the report, allow me to table a copy of the report, the minutes and accompanying documents therein. I beg to lay. THE SPEAKER:  Please lay.MS PACUTO:  The Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. In accordance with Article 155(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Section 13 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, and Rule 148 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, sectoral committees are mandated, among others, other things to examine and comment on the policy statements. The Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development has 14 V otes as listed in the report and 10 subventions as listed on pages 4 and 5. The methodology used is herein listed on page 5. However, as a matter of policy, let me highlight the following: On gender and equity compliance, my committee found that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was not able to service the committee with the Gender and Equity certificates, although we used that which was shared by the Equal Opportunities Commission and because of that, we want to recommend as follows:1. That the minister makes a report to Parliament with an explanation regarding the non-compliance to Section 13(15)(g) of the Public Finance Management Act(PFMA), 2015 in line with Section 78(1) of the PFMA, 2015.Again, this is about policy and I want to comment about the resource envelope. As you might have heard from previous presenters, we found it a bit difficult, as the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, because on the projected resource envelope for 2024, we relied on the Budget estimates that were tabled on the Floor of Parliament which indicated a total of Shs 60 trillion. However, there was a variation in the talking notes of the minister. When he presented the ministerial policy statement, it was totalling Shs 58 trillion and we found this a bit confusing.We know that there is a rumour going around about the corrigenda, but that was not presented to the committee. As a matter of policy, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development needs to address this as well. The revenue forecast for 2024/2025 is very key for us to listen to, as well as the minister and officials in the Ministry of Finance. The committee observed that revenue forecast for 2024/2025 revenue collections are significantly lower than the trend in past revenue growth. I would like to take you to page 8 to demonstrate that. When you look at the nominal growth rate on page 8, Table 3, the trend in 2020/2021 was 14 per cent and in [Ms Rwakoojo]12689THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 20242021/2022, 10.8 per cent. There was a drop, it increased to 15.9 per cent in 2022/2023. In the current year of 2023/2024, it was 17.3 per cent and now the Minister of Finance is using a figure of about 6.4 per cent as the nominal growth rate in revenue collection. This is not normal. When you look at the three or four consecutive financial years, it averages to about 14.6 per cent. We, as a committee, used an average of about 10 per cent and we think that the envisaged growth should have not stood at Shs 31,574,420,000,000 but rather, if they used an average of about 10 per cent growth, it should have grown to about Shs 32.63918 trillion. Therefore, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance reviews its revenue projection by maintaining the revenue growth within the provision bounds, as this will in turn ease the pressure on domestic borrowing.We want to look at the costly domestic borrowingOur recommendation is that the Government and the Ministry of Finance in particular should slow down on continued borrowing, especially in the domestic market, as the cost of these loans is so high and also, domestic borrowing crowds out the private sector by driving up commercial interest rates. This is very paramount because this is a liberalised economy and in every economy globally now, it is the private sector that is driving needed growth and development and our country should follow suit. On page 10 on the overview on V ote 008- I do not want to dwell on it, Members can read.The low cost of tax incentives has been an issue in this House and the country. We are grappling with revenue collection and we think something has to be done about tax incentives. The committee recommends that the minister ensures that every beneficiary of a tax incentive has compiled tax returns presented to Parliament for the requisite approval, as provided for under the PFMA and Tax Procedures Code Act. On outstanding domestic arrears, I would like to take you to the recommendation on page 13. Again, this affects the private sector. The committee recommends that the minister lays on the Table, for Parliament’s consideration, the domestic arrears clearance payment plan before approval of the annual Budget estimates. (Applause) In the Budget, only about Shs 200 billion is allocated to cater for domestic arrears. Given the cumulative domestic arrears and if no concrete plan is put before this Parliament, we are going to push very many traders out of business and this is not acceptable. On V ote 108: National Planning AuthorityWe can read that. I would like to take you to the budget shortfall for the National Planning Authority. The Authority’s home across has been condemned and has to be razed. They have been provided with Shs 10 billion and we think that an additional Shs 30 billion should be given to them, so that they can expeditiously construct their own home and we save on rent. However, because they have to bring down their offices in the coming financial year, we think that there is a need for us to provide Shs 1.7 billion to cover the shortfall in rent, so that the construction can start. V ote 123: National Lotteries and Gaming Regulatory BoardThis is one of the entities under our docket that supports this economy, in terms of raising revenue. They planned to raise up to Shs 300 billion but had a shortfall in the following areas and because they are a revenue generator, we need to strengthen them so that they can even collect more than Shs 300 billion. On the automation of the records management system and ISO 2770 and 2771 privacy information system certification, the committee 12690SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSrecommends an additional Shs 0.3 billion to undertake the above acquisitions. Due diligenceThe committee recommends that an additional Shs 0.5 billion be provided to the Board to undertake due diligence, so that we can improve on their revenue collection and also monitor gaming that may be harmful to our children. Public awarenessThe committee recommends that Shs 0.45 billion be provided to the Board to undertake public awareness so that our people do gaming responsibly. Madam Speaker, on page 17, I take you to V ote 129: Financial Intelligence Authority.Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the ministry for fighting hard to see the country out of the grey list. That calls for more strengthening of the Authority. (Applause)  This gives a lot of implications on the financial sector and economy at large for us to be out of the grey list. Therefore, we should not allow the country to slip back into the grey list or even beyond the black list.For that reason, the committee is recommending that an additional Shs 1.0 billion be provided to FIA in the Financial Year 2024/2025 to review all anti-money laundering laws. ii. Sensitisation on financial crimesThe committee recommends that an additional Shs 1.1 billion be provided to the Financial Intelligence Authority (FIA) to undertake public sensitisation on financial crimes in the Financial Year 2024/2025. This is very paramount, especially to the traders who may be tempted to do otherwise. V ote 130: Treasury Operations Policy and budgetary recommendationsi. Limited resource envelopeThe committee recommends that the minister should table the progress report on the level of implementation of the Public Finance Investment Strategy, 2022 before the approval of the annual budget estimates for Financial Year 2024/2025. ii. Statutory revisionsThe committee recommends that any budgetary alterations be undertaken with the approval of Parliament. The committee recommends that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, under Section 78 of the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA) 2015, makes a report to Parliament with an explanation on the statutory revisions. iii. Outstanding Bank of Uganda (BoU) reimbursementsThe committee recommends that the minister tables in Parliament the outstanding stock of the BoU reimbursements, when the ad hoc funding was raised as well as repayment schedule before approval of the Annual Budget Estimates of Financial Year 2024/2025. Madam Speaker, this is because there have been no clear total amounts because the Auditor-General gives us a different figure from that of the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Therefore, we think there is a need for this Parliament to know the outstanding stock of the reimbursement required as stated in the recommendation. iv. Undisbursed debtWe heard from the Committee on Physical Infrastructure how we have acquired loans, but the implementation of the projects sometimes delays or even does not take place. [Ms Pacuto]12691THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024THE SPEAKER: Welcome back, Hon. Ogwang. (Laughter) MS PACUTO: On undisbursed debt, the committee noted with concern that as at 31 December 2023, the committed but undisbursed debt amounted to Shs 14.42 trillion. The committee recommends that the Auditor-General undertakes a special audit into the entire loan portfolio of the Government with a view of addressing redundant approved loans. (Applause) V ote 131: Office of the Auditor-General.Policy and budgetary recommendationsi. Recruitment of staff.You realise that with more social programmes like Emyooga , the Parish Development Model (PDM) and others, the scope of audit of the Office of Auditor-General is expanding year in, year out and, therefore, there is need for them to bring on board qualified staff. The committee recommends that Shs 20 billion additional - they needed Shs 40 billion but because we understand the budget constraint, we have recommended that for this year, let them start with Shs 20 billion and then next financial year, we can look around and provide them with an additional Shs 20 billion to fill in their organisational structure as per the evaluation carried out. ii. Operational fundsMadam Speaker, in line with that, again, when you recruit, you definitely need to apply some operational funds here and there. There, we are recommending Shs 6.05 billion in Financial Year 2024/2025 as operational funds in that expanded scope. iii. Transport equipmentThe committee recommends an additional Shs 3.5 billion. They actually needed Shs 7 billion, but we are considerate of the resource envelope. Therefore, let us provide them an additional Shs 3.5 billion in Financial Year 2024/2025 and the balance of Shs 3.5 billion in Financial Year 2025/2026 to upgrade its ageing fleet. iv. Perception survey of the Auditor-General’s mandate across the countryIt is important that the Office of the Auditor-General is informed of how the public perceives their services to this country – THE SPEAKER: Yes, Hon. Nsereko? MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You guided that it would be a 20-minute presentation for each presenter and that they should read the recommendation on the V otes. She has already used 25 minutes. THE SPEAKER: Hon. Meddie, you would rather leave all other V otes, but discuss V ote 130. V ote 130 is a very important V ote. That is where all the loans, advances and unspent balances are. That is exactly what Hon. Gorreth was speaking about. She is about to finish. MS PACUTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for protecting me. This is about finance; therefore, we need to be patient. On the survey, the committee recommends an additional Shs 0.9 billion to the Office of the Auditor-General. V ote 138: Uganda Investment Authority (UIA)I would like to take you to page 26 – THE SPEAKER: How much for the Office of Auditor-General? MS PACUTO:  Additional  Shs 0.9 billion to carry out the public perception survey. THE SPEAKER: You may need to - we passed a resolution two days back. In the circumstance that an Auditor-General wishes to retire - I am not saying that he is retiring – you may need to put it in your budget and take it as priority. 12692SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSYou need to get a resolution of this Parliament on what was awarded to the Auditor-General. MS PACUTO: That is noted, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: That is under Section 5(2) of the National Audit Act, which mandates Parliament to pronounce itself on how much the Auditor-General should get pre and post. MS PACUTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. That is noted. The committee will await the extract from the resolutions of Parliament and then the - THE SPEAKER: The extract is ready. The committee should get the extract. MS PACUTO: I think the Ministry of Public Service also has some work to do. They have to make calculations - THE SPEAKER: No, the Auditor-General is a staff of Parliament. MS PACUTO: Okay. Maybe the Parliamentary Commission then needs to give us the figures to include. THE SPEAKER: Can you take the advice I am giving you? The money does not come to the Parliamentary Commission; it goes to the Office of Auditor-General. Therefore, in the money that you are asking for, include that amount. MS PACUTO: Thank you for your guidance, Madam Speaker. We shall comply, as a committee. V ote 138: Uganda Investment Authority (UIA) Policy and budgetary recommendationsi. Surveying, titling and securing all industrial and business parksMadam Speaker, the UIA has secured a lot of land across the country and they are requiring an additional Shs 6.5 billion for securing and fencing the industrial parks across the country and that is the recommendation of the committee. Financing activities of the owner’s engineer for the Financial Year 2024/2025The investment authority requires Shs 10 billion to finance the activities of the owner’s engineer. This is the supervisor in the industrial park for years. He has worked without pay; it is more or less arrears.  V ote 141: Uganda Revenue AuthorityOn total revenue projection for Shs 31.5744 trillion - I think I have already commented on it. Budget cut on wageThe Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development told us that they made a budget cut because there was a Shs 55.73 billion that had been provided in the last two financial years but was not used and we think that this should be reinstated so that the URA can recruit more staff.Development of the oil and gas monitoring systemThe authority requires additional Shs 9.16 billion and the committee recommends that this should be provided in the next Financial Year 2024/2025 and the remaining Shs 22.34 billion across the medium-term to develop an oil and gas monitoring system and position itself to process oil and gas information. V ote 143: Uganda Bureau of Statistics What is outstanding is the tax arrears being accrued during procurement of census tablets. The bureau informed the committee that they need Shs 23.67 billion to be provided for the tax arrears, and we do recommend the same to be provided for the bureau. [The Speaker]12693THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024V ote 149: National Population Council Lengthy and manual procurement process Madam Speaker, we were satisfied with the ministerial policy statement of the National Planning Council, and we thought they can go with what the ministry has provided. V ote 153: Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets AuthorityThe committee observed that the procurement process is still lengthy, manual, and frustrating, and this hampers service delivery. The committee recommends that the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority expand the eGP procurement system to all MDAs as this will eliminate the human interface and corruption related to it. The committee learned that they are only still at 35 and we are recommending that they should expand this. Increase the coverage of procurement audits The committee recommends that PPDA be provided additional Shs 1.5 billion to expand the scope of procurement audits from 40 per cent to at least 60 per cent coverage of the entities with the aim of improving compliance across entities. V ote 161: Uganda Free Zones Authority Completion of Entebbe International Airport Free ZoneThis afternoon, we are complaining about road works that have taken so long. We also felt that instead of dragging the budget for very many years, it would be better that we provide a one-off additional Shs 3 billion so that the Entebbe International Airport Free Zone is completed in time and put to use. In the same manner, on purchase of the cold storage facilities at Entebbe International Airport, we felt that it would not serve Ugandans and the country very well if we simply completed and did not install the cold storage facilities. We are, therefore, recommending that an additional Shs 4.4 billion be provided to UFZA to procure a cold storage facility for Entebbe International Airport so that we can improve on the needed revenue that this country needs and also improve on our forex reserves. Installation of land boundary markersThe authority requires Shs 15 billion and the committee recommends that UFZA prioritises the installation of boundary markers and signboards, pre-feasibility, and master planning activity for the Financial Year 2024/2025 and in the medium term. V ote 162: The Uganda Microfinance Regulatory AuthorityIt should be noted that the Uganda Microfinance Regulatory Authority’s NTR collection has grown from Shs 0.5 billion in the Financial Year 2018/2019 to Shs 1.12 billion in the Financial Year 2022/2023. This is a result of license fees and application fees and we think, as a committee, that this authority be strengthened by providing them, say, wage-related costs.The committee therefore recommends that we give them additional money so that they can recruit and do much more than that, in terms of facilitating revenue collection. We recommend that Shs 0.20 billion to cater for staff social contributions be provided. They were provided only wage, but they did not provide for social contribution and we felt the two go hand in hand. Operational funds Since the work that they do is huge and it is for the entire country they are recruiting more, it implies that there is need for additional operational funds and we are recommending an additional Shs 0.1 billion to cater for operational funds.12694SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSLicensing and supervising of PDM and Emyooga  SACCOsThe committee recommends that UMRA be provided with an additional Shs 1 billion to exercise this mandate effectively in the Financial Year 2024/2025. Soon, we shall need to repay and therefore, there is some work that UMRA has to do there if these SACCOs are to stand the test of time. V ote 163: Uganda Retirement Benefits Regulatory Authority On capacity enhancement, the committee recommends that URBRA be provided with an additional Shs 0.64 billion in the Financial Year 2024/2025 for retooling. On stakeholder consultations, the committee recommends that an additional Shs 0.90 billion be provided to URBRA to undertake key stakeholder consultation amid the extension of pension and social security coverage across the country. We need long-term savings and therefore we need to strengthen URBRA. General observationsMembers, this is key. As I mentioned before, there are inconsistencies in the Budget documents presented for the Financial Year 2023/2024 and this is our recommendation. As you can see, the comparison of draft budget estimates, ministerial statements, and appropriations Bills are different and we think that the ministry should take note of this and not make a repeat. The committee, therefore, recommends that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, guides Parliament and the respective V otes based on inconsistency in Budget numbers.The committee further recommends that the minister, by motion, amends his submission to the House to have consistent and reliable numbers for Parliament’s consideration. That is very key because the public there and even some of us do not know which numbers to take. Declining international trade taxesMadam Speaker, now that we are considering –THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Jane, which figures are we talking about? Is it the ones in the policy system? MS PACUTO:  Let me take you to Table 5. You can see that the ministerial policy statement for example, of the National Lotteries and Gaming, is reading Shs 18,761,804,000. The estimate has the same figure but the Appropriation Bill has Shs 16,786,744,000. So, there are inconsistencies in the three sources that we would have used. THE SPEAKER:  What are you going to do in the Committee on Budget? Aren’t you going to harmonise those figures and come up with a common figure? MS PACUTO:  Yes, Madam Speaker, but it is a requirement that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development lays documents here. Since they laid different documents that are not tallying, we think that as a matter of rule or even the law - I cannot quote the law - it would be proper that they come back and re-table or move a motion, which will guide the House on –THE SPEAKER:  What will be the use of their corrigenda? Will it not be to correct or to harmonise? I am just asking. MS PACUTO:  Maybe, since the minister is here, he can explain. I am reading the committee report. THE SPEAKER:  It is not tabled; it will come to correct the figures. MS PACUTO:  Maybe the minister will respond to that as he comes here, but we thought we should take note of that. ii)  On declining international taxes, the committee recommends that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provides justification to [Ms Pacuto]12695THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024Parliament for the declining and many times stagnant tax head growth projections despite a fast rising economic growth rate.Two, the committee recommends that the minister re-evaluates revenue projections to a more realistic growth path in order to accommodate more expenditure demands on the budget. I had earlier highlighted that.iii)  Projections for domestic debt, maturities and service –THE SPEAKER:  Still on taxes, honourable minister, we need to know how you determine what should be taxed and what should be left out. As the representatives of the people, we want services. We would be very interested in helping you find out where we can be able to get money for us to give services to our people. I think we need a consultative approach between the Cabinet and us, on whether the taxes that you are bringing are really the actual taxes that people need to pay outside there. It would help you. You will find out that you are only thinking about taxes on land and fuel, yet I would tell you that this is the best thing for us to enlarge our tax base. The report is still on. MS PACUTO:  The committee found it strange that the debt database can reflect maturity debt in one financial year to be Shs 9.4 trillion and then it is revised to Shs 12 trillion. Based on that, the committee recommends that Parliament, through its relevant committee, investigates Uganda’s debt portfolio to guide on the debt service profile into the medium term. As a Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we would like to propose that in the future as we present our ministerial policy statement, if the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development could table the tax Bills in time, we would process them and present them at the same time so that this House can appreciate better the revenue mobilisation efforts or challenges, as you have just guided. We therefore want to propose that in future, we present the two together or probably on the same day. We are going to come back with the tax Bills; it may be totally different from the projections the ministry has made. However, let me go to 6.6. In conclusion, the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development appreciates the fact that the institutions under it are very critical in achieving a just and equitable society. During the presentation of the ministerial policy statements, there was a shared concern that these institutions continue to attract very limited funding, which has made it extremely difficult to attain their respective mandates.The budget strategy for the Financial Year 2024/2025 will only be achieved if the institutions are supported in the execution of their mandates. Madam Speaker, in light of the above, it is the prayer of the committee that this House adopts its report and approves the Budget estimates that incorporate the committee’s recommendations for the respective V otes for the Financial Year 2024/2025 as listed in the summary of budget estimates for the Financial Year 2024/2025, V ote by V ote.I will start with V ote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. For recurrent expenditure, they will require Shs 1,935,390,135. For development expenditure, it is Shs 482 – Madam Speaker, I think the Members can read this summary. With that, I beg to report. (Applause)Allow me to thank the committee members. Madam Speaker, like you know, some of us have already reported for the retreat on tax Bills. However, some members have stayed here to support me. Please stand up - these are the serious members of this committee. I thank my minister too. THE SPEAKER:  Even Hon. Nakut? Thank you very much, honourable member. We have got the three reports and we are only left with one. 12696SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTS(VII) THE COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTSTHE SPEAKER: They are uploading it. As they finish uploading, can we start with the report from the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development? Finance helps us. Can we hear from the minister? You have heard from the report the weaknesses of what you have done - Yes, finance ministry is very good for you. There are things that he needs to clarify. 7.57THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) ( Mr Amos Lugoloobi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me start by thanking the committee chairperson for the report well-presented and the good content in the report –THE SPEAKER : Just before you come in, the Minister of ICT and National Guidance is very compliant. He promised you that he was going to ask you for areas where there is poor or no network. The letter is here to Members of Parliament:“Parliament of UgandaPO Box 7178Kampala.Honourable Members,Re: Request for information about areas with poor or no network in your constituenciesDuring the discussion of the report of the Committee on ICT and National Guidance on the ministerial policy statement and Budget estimates for the Financial Year 2024/2025 on 12 April 2024, many honourable colleagues raised concerns of no or poor network in your constituencies. As I promised, I now write requesting you to submit names of areas in your districts and constituencies that have no or poor network to enable us plan appropriately. I will appreciate if this information could be availed by the end of April 2024. You can deliver this information at Parliament Reception or at the ministry offices or in Speaker’ s Office; whichever is convenient.  When you bring it there, I will deliver it. Thank you and best regards.Dr Chris Baryomunsi, MP and Minister of ICT and National Guidance.  All of you will get a copy in your pigeonholes.8.00MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu):  Madam Speaker, if I am permitted, I pray that the minister also writes to these telecom companies because in the modern era now, each company knows where there is no network. It is displayed on its grid properly. So, write to them as well and get that information as you get ours. (Interjection)  They have it. Thank you for your letter, honourable minister.THE SPEAKER:  You wait for him to write to them. As for me, I have already given you my list. Act; we are the ones who requested. So, the minister has done his best. Yes, finance –  DR BARYOMUNSI:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. If I may explain to Hon. Ssewungu, the telecom companies withdrew from constructing masts. Like I said earlier on, there are two private sector companies; American Tower Corporation (ATC) and Ubuntu. Their work is to construct masts and then MTN, Airtel, Lycamobile, just rent those masts. If you have a radio and you want to mount your antenna, you just rent from them. That is the framework. I said earlier on that when we license these companies, our policy requires that they cover 90 per cent of the national area and 10 per cent is covered by the Government. So, once you submit those areas, I will invite these companies together with the Uganda Communications Commission (UCC), and maybe even the telecom companies, and then 12697THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024we sit and map out the country and see how to support the different constituencies.THE SPEAKER:   Thank you, honourable minister.DR BARYOMUNSI:  The Speaker has already submitted her areas in Bukedea and next week, I will send the technical team to do the assessment. (Laughter)THE SPEAKER:  I will come and testify. Honourable minister, thank you.MR LUGOLOOBI:  Madam Speaker, I have already appreciated the chairperson for the report.In one of the observations on page 9, where the committee has proposed the projected revenue, which is higher than what we are projecting, our projections are scientifically arrived at in a model which we run that presents various assumptions. So, it is scientifically arrived at looking at various parameters, and this is what it is giving us. Also, we have to remember that the base keeps increasing upon which this growth rate is being measured. Therefore, we cannot just lineally state the revenue growth the way the chairperson is proposing without putting into account the assumptions. I suggest that if need be, we would be allowed to make a more detailed presentation about this to the House. The second issue is about the recommendation that the minister lays on the Table for Parliament’s consideration on the domestic arrears clearance payment plan before approval of the annual budget estimates. We have no objection, we can lay out a plan, but of course, we have challenges, as previously presented them to this House. Whereas we recognise that our provision is far less than what we ought to provide, we continue to face challenges in the availability of resources, first, to deal with the requirements in the budget. Since morning, presenter after presenter, is presenting new requests. Now, that has to be measured against the portfolio of the arrears that we have. So, it is a question of availability. As we all know, in economics, there is that problem of scarcity of resources amidst various choices. This is what we are experiencing. If we choose to optimise or to maximise domestic arrears, it means that we are reducing drastically on what we are providing for other expenditures. I think it is a difficult paradox that we are dealing with to make a decision. We really want to pay these domestic arrears, but the challenge is the availability of resources. Let us not forget the challenge we have now in mobilising resources. Since the COVID-19 pandemic, the interest rates have been going up, especially on the externally sourced resources. As we speak, the interest rates are at 9 to 10 per cent on external resources. Domestic interest rates are also equally high, and we cannot continue committing the Government so heavily because that has repercussions in terms of the debt burden we are incurring as a country. So, we shall provide a paper on that one as well. The other issue is on pages 20 and 21 where the committee recommends that the minister should table the progress report on the level of implementation of the Public Finance Investment Strategy before the approval of the annual budget. The committee has looked at various options of mobilising more resources into the budget, and they have mentioned them, including Public Private Partnerships, remittances, but remittances cannot be revenue into the budget, philanthropy, crowd financing, international bonds and infrastructure bonds, among others.Indeed, we have some of these long-term bonds, which we have been issuing. Again, this is borrowing that we have been undertaking for a long time. It cannot be an alternative to revenue. The two are different because we mobilise resources through revenue and borrowing. Our problem has been borrowing because of limited revenue. We need to strike a 12698SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSbalance between the two to ensure that our debt to GDP remains sustainable. That has been the challenge. The PPP would be a viable option if we had a strong private sector. However, we have the PPP Act that presents very complicated conditions for securing a Public Private Partnership (PPP). We have been trying but success has been limited in terms of securing PPP contracts.When I was presenting this, this afternoon, I talked about the Jinja Expressway and the challenge we are facing is securing a private party into that arrangement. They are insisting that we provide partial risk guarantees. To secure a guarantee again requires the Government to incur a cost. They have also insisted that we should contribute to the project. We are looking for money but the private party is saying that we raise at least $400 million and on top of that, we guarantee their contribution.Therefore, it is also an avenue that we have an operational unit within the ministry but success in that arrangement has been limited.The other comment was about the inconsistencies in figures between the ministerial policy statement estimates as we laid them here and the Appropriation Bill numbers. I need to verify these but otherwise, the figures have to be the same assuming - THE SPEAKER:  There is a – MR ATWIJUKIRE:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. When the honourable minister talks about partial risk guarantees, we wonder why it is a shock at this point. Where are the thinkers in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development? The planners ought to have envisaged this and planned ahead and if they realised that the country could not afford it, they would stop it for some time. Why first get the country into it and you are stuck? The country is expecting the commitments are done but we are making the same lamentations.Finally, during the budgeting process, the country is very expectant. We continue to grow the figure in terms of Shs 58 trillion and dwindle on allocation to sectors that help the common person but we do not seem to get clear strategies from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development apart from the usual rhetoric here, we shall do micro-economic something. The person on the ground wants to hear solid strategies that we can discuss together as a country and stop all this English. How long shall we hear stories, pretending to grow the economy yet it is completely pseudo? Even all the chairpersons, who have presented reports, are doing a ceremonial activity. It was too tough for us. We want to hear the strategy from Ministry of Finance on these issues.THE SPEAKER:  Supplementary?MR EKANYA:  Madam Speaker, Hon. Amos knows very well that if you have domestic arrears of over a trillion shillings - these gentlemen and ladies went to a commercial bank locally, and borrowed money to finance government projects. They issued a guarantee to the Government of Uganda and they are paying interest on it. They have also paid tax, but you hold their money for two, three to four years; their properties are auctioned. These are the same people you want to release money and pay taxes to grow the economy. What economic model are you applying? Wouldn’t it be correct for the Government to take deliberate action? Borrow money and clear off this Shs 1.5 trillion domestic debt.Therefore, you would be releasing money into the economy, these people would invest, pay taxes and create jobs, leading to the growth of the economy. However, if you hold their money, they are paying tax but some banks will also perform poorly in terms of growth and employment.[Mr Lugoloobi]12699THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024THE SPEAKER:  Liquidity.MR EKANYA:  And liquidity. I would like to request the minister to concede and provide money in this budget to clear the domestic debt to zero. Why is that when it comes to international debt, we issue treasury bonds and bills to clear the debts to zero?For this road, you are even telling us that they want to borrow money to issue a partial risk guarantee so that when the date for paying the money comes, it goes automatically into the Escrow account.Honourable minister, the pressure we are facing is because business people’s money - over Shs 1.5 trillion - is being held by Government. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Yes? Maybe you need to understand where the domestic debt is coming from first.  MR ODUR:  Madam Speaker, I actually have a big reservation about the figures of these domestic arrears and they need to be audited. No business person can have their money with someone and they sit comfortably. Year in and year out, you are told that we are not going to pay and you sit – THE SPEAKER:  That is why I am saying that we need to understand where this money is coming from.MR ODUR:  Yes, we need to audit because the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development - Madam Speaker, with your financial background, I know that you understand how some virtual debts can be created to serve specific purposes. If it pleases this House – THE SPEAKER:  Fictitious not virtual.       MR ODUR:  Yes, fictitious debts because a serious businessman who has borrowed money to finance his business and has supplied the Government cannot sit comfortably as it is. If it means burning themselves up – We recently saw a few staff from Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) who attempted to come here to Parliament. Honourable minister, this is an area that I would like to request the Speaker that we look deeply into. Maybe then, after the audit, we shall find that it is a small one and we clear it. I am not saying that it does not exist, but for the entire seven to eight years that I have been here, the same list of domestic claimants are the ones that appear and they seem to be very comfortable. It does not really make sense.MS PACUTO:  Madam Speaker, we need to make some clarification here. We talked about two things; the domestic arrears and the debt stock and knowing how much the country owes and to whom-THE SPEAKER:  For you to get the debt stock, you need to know the domestic and then the external loan that you have. That is when you can have a debt stock. Recently, you did a human resource audit, what were your findings? You hear from outside there that there were fictitious employees and a lot of money is being saved - Yes, even in Parliament, a payroll audit was conducted and a lot of money was saved.MR LUGOLOOBI:  Madam Speaker, I beg that we report about the Payroll Audit on another day. I do not want to report on it without the numbers.THE SPEAKER:  I would like to request – Yes -8.18MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of domestic arrears is a serious one. For us who sit in the Public Accounts Committee, almost all ministries have this challenge, but unfortunately, when you ask what they are doing about it, they say; “The Ministry of Finance has given them only maybe 1 per cent of what they should be paying.” 12700SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSAnd when you look critically at what is happening currently, most of these arrears attract interest. As if that is not enough, the other bigger problem with these domestic arrears – and this is why you find the Government losing a lot of revenue – is that when these people make supplies, they triple the price knowing that the Government is not going to pay immediately. This is why, at the end of the day, there is no value for money. How I wish we got out of this business of delaying to pay these contractors and purchase what we are purchasing or contracting at a reasonable price. The delay in paying these suppliers is the reason why we are losing this revenue. Madam Speaker, looking at what is outstanding – Shs 10.8 trillion – and we are clearing only one percent, what is that? Shs 200 billion is what is provided for. What even angers me more is seeing that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, aware that we have this challenge, goes into giving tax incentives to companies that do not even file tax returns at the end of the day. Are these really credible companies? Madam Speaker, we also need a list of all these companies that have been provided these tax incentives. Before you give tax incentives, you must come to this Parliament for approval. We need a list of all the companies that have been given these tax incentives in this country. Against that, we shall be able to tell the ones for which you did not come to seek the approval of this House. In all this, there is corruption at the end of the day. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, when these arrears reach a certain amount, do they not amount to a loan to the Government?MR LUGOLOOBI:  I think it depends on how you look at it – because we have been contracting debt through borrowing. However, if you want to interpret debt to include arrears, the money you owe to some creditors who have offered services to you –THE SPEAKER:  It is a debt. (Laughter)MR LUGOLOOBI:  It depends on how you look at it, but we have been separating the two. THE SPEAKER:  When you look at Article 159(2), the Government shall not borrow, guarantee or raise a loan on behalf of itself or any other public institution, authority or a person, except with an approval of Parliament. By the time you reach that level, it becomes a debt and you ought to have got authorisation from Parliament. What we can do – let us get a breakdown of the arrears, both local and international so that we analyse and determine what it is, what it was for and whether it is real or fictitious. MR LUGOLOOBI:  Most obliged, Madam Speaker. We shall provide the breakdown. MR MUHAMMED NSEREKO: Thank you. Hon. Amos Lugoloobi, at the moment, there is a debate in the world on who gives cheaper, but reliable credit. I think you should interest yourself in the new phenomenon where there is competition for providing services based on promissory payment. I know that when it comes to matters like sports facilities and hospitals, there are very many interested financers who are ready to finance you and on a long term basis. Secondly, interest yourselves in approaching the Islamic Development Bank so that we may get cheaper credit. We are members of the Organisation of Islamic Conference. THE SPEAKER: We actually passed a law in this House on Islamic Banking. So, make use of it.MR MUHAMMED NSEREKO:  Correct – at international level. Probably, we can get cheaper credit, mainly for infrastructural development, health and education where they are really aggressive. Probably, this will help us close the gaps, but also not go for expensive loans just like we are incurring. [Ms Opendi]12701THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024As regards the Kampala-Jinja Expressway that you talked about, the door is still open. There are very many people that are still interested in that project, without giving such conditions. THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, let us get the final remarks from the minister, as we take an initiative. We cannot wait for the list from the finance ministry. Let us have an initiative to have a breakdown of that. We can have a breakdown of it so that we compare with what comes from the ministry for finance. Let me first get information.MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, we had a meeting last week, in the Budget Committee. Hon. Henry Musasizi, the Secretary to the Treasury and a team from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was there. The minister for finance informed the Budget Committee that the ministry issued Treasury Bills and borrowed money to increase the budget for this financial year that is about to come to an end, without parliamentary approval. It was done by the office of the Accountant-General, to a tune of Shs 4 trillion. All the members of the Budget Committee are here. The matter became very serious and we resolved to suspend the Budget Committee meetings until the minister presents the legal framework under which they usurped the power of Parliament, of appropriation, to borrow Shs 4 trillion. Madam Speaker, I expected that the minister -THE SPEAKER:   I thought that – last financial year, when we had a shortage to close the financial year, they brought a supplementary and we passed it. What gave them powers to just do it behind the curtain? MR EKANYA:  Madam Speaker, based on that, they could not answer. They tried to use English here and there. (Laughter)  We agreed in the committee to suspend the proceedings until the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development presents the justifiable legal reason for us to accept their position.I expected that the minister for finance, today, would have brought that as well as the appropriate action taken. According to us, that led to abuse of office. We expected heads to roll. However, I am surprised that Hon. Amos Lugoloobi has come to this House without clear explanation on the legal framework under which the ministry can borrow Shs 4 trillion. THE SPEAKER: I thought that it was the Auditor-General that found out the Shs 4 trillion, but the finance ministry had declared Shs 3 trillion.MR EKANYA:  Madam Speaker, it is for this financial year that is ending in July – on top of the appropriation we did. Hon. Musasizi apologised to the members, saying the action was in error. MR ENOS ASIIMWE:  The Speaker is right; it was from the Auditor-General`s report. It was not for this financial year. 8.27MR MARTIN MUZAALE (NRM, Buzaaya County, Kamuli): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I want to begin by thanking you for the efforts to save the image of our country and, most importantly, our suppliers –THE SPEAKER:  Before you come in, I want to refer the former chairperson of the Committee on Budget, who is now the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development to Section 21(2) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. Just read it verbatim.MR LUGOLOOBI:  Madam Speaker, can I be protected from Hon. Ssewungu?  THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Lugoloobi, you are protected.MR LUGOLOOBI:  Thank you very much. THE SPEAKER: First of all, I want to thank you for coming to the House. Hon. Lugoloobi, feel at home. Hon. Peter, come back. Please take tea and come back. 12702SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSMR LUGOLOOBI: The title is: “ Budget execution by Accounting Officers . A vote shall not take any credit from any local company or body unless it has no unpaid domestic arrears from a debt in a previous financial year; and it has capacity to pay for the expenditure from the approved estimates as appropriated by Parliament for that financial year” . THE SPEAKER:  Please give me my book. Hon. Lugoloobi, we found these laws here and you are the ones who made them so we should be able to respect them. You may need to go to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to explain extensively what has been raised in your report. We will pass the report but go and explain it extensively because whatever is happening is not desirable. I do not want to say it is illegal but it is not desirable so you will need to go and explain it to the committee.  MR MUZAALE: Thank you. Madam Speaker, I want to begin by thanking you for trying to see that at least our local suppliers are paid their monies. Many of our suppliers and local contractors have lost assets because Government has not been able to pay them on time. What is unfortunate is that most of our contractors cannot go to banks now and borrow because their credit is not good in the financial institutions. Government itself is not credit worthy, but it is Government that has actually made laws that are currently affecting contractors to go to financial institutions to pick loans.  Today if you have a contract with Government and you want to go to the bank and get a loan, they will tell you, no, we cannot finance you. This is how terrible it is. It is very unfortunate that Government is leading to the collapse of its own people. It is very unfortunate. Honourable minister, normally you give the multinationals and the international companies interest where you have not been able to pay them, but the local contractors do not. This is how discriminative this country is to its own citizens.  I always get surprised because when you read the Budget, the picture is very good. We are now talking about Shs 58 trillion. Every ministry here is lamenting about budget cuts. Everyone is talking about unfunded priorities. The minister is presenting a very good budget of Shs 58 trillion so what should we tell people?  Our districts are not receiving money. Ministries are not receiving money. Right now, we do not even have anything to go back and tell our people that in the forthcoming Budget, expect A, B , C, D. It is very unfortunate. Thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you so much. Hon. Donald?8.33MR DONALD KATALIHWA (NRM, Mwenge County South, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I really do not want to allow the issue raised by my honourable colleague, Hon. Geoffrey Ekanya to be buried under the carpet because I sit on the Budget Committee with him and the rest of my honourable colleagues here. Madam Speaker, I can confirm that what he raised was really true. Hon. Musasizi came with talking notes in the Budget Committee last week, and the meeting was suspended because he confirmed that - Leave alone whether it was in the audit report or not, every year, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development uses its powers to overtake the powers of Parliament. We do not want to bury this thing under the carpet when it is actually true. Therefore, we want clarification from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on whether they have taken the powers of Parliament to do what we are supposed to do, instead of just saying that it is coming from the audit report. I thank you. THE SPEAKER: The rules of this House provide that we cannot speak about a person when he or she is not in. If Hon. Musasizi said that, he will come and explain to the House. 12703THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024The good thing is that the budgeting process is not ending today. To the best of my knowledge, it is the auditors who found out that it was Shs 4 billion. Finance was talking about Shs 3 billion so there was a discrepancy in the audit reports. All that said, we will get a clear picture from the talking notes that were given. The good thing is that it was talking notes, because he was just given notes by the technical people to go and talk. 8.36MR DENNIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Madam Speaker, in light of the physical deficit we are grappling with and the lack of clarity from the ministry on the best approach to resource mobilisation, I would like to draw the minister’s attention to a law known as the Expropriated Properties Act, which should have helped us liquidate assets of departed Asians. THE SPEAKER: Are they there? MR OGUZU:  That is what I need the minister to – The ministry should be able to account for them. According to some reports from the Central Bank, the President then, Idi Amin, compensated a number of the properties. We also know that there were Asians who did not return to claim. This law allowed the Custodian Board, headed by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, to liquidate some of the properties. Therefore, if we are stuck with properties that we cannot liquidate and yet we are crying for money -THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this is exactly what I was telling you; that these Members here have a lot of ideas of how we can get money to fund our Budget. Do not mind about it, we are going to handle it on Tuesday under RAPEX.MR OGUZU:  Madam Speaker, the problem with what you are talking about is that you are seeking to dissolve the Custodian Board without accounting for the properties and that is very irregular. (Applause)THE SPEAKER: That is why I was asking you whether they are still there. If they are there, what are you going to take over? Is it the assets or liabilities? If I were you, I would first do a forensic audit on the custodian board to know what is there. They know. MR OGUZU: Madam Speaker, the second source of revenue is this – MS PACUTO: Madam Speaker, I thank the colleague for bringing it up. However, we have it before the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and we are handling it. I feel that you are pre-empting our report because most of what you are saying has been discussed and will come in the report. I would beg, Madam Speaker, that you allow us to process the report, and we should probably be the first to present. THE SPEAKER: We are helping you with where to get money from. We have a budget and we are looking at the expenditure side. We are now going into revenue. Where are we going to get money to fund this budget? The Member has brought a very good idea. He wants to add another one. MR OGUZU: The second source of revenue the ministry should address itself to is that we have deployed the Uganda People’s Defence Force (UPDF) in Somalia to pacify that area. As part of the arrangement, whenever the equipment you deploy there or your troops get killed, the contingent on the equipment is always compensated. We lost helicopters and guns there, and this has been compensated. Nowhere is the ministry accounting for that money. Today, you must tell the country where that money is going and who is eating it. That is non-tax revenue for the country. That is the source - THE SPEAKER: I hope you are only talking about the equipment, not the persons. MR OGUZU: Of course, the equipment is where I have more interest. We lost helicopters, guns, and tanks. 12704SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSTHE SPEAKER: This is because for the persons lost, the money goes to the families. Yes, Attorney-General. Lee, do you have another one? Now we have gone into how to raise the – (Laughter)-  we are now raising revenues. 8.40THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The statement made by my colleague is serious. It is the kind of allegation that can easily be taken out of context. I would have been happy if the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs was represented here, and then either my colleague would be able to substantiate that or would seek clarification. Now that we have neither defence nor security ministers here, we are unable to tell which equipment was lost, and which equipment was compensated – THE SPEAKER: Just a minute, Attorney-General. Can we find out if we are compensated when our equipment gets destroyed, say in DRC, Somalia or wherever? MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, we do make what we call bilateral agreements, and each agreement is negotiated based on its facts. Like Congo, for example, we went in to hunt the Allied Defence Forces. It is not like we are doing the Congolese Government a favour. It is our work. THE SPEAKER: If our equipment is destroyed in Somalia because we are helping Somalia - we are not helping us; we are helping them under the arrangement of the UN - do they compensate for that equipment?  MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, I want to be honest with you that I want to look at that agreement between us, as members of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), and the rights that accrue when we go as AMISOM into Somalia. I cannot answer off-head without looking at that agreement. THE SPEAKER: Do you enter into a status of mission agreement of reimbursement? MR KAFUUZI: I am sorry I missed your question. THE SPEAKER: I said that when you are going into such, do you sign the status of mission agreement of reimbursement? MR KAFUUZI: Status of mission? THE SPEAKER: Yes. MR KAFUUZI: Yes, we do. THE SPEAKER: If you sign it then you are automatically reimbursed. MR KAFUUZI: That is why I said, Madam Speaker, that it would be important for us to have the Minister of Defence here, so that we answer from a point of knowledge, rather than speculation. MR OGUZU: Madam Speaker, those bilateral agreements should be laid here for Members to examine - (Hon. Atwijukire rose) . THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, we will discuss that under classified. We have a committee on classified, and we will know whether we get a reimbursement or not, and the committee will handle it. Honourable members, listen to me. By the time I tell you that it is classified, I know what it means. I am the chairperson of the classified. We can look for other sources of funds. The message that Hon. Jonathan wants to give, he will do so, to the chairperson and the committee on classified. Honourable members, we are going to ask the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, to rectify whatever was not done well. They must respond to all queries in the committee, first, in finance committee, before you go to the Budget Committee. In the circumstances that you are planning to table a corrigendum, it should correct all the V otes, including the statutory V otes, for you to be able to remove that non-uniformity that the chairperson was talking about. 12705THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 20248.46MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Madam Speaker, before the minister comes, you remember that in this House, the ministry had purportedly waived about Shs 600 billion, which was due in tax arrears from gold. The finance ministry had promised that they would come back to us, because it was done irregularly. We thought that the Shs 600 billion was very good money for this country. Now that he is here, could he update us? This is because, at that time, they said there was a mechanism they were trying to negotiate. THE SPEAKER: Was it him? MR ODUR: Yes, he was also here that day. THE SPEAKER: No, he was not. MR ODUR: He is a minister; he is now representing finance here – (Interjections) - Okay, I apologise – THE SPEAKER: He was sick. MR ODUR: He was in court or something -(Laughter)  THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the Financial Year 2024/2025 be adopted by this House with amendments;(Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.THE SPEAKER: The amendments we are going to make is to open up;1. V ote 130.2. Correct your figures using corrigenda.3. Go and explain your Shs 4 trillion; who gave you powers? We need that in the House.4. The presidential and domestic arrears. Yes, you know all that we need.Honourable members, Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs almost has nothing. (Laughter)Judiciary is a statutory vote. There is nothing. Okay, what is it? (Hon. Ssewungu rose_) Honourable members, wait. Let me – 10.49MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu):  Madam Speaker, for the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, my interest is on state attorneys. Even yesterday, there was a very big debate on having many prisoners. Most of our districts have created lower courts, but there are no resident state attorneys. As a result, many Ugandans are kept in prisons or police posts for over a week because they cannot be remanded.I pray that Parliament together with Budget Committee finds it necessary to give money and we appoint more resident state attorneys who can be deployed - THE SPEAKER: That is in the report. We agreed to give them money. MR SSEWUNGU: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: We want to reduce the number of prisoners. MR SSEWUNGU: That was my interest. Thank you, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: We are giving them money.8.51MR MOSES OGWAL (NRM, Dokolo North County, Dokolo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. My attention was caught when it was recorded –  12706SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSTHE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am reporting Hon. Kyofatogabye. He is showing me the time -(Laughter)-  can I have – MR MOSES OGWAL: Thank you. My attention was caught when the chairperson recommended that we should buy some vehicles because they were destroyed. Totalling to Shs 2 billion –THE SPEAKER: It was  under which  vote? MR MOSES OGWAL: It was under Judiciary. THE SPEAKER: Do not talk about Judiciary. Nothing was said about the Judiciary here. Judiciary is a statutory vote. You are not even supposed to mention anything about the Judiciary.I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the Financial Year 2024/2025 be adopted.(Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Let me start with the landlord. 8.52MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala):  Thank you, Madam Speaker -THE SPEAKER: He is the landlord of Kampala. MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: You are tenants.MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will use very few minutes to give opportunity to my honourable colleagues, to make their submissions. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee - THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us be brief, so that everybody speaks. One minute each.MR NSEREKO: That is true. And the Members. I will be brief. The capital, which is under the auspice of the Committee on Presidential Affairs, is the gateway to the nation and the face of the nation.Like we spoke last financial year that we will all be back here to count our losses. There is nothing good to show about the infrastructure of our capital city now. Most of it is old, dilapidated and full of potholes. The status of our public health is dire. The single Kiteezi landfill that we have which serves over 15 million people – and you saw the budget - we would like to thank you for having identified a few other billions to cater for the landfill. You remember, the other day, we had the issue of the sweepers - the old women who came at the gate of Parliament seeking your intervention. Thank you, Madam Speaker, after your indulgence, at least that matter has been put to rest.THE SPEAKER: I hope they are going to put funds for those casual labourers in the budget.MR NSEREKO: You have done it well in public health this time. We are really glad because they wake up early in the morning to try to make our city look a little tidier and better, for us to come and work. Madam Speaker, the presidential directive was very clear in 2023, when he stated that after every 300 metres, he would like to see a dustbin on the streets. At the moment, we have not achieved that. We only have about seven functional garbage trucks for the entire city and the metropolitan. You can imagine the amount of garbage left in our houses -(Member timed out.)  THE SPEAKER:  Conclude.12707THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024MR NSEREKO: We request for an enhancement in our budget. They gave us about Shs 157 billion, but the request was about Shs 500 billion. If we are to work on this city - we were all in Kigali the other time for benchmarking. Look at Bujumbura now, we are the shabbiest city in East Africa - (Interjection)-  it is the reality. You do not even need to shun that. We can make it better if we realise that we are not doing well. It starts by accepting that we are not doing well. Then you can make it better. We need money for street lighting, pedestrian walkways, drainage, new drainage works and desilting, public health, road marking, etc. I implore honourable members, to join us in the call of – (Member timed out.)  THE SPEAKER: Have you finished? (Laughter)  You finished.MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable colleagues, we anticipate increase in the fuel levy; 60 per cent of the monies from these fuel levies come from Kampala Metropolitan Area. All of you nearly reside either in this area or we work from here. Let us make this city look good. We will attract more tourists, more conferences for this city and we will make it better as a trade area. We will even encourage the people who pay the taxes in return to pay more taxes when they see that their taxes are utilised well. No one wants to move on roads with potholes. Madam Speaker, I suggest that at least we enhance the budget on roads from Shs 157 billion that has been provided to about Shs 200 billion. On drainage - THE SPEAKER: That is reasonable. MR NSEREKO: Shs 132 billion is reasonable. For public health, we are happy.Finally, street lighting - that is all I request that we adopt in this House so that we can see the next financial year, Shs 12 billion for street lighting so that we can have a well-lit, organised, clean and smart city that we can be proud of. As we are going to host African Cup of Nations (AFCON). THE SPEAKER : Lastly, to provide all the money for Boona Bakole . MR NSEREKO:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I re-echo what you have said, Boona Bakole  is a scheme where the President suggested that these ordinary women, who are offering services of sweeping and maintaining the cleanness of roads be given contracts through their SACCOs in order to empower them. They are some urban poor from slums so that we look after them and get them some earnings so that they are part of the development of the capital through Boona Bakole.  And we are glad that the chairperson and her committee has provided much more money through public health. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Information. MR ONZIMA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I want to give him is that the exact thing he is stating is what is happening in Dar es Salaam. Most of those groups that sweep the city, even the vehicles that carry the rubbish, all belong to women groups that have SACCOs and according to them, it was a deliberate move to empower the women in Dar-es-Salaam. In Kenya, it was a different case. The SACCO groups of women are given a chance to acquire mini-buses and manage the transport system in the city. I think it is a very good idea and if it is adopted, in one way, they help to manage and clean the city, in another way we also empower them economically. That is the information I wanted to give you. MR NSEREKO:  Thank you, my honourable colleague. And finally, I find your information very beneficial; allow me to request in the amortisation and alignment of the budget that you do not forget the funding of Phillip Omondi Stadium, Lugogo because Parliament also uses it. 12708SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSTHE SPEAKER:  We shall also build ours. MR NSEREKO:  Bukedea stadium. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Let me first hear from Kaliro City. 9.00MR SANON BWIIRE (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson of the Committee on Presidential Affairs for the thorough report. Ever since Kaliro became a district all RDCs do not sleep in the district; they reside in Jinja or Iganga. When problems come, these people who are representing the image of the President are not in the district. That is why I thank, the committee, for talking about establishing residence. One day, Kaliro people wanted to demonstrate and chase them away. They asked them, “does the President sleep in Kenya to lead Uganda? Why can’t you sleep in our district?” They end up- THE SPEAKER:  Don’t they have where to rent in Kaliro for them to stay somewhere? MR BWIIRE:  I think we need to investigate them because we have very good houses in Kaliro, but they do not want to sleep there. Secondly, it is about the banana project –THE SPEAKER:  The local problem should be solved locally. Equally, in my district, I do not have an office for RDC, not even a residence for RDC but they stay within the district and the local government gave them an office within the district. Those people should be responsible. MR BWIIRE:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let the minister take it up and make sure that those people reside in the district.THE SPEAKER : Thank you. Honourable member for Nakawa – you are raising on procedure so that you can speak.9.02MR RONALD BALIMWEZO (NUP, Nakawa Division East, Kampala):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. The greatest challenges of Kampala are; the poor roads, poor drainage and poor waste management. Kampala has 2,110 kilometres of road network, only 770 is tarmac but over 50 per cent of that is tarmac has outlived the design life. In fact, 348 kilometres is in a poor state. It needs reconstruction. According to reports, we lose, 240,000 man-hours in traffic jams, which is 10 trillion a year. If we worked on the roads in Kampala, we would have solved quite a lot. Therefore, I want to appeal to us to increase the number of unpaved roads and also create a budget for road maintenance. Whenever you increase the coverage of paved roads, you must have a plan for – THE SPEAKER:  Don’t we have money for road maintenance? Let us hear from the former chairperson of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. MR DA VID KARUBANGA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of roads was under the Committee on Physical Infrastructure and that is the integrated transport. Here we are discussing other issues and I think you should have brought that debate of roads when we are discussing the other report. Thank you. MR BALIMWEZO:  Thank you, Mr Chairperson. It was information but I want to put it on record that the Committee on Physical Infrastructure has no vote for roads and the Chairperson will answer that in detail. THE SPEAKER: My MP Nakawa, we have already agreed on what we should increase and let us now move on to something else. MR BALIMWEZO:  Most obliged, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Somebody is dying with the procedural matter. 12709THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024MR ENOS ASIMWE:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. When you look at the methodology of the report, they are saying that they looked at the policies and budget allocations, but they missed out something under the second budget call circular, because they do not mention about it, and that can tell because they have not referred to it because it was advising MDAs not to allocate money to put up office buildings or office space.Not to buy new vehicles or approve consultancies outside what they can do internally and clearly, when you look at the recommendations of the committee, like building offices for RDCs, Shs 35 billion allocation for vehicles to State House of V ote 002.I believe that they could have missed the budget call circular. Are we procedurally moving right if they never consulted and yet we are going to make recommendations in areas that the Ministry of Finance had clear guided that we should not allocate money? THE SPEAKER:  When they talk about vehicles for the State House, it is one of the statutory votes. That is the Office of the President. Just like yours when the term ends, we shall buy you vehicles. Even when they say, “do not buy vehicles”, we will buy vehicles for all of you. MR SSEWUNGU: The honourable member should be careful, but let him reserve it for – THE SPEAKER: You say it.MR SSEWUNGU: The honourable member from Lyantonde should be very careful. I have been here for some time and when you talk funnily, things turn around. The vehicles you complain about might be one of yours when you leave here and become an RDC somewhere. So, do not complain; be very careful. THE SPEAKER: [Mr Enos Asiimwe: “Order.”] He has left. (Laughter)9.08DR JOSEPH RUYONGA (NRM, Hoima West Division, Hoima City): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in appreciating the Committee on Presidential Affairs for the good report. On donations, they had a budget of Shs 83 billion, but what was provided was Shs 53 billion. My question is: of the Shs 83 billion, do they have a list of the presidential pledges? I am asking this because the President came to the Uganda Muslim Supreme Council headquarters in Hoima about two or three years ago and pledged a vehicle for the district khadi; he still asks me up to now. If it is not on the list, I can follow it up so that it can be included. I beg to submit.THE SPEAKER: As a Member of Parliament of Hoima, have you reminded the State House Comptroller about the pledge that the President made and it was not responded to?DR RUYONGA: Madam Speaker, I met him one month ago.THE SPEAKER: Who?DR RUYONGA: The district khadi and he talked about it. THE SPEAKER: The accounting officer for that V ote is the State House Comptroller. When the President moves everywhere and makes a pledge that “I am going to give you a car,” somebody takes note. What you need to do, as a leader of that area, is to write and say, “When you came to Hoima on such and such a day, you made a presidential pledge of A, B, C and D. It is our request that it be fulfilled.”DR RUYONGA: Madam Speaker, I am going to do that. Thank you very much.9.10MS JOSEPHINE BEBONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo):  Madam Speaker, thank you very much for this opportunity. I would like to thank the 12710SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSchairperson of the Committee on Presidential Affairs for the elaborate report. However, about disaster preparedness, assessment and supporting disaster victims, I have noted that it is only the eastern –THE SPEAKER: Hon. Babungi, do you also have people to be supported on disaster issues?MS BEBONA: Yes. I have noted that they are only considering the eastern side and leaving out Bundibugyo; it is not mentioned anywhere, especially Ntotoro, Harugare and Kirumya subcounties - THE SPEAKER: No. Hon. Josephine, I come from eastern Uganda and I do not think that they consider only one region. Bring your report from the District Disaster Management Committee and we see whether it will not be considered. That would be discrimination – because it must be handled. Let us not regionalise these things. The Prime Minister is not from eastern Uganda. MS BEBONA: Madam Speaker, they specifically mentioned Bududa, Manafwa, Sironko and Bulambuli and I felt like Bundibugyo was left out. We have sinking ground; we still have landslides up to now. There are victims to be compensated and even resettled, but nothing has been done. We still have the washed away bridges. Since 2022, we have been reporting this and writing to ministries, but nothing has been done. We have even invited the Minister of Works and Transport to come on the ground and make an assessment so that they see what can be done. Secondly, I thank the committee for ensuring that they add money to Uganda AIDS Commission because – THE SPEAKER: Procedure?MR OGUZU: Madam Speaker, you guided the Member holding the Floor that for the Government to intervene in a disaster situation, the District Disaster Management Committee must originate a report and file it with the Prime Minister’s office and the House would be able to make a follow-up. She is still continuing to insist that their areas are not attended to when we do not have copies of that disaster management report. (Laughter)  So, are we proceeding well without clarity on what she is talking about? Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Hon.  Josephine Bebona, are you done?MS BEBONA: Thank you. I was concluding on the matter concerning HIV interventions. Let us support this sector because right now, as I speak, HIV is among young people between the ages of 15 and 25. These interventions are being funded by donors.It is high time the Government took up the matter so that we start funding these interventions, especially on sensitisation and prevention messages in order to reduce HIV infections. Thank you – (Interruption)THE SPEAKER: There is information for you.MR KATALIHWA: Thank you for allowing me to give information. Madam Speaker, when Hon. Josephine Bebona raises the issue of HIV , I do not want to regionalise it. I read the document and found out that there is a proposal, under V ote 107: Uganda AIDS Commission, to establish regional HIV centres to give services to people in different regions. When I read through the list, I saw Bunyoro, West Nile, Central and Eastern, but I did not see western Uganda. From the statistics, HIV prevalence is more in western Uganda – in Rwenzori Subregion and the others. Madam Speaker, I would like some clarification on whether the western region is covered under these regional offices.THE SPEAKER: I thought Bunyoro is part of the west.MR KATALIHWA: No, Madam Speaker. [Ms Bebona]12711THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024THE SPEAKER: I did not hear the chairperson reading the list. Do you have the list of the regions?MS ABABIKU: Madam Speaker, these six are additional offices. So, where it is not provided for, it means you have a regional office, unless you verify. MR KATALIHWA: If we could get details on that, I will be satisfied. Thank you. MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, thank you for this opportunity. I would like to inform the House. What they are talking about are HIV zonal coordination offices.The world has since moved on. The Uganda AIDS Commission was extremely relevant at a time when we did not have medicines for HIV . Today – (Interjection) - yes, at that time. Today, we have medicines in the country for HIV and AIDS interventions and we are into programme-based budgeting. We have moved away from sectors, into programmes.In the Ministry of Health, there is a whole department for these communicable diseases and this is what I want to bring. We are trying to reduce expenditures, at what point is it right at this time to establish zonal coordination centres for Uganda AIDS Commission when we have the Ministry of Health handling these interventions on communicable diseases? (Interruption) - no, let us stop looking at matters and promoting our interests. We are into programme budgeting. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, how come we are all talking about the Government? I saw what Katikkiro did, having a run for HIV/AIDS. Why don’t we initiate something as Members of Parliament to give back to the community; to be seen that we are doing something for them. We do not give back every day; let us do something. Honourable members, we used to deduct Shs 1,000,000 here and send it to the cancer institute in Nsambya. This time, I told the Clerk that we are not deducting anybody’s money; we are giving money out of the donation. (Applause ) We have given Shs 1.76 billion to the cancer institute. What can we do as Parliament to give back to the community? As we legislate, let us be seen to be supporting the community. The communities where - even if we do not come from the same community - not all of us come from Kampala but our relatives get good treatment here. Hon. Ogwal, first give the honourable member from Sebei, Hon. Phyllis Chemutai opportunity. 9.19MS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. My concern is about the model villages. When His Excellency came to Kapchorwa, he identified one area near the State Lodge in Kapchorwa and said that that village was to benefit from these model villages.However, when the programme rolled out, this village in Kapchorwa was left out.THE SPEAKER: Do you know villages that you are thinking of?MS ABABIKU: Madam Speaker, not yet, except we recommend that per region, there should be two identified; but we have not yet identified them. THE SPEAKER: When the President also came to Bukedea, he also identified one.  Bukedea and Sebei should be included. You were there, Hon. Goli Ogwal. MS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI:  Thank you. (Laughter) 9.21MR GOLI OGWAL (NRM, Dokolo North County, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Committee chairperson, thank you for your presentation-THE SPEAKER: Hon. Dorcas, we are coming to that side. 12712SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSMR OGWAL:  Thank you for your presentation and particularly the one on Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF). Kindly enable the support for NUSAF to support livelihood. The other question I am asking is, in the affirmative action ministry support, I see Northern Uganda with a budget of Shs 35 billion - (Interruption)- It is a gap. Okay, then that is right. The last one is the one I had asked earlier about insurance mainly about the vehicles I mentioned. Under the Inspector General of Government’s Office (IGG), they mentioned that they want compensation or to buy four vehicles at about Shs 2 billion.  THE SPEAKER: IGG was passed. MR OGWAL:  Let me explain the issue. Now, if you are supposed to buy a vehicle, which has been damaged, honestly, why wouldn’t the Government do insurance? Otherwise, Shs 2 billion would actually insure more than 1,500 vehicles comprehensively and there are so many vehicles which are getting destroyed by the Government and yet there is no insurance. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should help us to at least insure Government vehicles. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Minister  of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, on the issue of insurance, we are told there is a policy that no Government vehicle is insured; that comprehensive insurance is a waste of money. Hon. Ogwal is saying, why don’t we spend money to have these vehicles insured? Of course, you do not insure them based on age but accidents. Now, what the committee chairperson was saying was that they had outlived their time; not spoilt out of accidents but because they had been using them for a longer period. MR OGWAL:  Thank you. I needed to crosscheck because there was a statement, which was made that they had problems. THE SPEAKER: I am very sure because IGG is also under our office in Parliament. Yes, Dr Bhoka. 9.24DR GEORGE BHOKA (NRM, Obongi County, Obongi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Chairperson of the Committee on Presidential Affairs for two issues. One is on the vote for Uganda AIDS Commission. We thank the President for the presidential initiative for ending HIV/ AIDS as a public health threat by 2030. Pillar four of the presidential initiative is about sustainable financing, and this is coming at a time when external financing to the HIV/AIDS pandemic - This Parliament passed the AIDS Trust Fund, but we also pronounced ourselves that we need to mainstream HIV/ AIDS in all Ministries, Departments, and Agencies (MDAs). A 0.1 per cent inclusion of the funds for HIV/AIDS interventions in all Ministries, Departments and Agencies will go a long way in institutionalising HIV/AIDS and moving us away from donor dependency. Therefore, within this budget, it is my prayer that through the Office of the President, we consider the matter of sustainably financing our HIV/AIDS programme from domestic sources. The second issue is about the Development Response to Displacement Impacts Project (DRDIP) under the Office of the Prime Minister - (Member timed out.) THE SPEAKER: Yes? DR BHOKA: We thank the World Bank for the support that it has extended to the refugees hosting districts under DRDIP. Its first phase is ending.  Many of the refugee hosting districts are hopeful about DRDIP Phase 2. Through the Office of the Prime Minister and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, it is our prayer that as we look at ways and means of mobilising 12713THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024resources for the integration of host and refugee interventions in the refugees hosting districts, we fast track the DRDIP interventions. There are projects that have been initiated that will remain pending, if these resources are not secured. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Thank  you. Members be aware that you have a report on the Committee on Education and Sports. Hon. Solomon Alinga, Hon. Sam Otukol and the Member from Rwampara. 9.26MR SOLOMON ALINGA (NRM, T’oo County, Bukwo): Thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Is that Rwampara or Ntoroko?MR ALINGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join colleagues in thanking the committee for the report. I picked interest in the rolling out of the resettlement of people who are affected by the landslides and mudslides. It is a good suggestion by the committee that money must be provided such that people are resettled in a better place. The issue that attracted my attention is that most of the Elgon region going to the Sebei Subregion - Some of our people are staying in very risky areas. I would possibly give an opinion that the Government can go out and begin mapping those risky areas so that our people can be settled in the future, but those risky areas can be taken over by the Government so that they can plant trees. Otherwise, our people should not wait for the disaster to come. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Sam Otukol?9.28MR SAM OTUKOL (NRM, Pallisa County, Pallisa):  Thank you, Madam Speaker and the chairman for the report and the committee. Mine is on truth killing. THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, there is a motion. 9.28DR SAMUEL OPIO (Independent, Kole North County, Kole):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I move under Rule 59, on the motion without notice. I have noticed that the committee report has been well received by Members. The issues raised of underfunding, and unfunded priorities is an issue of funding that can be handled at the budget level. I have also noticed, that a number of the issues being raised are matters of urgent importance in our villages, constituencies, and districts. Having noted that and that we have another item on the agenda, I move a motion without notice that we close the debate and move to the next item. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Seconded? Seconded by Afande . I put the question that the report of the Committee on Presidential Affairs on the Ministerial Policy Statement and budget estimates for the Financial Year 2024/2025 be adopted by this august House. (Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Ethel Naluyima and Hon. Mugole, if you have issues, kindly go to the Budget Committee and present them and the Budget Committee will handle that effectively. Remember, these issues that were being discussed, most of them cover Kampala area. Do not worry; we will handle it.(VIII) THE COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTSTHE SPEAKER: Honourable members let us first hear from Hon. Ogwang; he seems to be very tired. 12714SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTS9.31THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang):  Madam Speaker, first, I am not tired and I am here to listen to the report of the Committee on Education and Sports. I thank Parliament for the comments, which you accorded to my sector and specifically sports. As far as the assignment you directed me to go and do, I had a planned meeting in line with the project of Namboole Stadium. You did direct me to sort out the problem of Pioneer buses, which are in our custody at Namboole. As per your directive, I had the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development which was represented by the Secretary Uganda Land Commission, Office of the Attorney-General which was represented by the senior counsels form the Attorney-General’s office, myself and the Director of Pioneer Buses. We have agreed that by Monday, the Pioneer Bus Company will begin to remove their buses from our property or our land of Namboole and that is the report I am here to present. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. What time do we come on Monday since you invited us so that we get the buses gone? MR OGWANG:  Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence and guidance. I received a letter from the Leader of the Opposition when I was in Namboole that he needed to visit the stadium at 10.00 a.m. for which I will welcome him wholeheartedly on Monday. Secondly, with your guidance and directive, I am ready to comply with your directive on the time. THE SPEAKER:  I want to come when the buses are off. MR OGWANG : I request that you come at 2.00 p.m. THE SPEAKER:  Expect me at 2.00 p.m. MR OGWANG:  Most obliged. I will be there, Madam Speaker, to receive you. I also want to confirm that I will wait for the Leader of the Opposition at 10.00 a.m. at Namboole Stadium.  Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Give us a summary of your report. 9.34THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mr John Twesigye):  Madam Speaker, I thank you for allowing me to present a report of the Sectoral Committee on Education and Sports on the Ministerial Policy Statement and budget estimates for the education sports and skills program for the Financial Year 2024/2025. Allow me to lay first the report and the minutes.THE SPEAKER:  Please lay.MR TWESIGYE:  Because of the constraint on time, but also to let the Members be aware, this is a report of 100 pages. Allow me to go straight to observations and recommendations. I will begin with the V ote –THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members who are getting out, I want to remind you, through your Government Chief Whip, that all the committees with RAPEX Bills must furnish them to my office by Monday. On Tuesday, we shall be sitting from morning to handle RAPEX Bills. MR TWESIGYE: Madam Speaker, V otes 013: Ministry of Education and Sports. (a) Cabinet directive to implement free education at primary and secondary education levels. Out of this, in order to reduce stress on parents, the committee recommends that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development commits an additional Shs 309.162 billion towards the implementation of free primary and secondary education. 12715THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024(b) Grant aiding in over 100 primary and secondary schools. The committee recommends that the Minister of Finance, Planning, and Economic Development commits an additional Shs 36.6 billion to the Ministry of Education and Sports for grant-aiding both primary and secondary schools. (c) Rehabilitation of existing 200 primary schools The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development commits an additional Shs 100 billion to the Ministry of Education and Sports for rehabilitation of existing 200 primary schools across the country.d)  Enhancement of capitation grants and salaries for teachers in UgIFT seed secondary schools on V ote 612 - Local GovernmentThe committee recommends that finance ministry commits additional Shs 139.88 billion as capitation grant to UgIFT schools and Shs 122 billion for salaries for recruitment of teachers under Phase II and III of UgIFT.e)  Finalising the Higher Education PolicyThe committee recommends that Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development commits an additional Shs 0.5 billion for finalising the higher education policy.f)  Facilitation for secondary school gamesMadam Speaker, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development commits an additional Shs 23.304 billion to Ministry of Education and Sports to facilitate secondary schools’ games.g)  Higher Education Students’ Financing BoardThe committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development commits an additional Shs 6.75 billion to provide loans to a total of 6,180 students, Shs 0.758 billion to undertake staff training in skills gap identified and implement the Human Resources Development Plan and Shs 0.134 billion to improve and upgrade the Integrated Loan Management Information System. Examinations Boards(a) Under the Uganda Nurses and Midwives Examinations Board (UNMEB), we observed that there is a gap in the supervision and monitoring of nurses and midwives while in the field clinical placements. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Development commits Shs 0.963 billion for recruitment of critical staff to help in the implementation of that challenge. Procurement of printing equipmentThe committee recommend that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provides Shs 0.820 billion to UNMEB to procure printing equipment. (b) Uganda Allied Health Examination Board(i) Understaffing at the BoardThe committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provides Shs 0.897 billion to cater for salaries and other employee costs. (ii) Training of examinersThe committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development allocates Shs 0.560 billion for training of at least 1,000 examiners in critical areas to match with increased candidates in health training institutions. (iii) Installing security systemsThe committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development commits an additional Shs 0.100 billion to 12716SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSthe board to secure its premises by installing security systems for both its premises and the vehicle tracking systems. (c) V ote 165: Uganda Business and Technical Examinations Board (i) Construction of UBTEB Assessment CentreThe committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development commits an additional Shs 9.24 billion to UBTEB to fast-track the construction and completion of the assessment centre. (ii) Storage containers and ICT accessoriesThe committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development commits an additional Shs 0.200 billion to procure 10 containers and ICT facilities to ensure security of examinations at the police stations. (iii) Justified wage shortfallUnder this the committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development commits an additional Shs 1.23 billion to UBTEB to address the staffing challenges.(d) V ote 128: Uganda National Examinations Board(i) Assessing the new lower secondary school curriculumMadam Speaker, currently UNEB is planning to assess the new lower secondary curriculum but most importantly, to monitor the continuous assessment. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development commits Shs 6.5 billion to UNEB for assessing the new lower secondary school curriculum and continuous assessment.(ii) Conducting transitional examinationsAs you are aware, there are students that never completed their studies under the old curriculum. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development commits an additional Shs 8.6 billion to UNEB, to enable the Board to conduct transitional exams from the old curriculum to the new lower secondary curriculum.(iii) Securing accommodation for hosting marking and enhancing fees for examinationsThe committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development commits an additional Shs 6.5 billion to UNEB to cater for the five meals, utilities and basic healthcare services provided to examiners and checkers during marking of examination scripts. (iv) Enhancing marking fees for examinationsThe committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development commits an additional Shs 4.6 billion to enhance the marking fees for examinations.(v) Improving on the quality of certificates and results lipsThe committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development commits an additional Shs 1.3 billion for certificates with enhanced security features and results slips.(vi) Enhanced field conduct of examinations and providing extra security of examinationsThe committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development commits an additional Shs 8.5 billion to cater for travels inland and Shs 2.96 billion to provide extra security of examinations.[Mr Twesigye]12717THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024(vii) Constructing and equipping E-assessment and digital centre and enhancing ICT infrastructureThe committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development commits an additional Shs 8 billion in the next financial year for the phased construction of E-assessment digital centre. An additional Shs 8.6 billion be committed for ICT systems, re-engineering, integration and security enhancement, revamping and upgrading of the core hardware security and business continuity and disaster recovery activities, which need to be undertaken. Other entitiesa) V ote 166: National Council of Sportsi) Payment of commitment fees This is for AFCON. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development commits additional funding of US$ 30 million, which is Shs 114 billion for commitment fees for Uganda hosting the AFCON East African PAMOJA Bid, 2027. ii) Construction of Hoima Stadium for AFCON 2027The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development commits Shs 380 billion to the National Council of Sports for construction of Hoima Stadium.iii) Construction of Lira Akii-Bua and Buhinga StadiaThe committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development commits an additional Shs 100 billion to the National Council of Sports to facilitate the construction of Buhinga in Kabarole District and Akii-Bua in Lira District.iv) Construction of 11 training grounds for AFCON 2027The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development commits Shs 110 billion to National Council of Sports for construction of 11 training grounds for AFCON 2027.(v) Redevelopment of Lugogo Sports ComplexThe committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provides an additional Shs 790 billion to the National Council of Sports for redevelopment of Lugogo Sports Complex in a phased manner.(vi) National Anti-Doping Organization (NADO) The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provides additional Shs 3.0 billion to National Council of Sports as subvention to the National Anti-Doping Organisation. (vii) Relocation of Lugogo Cricket Oval and Tennis Courts The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance commits an additional Shs 0.36 billion to the National Council for relocation and hire of office space for the National Council of Sports during the National Council of Sports redevelopment of Lugogo Sports Complex; including Lugogo Cricket Oval and Tennis Courts. (viii) Non-Wage RecurrentTHE SPEAKER:  Mr Chairperson, the Lugogo, sports complex? What is supposed to be done? Are they repairing, constructing or what? MR JOHN TWESIGYE:  Madam Speaker, the plan is to redevelop the entire complex to meet the current sports requirement at international levels. Because when you visit Lugogo now-12718SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSTHE SPEAKER:  Are you doing it together with the Africa Cup of Nations (AFCON) teams? Aren’t you not doing it too much? MR JOHN TWESIGYE:  Based on their presentation and what we discussed as a committee, we felt that if we mix the two, we might get lost because AFCON already has its own timelines. That is why we are recommending that the re- development of Lugogo be done in a phased manner to avoid mixing up of so many things. THE SPEAKER:  It should be done after. MR JOHN TWESIGYE: What I am presenting is the position of the committee but Parliament can advise. THE SPEAKER:  That is why we are saying that first things first. MR JOHN TWESIGYE:  Guidance noted, So, on non-wage recurrent, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development commits additional Shs 9.19 billion for support of major international games for Team Uganda, (Olympic and Paralympic Games, Commonwealth Games, All Africa Games, East Africa Community Games, and Islamic Solidarity Games). Shs 4 billion sports equipment Shs 3.9 billion, representative clubs, Shs 0.5 billion, revitalisation of District Sports Councils, 0.5 billion monitoring & evaluation, Shs 0.2 billion, membership to international sports bodies, Shs 0.09 billion. (ix) Support to federationsThe committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development commits additional-THE SPEAKER:  In the associations, where does Federation of East Africa Secondary School Sports (FEASSA) fall? MR JOHN TWESIGYE:  Madam Speaker, I have already mentioned it-THE SPEAKER:  The minister is putting up his hand.MR OGWANG:  FEASSA falls under the Department of Physical Education and Sports and that is why the chairperson recommended that money be increased. He mentioned proposed about Shs 600 million in his budget but this one is for National Council of Sports. The other one is directly under the Ministry of Education and Sports, under the Department of Physical Education and Sports. Which is under Uganda Secondary School Sports Association. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  For East Africa?MR OGWANG:  That is the Federation of East African Secondary Schools Association, which is going to be hosted in the Bukedea District between Amus College and Bukedea Comprehensive. I thank you. (Member rose_)THE SPEAKER:  Do you have a school?MR EKANYA:  Madam Speaker, Amus College and Royal Palm, are in partnership. I own Royal Palm in Mukono. THE SPEAKER:  For your information, the bid was won by Bukedea Comprehensive School. The co-host is Amus College. Mukono is very far from Bukedea. How much are you adding on FEASSA games?MR EKANYA:  Yes, that is the clarification I am seeking because Bukedea Comprehensive School and Amus College, are going to host and they will promote the Government of Uganda’s image. Therefore, the Minister of Sports needs to assure us now because we need some support to the two institutions that are going to host these East African Games. It has not been easy to host this game because we had eight countries that competed. This is a very serious matter; we want to know how much money as a subvention that the Ministry of Sports is going to extend to the two schools. 12719THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024MR JOHN TWESIGYE:  Madam Speaker, I beg to first complete presenting the report. THE SPEAKER:  Maybe for your information, it is not the first time it is starting? Give clearance. MR OGWANG:  Honourable colleagues, this tournament is hosted annually within the East African Partner States. The way we handle our East African Parliamentary Games.The last one was hosted in Rwanda. Before Rwanda, it was hosted in Tanzania. Before Tanzania, it was hosted in Kenya. Before Kenya, it was hosted - I think, it was in Burundi. So it is an annual event -THE SPEAKER:  However, you have to go through-MR OGWANG:  However, there is a criterion, which the Department of Physical Education and Sports of the Uganda Secondary School Sports Association has set. Teams which want to host this specific elite tournament apply to that secretariat then the bids are open. Criteria teams are selected to go and carry out the opening of these bids and look at the infrastructural development of the specific schools. Do you qualify? Because we are talking about having about 15 games, which include swimming, football, netball, basketball, volleyball. These are all games which are competed in the region. However, I want to confirm that Uganda is the powerhouse of East Africa. Even as I speak now, out of 21 previous competitions, which were held in Kigali, we were able to get 17 gold medals. That tells us that we are a dominant power as far as sports in our secondary schools are concerned. Madam Speaker, the challenge which has been there is that Government gives me about Shs 6 billion which helps me - as we speak now, there are competitions taking place across the country for football. Then with the same little money, I have to prepare and present these teams at the regional level. I want to say this: To a big extent, we have been trying to appeal to the private sector, to some of the schools which qualify to cater for their own school competition in terms of supporting and sponsoring the teams, which by the way, has also a disadvantage because you find teams selected by Government- have a certain limit, funds.Then we have those teams which go on their own and represent the country; they tend to suffer. That is why I guided that it is important for all teams which qualify to be fully supported by the Government because they represent Uganda. Whether, it is Budo, Bukedea Comprehensive or Amus, they represent Uganda. That is why I even guided that once they qualify for that, I do not need a Bukedea Comprehensive uniform because I want Uganda to be seen. That is what will be marked from the other side. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Maybe for clarification; as we speak now, we have not got any funding. We have been facilitating our teams. My team qualified to go to Serbia as the best volley ballers in the country and Amus College were the best footballers in the country and they are going to India. But we have not got a single penny from the ministry. MR OGWANG:  I want to confirm that it is true. Today I had to get a diplomatic note for these schools which have qualified to go and compete in the International Secondary Schools Competitions. Football is Serbia. The current budget I have been having is Shs 6 billion by the Government. The committee chairperson in the report has made a recommendation which I do not want to pre-empt since it is the report of the committee. He will be able to explain that and read it before the House. I thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. 12720SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSMR JOHN TWESIGYE:  Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my minister for clarifying that. If you allow me a minute, I will give further clarification on this. As he has elaborated; while analysing the budget, we realised that the ministry facilitates and supports the secondary school games.As was said in the past, these schools would struggle on their own and sometimes fail to compete. Therefore, in order to have effective facilitation of these teams – that is, supporting the secondary school games, the secondary school championship games, the secondary school ball games which include girl football, basketball, rugby, table tennis, badminton and hockey, the Federation of East Africa Secondary School Games and the International School Sports Federation – only Shs 6 billion has been provided, as the minister has stated.However, when you look at the detailed budget, there is a gap of about Shs 23.304 billion. In total, what we need in the next financial year is Shs 29.304 billion and that is why we are recommending that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development commits an additional Shs 23.204, on top of the Shs 6.0 billion, to enable the ministry to facilitate these games.Madam Speaker, allow me to proceed with the rest of the report. Thank you. Under the reward and recognition – this is under the National Council of Sports (NCS) – of talented and excelling athletes, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development commits an additional Shs 2 billion to National Council of Sports to support and reward talent for national athletes who excel in international major games in the country.Additional funding for wage and gratuityThe committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development commits an additional Shs 0.193 billion for wage and gratuity.V ote 132: Education Service CommissionTHE SPEAKER:  Committee chairperson, when you talk about that you need to remind Members that that was an approval in the law. MR JOHN TWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that guidance. Under the Education Service Commission, the committee recommends that Shs 7 billion be provided - THE SPEAKER:  Yes, minister?MR OGWANG:  First of all, we have Team Uganda, which has won medals in the just concluded All African Games. As Government, we recognise three elite competitions: All African Games, the Olympic Games - which is coming up in Paris, 2024 - and the Commonwealth Games. Therefore, when we talk about this provision of the law – reward and recognition: Shs 2 billion – for instance, I have football, which has a 24-man team, who got silver medals in Ghana. I have rugby which has 14 people, who won gold in the just concluded – both men and women. I also have athletics and badminton.Therefore, Madam Speaker, it is prudent that I appeal to this Parliament. The time is now for us to appreciate the sweat of our children with this law. That is when we will be able to say that, “Finally, we are rewarding them with what they deserve.” The Inzikurus are there. They won gold medals, but where are they? This is the time to act by putting money in this specific provision. I thank you.MR JOHN TWESIGYE:  Thank you, honourable minister. Madam Speaker, under V ote 132: Education Service Commission, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provides an additional Shs 7.0 billion to facilitate the second phase of construction of the Education Service Commission office block and also Shs 0.623 billion to undertake evidence-based 12721THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024research in education service and Shs 0.45 billion to disseminate the validated report of 2022 in the remaining regions.V ote 122: Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA)The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development commits an additional Shs l.525 billion to the revised capitation grants for UPE, USE/UPOLET and Special Needs Education subvention to KCCA schools and Shs 39.0 billion towards the construction of KCCA Phillip Omondi Stadium, which will act as a support facility for AFCON.THE SPEAKER:  Isn’t that the stadium they talked about already?MR OGWANG:  Madam Speaker, it is true that we have one stadium for the city, which is Phillip Omondi Stadium, Lugogo. It is one of the stadia we have identified to act as a training ground for AFCON 2027. The advantage they have is that, as an authority, we have been appropriating money to support them in infrastructural development. However, they requested me - when we visited them - that there are two areas where they needed support; the area of the floodlights and the area of the tuft. Those are the two areas in which they requested the Ministry of Education and Sports for support for purposes of AFCON 2027. Even in line with the Confederation of African Football (CAF) guidelines, there is also a specific provision to widen the pitch. If you look at the technical drawings, that pitch is 98 metres long and 68 metres wide. As of now, we would like to make it 100 to 105 metres –(Interruption)MR NSEREKO:  Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the chairperson of the Committee on Education and Sports. Investment in sports infrastructure is one of the things that we need. You can see the amount of money Mr Hamis Kiggundu spent on that stadium in Nakivubo. It was amazing and we should thank and commend him. In the same spirit, at least we can galvanise something and invest it here in Lugogo. The more multiple pitches that we have, the more the chances for us to host international events, which in return, bring more revenue.We can start with that and then move regionally to have one in Soroti or Bukedea – (Laughter)-  the Speaker has started a very good - and I would like to thank and commend you for taking individual initiative for sports. You will see the reward.THE SPEAKER:  It is not me; it is Bukedea Comprehensive School.MR NSEREKO:  Yea, Bukedea Comprehensive School, but you are their representative here in the august House. There is nothing to shy away from. This credit goes to you as a leader, that you have mobilised your community. Even Mr Mulindwa in Kitende. I can assure you that we will reap something in future. You might never know how much a player is valued internationally until you know how much it takes to produce a single professional that can turn around the fortunes of the nation. For example, people like – THE SPEAKER:  No, it is okay. We have agreed. Let it be done, but no duplication.MR NSEREKO:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. We shall harmonise.MR JOHN TWESIGYE: Madam Speaker, I think we shall harmonise that at Budget Committee level. I thank honourable members for supporting that this be provided to KCCA to develop that facility.On V ote 164: National Council for Higher Education, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development commits an additional Shs 1 billion for the recruitment of staff and Shs 11 billion for the construction of National Council for Higher Education infrastructure in a phased manner.12722SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSV ote 111: National Curriculum Development CentreThe committee recommends that the National Curriculum Development Centre is funded with an additional Shs 5 billion to train more teachers in the implementation of the new lower secondary curriculum. The NCDC should be supported with Shs 5 billion to fast-track and conclude with the revised A-Level curriculum so that the students currently in senior three experience a smooth transition and for the current senior four students, they design an abridged curriculum to help them transit into A-Level curriculum without much trouble. The Ministry of Finance should grant NCDC permission to spend a proportion of NRT at source to avoid delays in book evaluations. Madam Speaker, on this, there is a very big challenge and it is happening in universities. What happens is that when the money is collected, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development does not provide that money when it is appropriated by Parliament. It is a very big problem and we shall discuss it further maybe when you have the time or when we are considering the Budget. Public UniversitiesUnderstaffingThese are general issues, Madam Speaker. We have the recommendations on general staffing so allow me to go through them very quickly. The committee recommend that Government commits to addressing the persistent issue of understaffing and salary harmonisation of public universities so as to at least operate at an average of 50 per cent. There are universities, which are operating at 10 per cent of teaching staff, like Busitema while others are at 15 per cent. Soroti, I think is at around 17 per cent. It is a terrible situation. Some universities have one professor. Let me proceed with the report. Inadequate funding for Government-sponsored university students The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development commits enough funds commensurate with the number of Government sponsored students to avoid incidences where the university has to use its operational funds to give students allowances and apply for supplementary budgets each financial year.What is happening is that if a university started, say in 2020, the first quarter of students that the university funds at the time of that intake is the same money that continues coming those 100 students continuously up to four or five years of existence.The committee further recommended that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development re-categorises the items, living out allowance and NSSF payment as statutory payments under wage component and further allocates funds to the public universities to clear the arrears got as a result of non-paid NSSF.What happens is that money has been lumped into non-wage. When they just cut across the board, then NSSF money is cut. When it comes to remitting that money to NSSF, the universities do not have anything to pay. Inadequate research funds to universities The committee recommends that additional funding grant for each public university to support their research and innovation function given that research is a priority.  Madam Speaker, let us now look at the independent votes. V ote 301: Makerere UniversityThe committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development commits Shs 12 billion for implementation of salary harmonisation as directed by the Minister of Public Service. Another Shs [Mr Twesigye]12723THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 202416 billion, for renovation of the College of Health Sciences and the College of Veterinary Medicine, Animal Resources and Biosecurity, Shs 3.4 billion for the restoration of funding for the Infectious Disease Institute and Shs 2.4 billion for restoration of Julius Nyerere Leadership Centre. Then Shs 12.3 billion for reinstatement of the budget for scholarships, education materials, research outstanding, in-house retirement benefits arrears and contracts gratuity, and Shs 14 billion for increase in Government-sponsored students’ food and living-out allowances. V ote 304: Kyambogo UniversityThe committee recommends that Minister of Finance, planning and Economic Development commits additional Shs 6.39 billion for wages, Shs 0.5 billion for research and innovation, Shs 9 billion for renovation of student`s halls of residence, Shs 2 billion for removal of asbestos sheets from buildings, renovation of 20 accommodation facilities. You cannot believe that this still exists in our universities, Madam Speaker and some schools in Kampala Capital City Authority. The committee also recommends that the finance ministry provides Shs 9 billion for construction of a boundary/perimeter wall. Madam Speaker, there are threats already of land grabbing at that university and people have started building houses. The university always fights with those squatters day and night. V ote 309: Gulu University The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development commits a total additional Shs 5.6 billion for salary harmonisation, Shs 2 billion for the gazettement of the Gulu Central Reserve Forest and degazettement of Gulu University Land in Nwoya. Then, Shs 17 billion for construction of a business and development centre and teaching facility in a phased manner, Shs 3.36 billion for repurposing of Kotido Primary Teacher`s College (PTC) as a learning centre. Shs 2 billion for procurement of five new transport equipment, Shs 4.7 billion for construction of a multipurpose building and Shs 2 billion for preparation of architectural and engineering designs and production of bills of quantities for the proposed Jacob Oulanyah L’Okori Memorial Law Studies Block. V ote 306: Muni UniversityThe committee recommends that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Social Development commits additional Shs 2 billion for the construction of the University Administration Block, Shs 4.8 billion for salary shortfalls, Shs 5 billion for renovation and expansion of Madikola farm. V ote 308: Soroti University The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development commits Shs 25 billion for completion of the anatomy block, which has stalled for quite a long time. Commit Shs 8.8 billion for shortfalls in living out allowances for Government sponsored students, outreach services and clinical placement for students in the school of health sciences and Shs 7.2 billion to address the wage shortfalls. V ote 321: Uganda Management Institute (UMI)The committee observed that the institute struggles with a number of challenges and it recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Social Development commits a total of Shs 10 billion for construction of a new multipurpose building at Kampala branch, Shs 4 billion be provided to construct a new classroom block at Mbale branch, Shs 1.32 to address salary shortfalls, and Shs 2 billion for research and innovations. V ote 310: Lira UniversityThe committee recommends that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development commits an additional Shs 11.5 billion to address the recruitment of critical staff. THE SPEAKER:  Yes, Procedure? 12724SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSMR NSEREKO:  Madam Speaker, when I look at the clock, it is about 10.30 p.m. I appreciate the amazing work the chairperson is doing but please try to summarise because we have this report with us and we are following you and we can read. Madam Speaker, it would be prudent if the chairperson went to the gaps and give us recommendations. We will consider them as we so wish, as we go to the Budget Committee. For sure we have heard, but just summarise. MR JOHN TWESIGYE: Madam Speaker, this is education. I wish we had more time. I am actually presenting only the gaps. Allow me in only 10 minutes to summarise this as quickly as possible. Under vote 321: UMI, I said that the committee recommends Shs 10 billion for the construction of a multipurpose block, Shs 4 billion for a new classroom block, Shs 1. 3 billion for salary shortfalls, Shs 2 billion for research. V ote 313: Mountains of the Moon UniversityThe committee recommends that the finance ministry commits an additional Shs 17.6 billion to address salary harmonisation, Shs 39.59 billion for short falls, Shs 7.24 for contractual obligations, Shs4 billion to conduct transformative and scientific research, Shs 0.49 billion for major rehabilitations. V ote 307: Kabale University The committee recommends that Shs 15.513 billion is provided for infrastructural development and re-retooling.There is a further recommendation of Shs 6.65 billion to fund an increased number of government sponsored students, Shs 7.8 billion as NTR to finance the administrative operation of the university.V ote 305: Busitema UniversityMadam Speaker, the university requires an additional Shs 10.4 billion to address the challenge of staffing. Honourable colleagues, as you said, you realise most of these universities have a problem with staffing.  Madam Speaker, I request that under the key unfunded and underfunded activities of the education and sports subsector – there is an annex that is attached. It is a very big document with very many pages. I request that Members read it at their own time.  THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Do you have Busoga University?  MR JOHN TWESIGYE:  For Busoga University and Bunyoro University, we have proposed that Shs 30 billion be allocated to help those universities finalise their preparations for the universities to be operationalised as Government universities. We mentioned it in the report, Madam Speaker.  THE SPEAKER:  What about what –? I heard something about Bugisu University, that it was a presidential pledge.  MR JOHN TWESIGYE:  Madam Speaker, when we were interacting with the ministry, that issue did not come up. We suspect that maybe it is still under discussions with the Government, and when it comes to the committee, we shall definitely handle it and update the House accordingly.  THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Wanda, what was that you wrote to me?  10.18MR RICHARD WANDA (NRM, Bungokho Central County, Mbale):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Mbale University was a presidential pledge. We wrote to the minister earlier and our expectation was that it would be part of this, but we found out it was not included. This morning we went to the minister’s office with the same plea.As a subregion, I think it is the only subregion remaining. All other subregions have been granted public universities. As the people from Masabaland, it is bringing a lot of tension even for your Members. 12725THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024MR EKANYA:  Madam Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from my brother. Initially, there was a discussion we had with some elders from that side. Aware that the School of Nursing and Science of Busitema University is using the Mbale Regional Referral Hospital because in the entire Bukedi - where Busitema University is - there is no teaching hospital and so Busitema University decided to take over Mbale, to open up its branch for medical school. Initially, some elders had proposed that in addition to that proposal, that Bugisu now would benefit from the two-pronged approach. We needed to agree this financial year, which one moves and then which one follows. I wanted to ask him, because now we are in a budget process, don’t you think it would be better that the medical school of Busitema, which is housed in Mbale, be funded now, as we discuss the other university? THE SPEAKER:  If a hospital is housing students from another medical school, does that hospital become a hospital of that place? I have a teaching hospital, but my students go for practicals in Soroti Hospital. So does Soroti Hospital become mine? MR EKANYA:  Madam Speaker, Mbarara University would not have developed without the Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital. MR WANDA:  I want to clarify: The existence of a nursing teaching institution cannot be a substitute for a university. And there is no way you can reduce the entire subregion to such a small institution.  THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Wanda, please go through the normal process. Follow it up with the ministry and we will support you. MR WANDA:  Madam Speaker, I thank you for that. Knowing very well that you are our mother here, I know your voice can be heard louder than mine.  We, as a region – THE SPEAKER:  That is why I have spoken. You inquired; I have given you a platform to raise it up. Minister of Education, take that up. MR WANDA:  Permit me to explain something, Madam Speaker. As a subregion, what we are requesting; we are not requesting for full funding at the moment but a start-up; let it be declared – THE SPEAKER:  It is a process. Let the Minister – MR WANDA:  Much obliged, Madam Speaker.MR PETER OGWANG:  Madam Speaker, as the honourable colleague has said, we will get back to the Head of State to formally communicate to us. Once we get the directive, we shall begin the process of fast-tracking, like others have gone through the due process. We welcome the request of the people of Bugisu. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Wanda, I have a meeting tomorrow with the Bugisu team. I am going to request the Minister of Education and Sports to come and join us in that meeting.MR NAMBESHE:  Madam Speaker, the clarification I was seeking from the minister is in his response feigning ignorance about the pledge that was made by His Excellency the President. THE SPEAKER:  Was he with the President?  MR NAMBESHE:  No, he has ever – THE SPEAKER:  I am asking: Was he with the President when –? MR NAMBESHE:  No, however, the honourable minister has ever confessed here about this pledge, which was made by the President over the university. The minister is denying.  Moreover, he has ever confessed here that he knows about the pledge, which was made by the President to give Bugisu a university-  12726SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSTHE SPEAKER:  No, the honourable minister is saying that he wants documentary evidence or an instruction from his boss. MR PETER OGWANG:  For the record, first, it is in good faith that I am part of Bugisu. You know it. I am only being professional - that if the President did make a pledge, as a ministry responsible for education and sports, we have already tasked him to put that pledge in writing. It is a formal process to all others. This is so that we begin a formal process of now looking at what is required for us to have a university in Bugisu, in line with fulfilling his pledge. I thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. As we continue, honourable minister, I am inviting you for that meeting with the Bugisu Parliamentary Group tomorrow. Yes, can you finish?MR JOHN TWESIGYE:  Madam Speaker, in conclusion, I beg to move and request the House that the report of the Committee on Education and Sports on the Ministerial Policy Statement and the Budget Estimates be approved. Madam Speaker, I beg to move. (Applause)  THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Yes, Andrew?10.25MR ANDREW OULANYAH (NRM, Omoro County, Omoro):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have three comments only and a request. One is on the Northern Uganda Youth Development Centre. It was transferred to the Ministry of Education and Sports, but there is a shortfall on the wage bill. They need Shs 1.5 billion.  Secondly, I would like to thank the Minister of State in charge of Sports for the commitment to recognise our sports personalities. The rugby team won two gold medals together with other athletes. I want to thank him for that commitment. THE SPEAKER:  It is not the ministry recognising; it is the law that you passed in this House.  MR OULANYAH:  Let us fund it. I want to appreciate that commitment. But more importantly, Uganda won the bid to host the Rugby Africa Cup competition. This competition is equivalent to the Africa Cup of Nations (AFCON). We are privileged to host it for two consecutive years, this year starting in July, then next year it will also double as the World Cup qualifier. However, there is a funding gap. It is my prayer to the minister and the committee to see how to plug into that gap of Shs 2.5 billion. It is a very good opportunity for Uganda, and I thank the minister, because at least we have space for that rugby tournament to be within Mandela National Stadium, Namboole. Let us support the fraternity. Thank you very much. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Member for Ntoroko – She has not spoken. Her name was mentioned, then a motion came up. 10.27MS ANNE TUMWINE (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntoroko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson and the committee for the report. My point is on Uganda Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfers Programme (UgIFT). Madam Speaker, UgIFT does not consider the hard-to-reach districts. There are many gaps in these districts, and they need a special consideration.Usually, when the budget is prepared, they do not consider the hard-to-reach districts, especially in terms of accommodation for teachers. They only send money for renovation of schools, and there is a big gap for teachers sleeping far from the schools. I pray for this to be captured. The hard-to-reach schools should have accommodation near them, so that the education system runs smoothly. Secondly, there are recruitment gaps in some government schools, especially in the district I represent. I have noticed that the chairperson indicated a gap of billions of money, but we do not know how much money was budgeted first – 12727THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024THE SPEAKER: You have the Appropriation Act of 2023/2024. Now, this is the Appropriation Act of 2024/2025. Check what was there then vis-a-vis what is there now, and determine the difference. MS TUMWINE: I pray that the gap is covered. The other issue I have not heard of is the students’ loan scheme. I did not hear about its vote, yet it has helped students. THE SPEAKER: Let us first see what will happen on Tuesday and Wednesday on the RAPEX. It is one of the items under the RAPEX. If it remains, we will provide money for it. That is why we must finish this RAPEX and provide money for what we think must remain. Let me first hear from Busoga University.  10.30MR SANON BWIIRE (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Specifically, I appreciate the Office of the Speaker of Parliament -  (Member rose_)THE SPEAKER: Do you also have a university? I have never known you to be a quarrelsome girl. MR BWIIRE: Madam Speaker, as Busoga Subregion, we are very proud because you helped us to attain what we have been hunting for. I thank you, Madam Speaker, for supporting us. We have been speaking the same language. I would like the committee chairperson to clarify something. You said that Busoga University and Bunyoro had been allocated Shs 30 billion. Can we know exactly what has been allocated to Busoga? If you say Shs 30 billion is for the two, you may give us Shs 8 billion and give the other one Shs 22 billion. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: You will go to the Budget Committee and find out. You are even a member of the Budget Committee. 10.31MS BETTY NALUYIMA (NUP, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, as we handle the education sector, what is so burning is that being part of the Parliamentary Forum for Children, is the issue of red eye disease in schools. It is rampant - THE SPEAKER: I have talked about it before. It is serious and schools are going to close because of red eyes. MS NALUYIMA: Madam Speaker, we need the ministry to issue guidelines like we were vigilant during the COVID-19 pandemic. Otherwise, children are crying out there. As we talk about the new curriculum, Madam Speaker, we are aware that the country is suffering. We are yet to assess the curriculum, but up to date, there are several schools that have not got the accessories to use for this very curriculum. We need this to be clarified. Finally, concerning the Education Service Commission, in the Public Accounts Committee (Local Government), most of the money being returned is because the Education Service Commission is not giving adequate time to ensure that teachers are recruited to go to local governments. It is key. We also take note – (Interruption) –  Thank you. Information – THE SPEAKER: It is good that you have taken over the Parliament. Honourable minister, you are starting to operationalise the Act, not so? Do we have regulations? MR PETER OGWANG: Madam Speaker, I confirm that I communicated to the Attorney-General, who has assembled a team that is working on the regulations. Once that is ready, I will come to Parliament and lay the regulation on Table to operationalise the Sports Act. THE SPEAKER: When will that be?MR PETER OGWANG:  Madam Speaker, permit me to crosscheck with what the team has already done, next week. 12728SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSTHE SPEAKER: Are we going to do things retrospectively? MR PETER OGWANG: No, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: If we do not have regulations in place, we shall not operationalise the Act. We will not pay that money. 10.34MS PASKA MENYA (Independent, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise my concern to this House about secondary schools in Pader District. I appreciate the committee for their report concerning upgrading of schools. However, much as we are upgrading schools, Pader District does not have Government-aided secondary schools with A-Level. The cost of paying for A-Level in private schools is expensive. My request is that as we do allocations – THE SPEAKER: I beg you a pardon. MS MENYA: We do not have any A-Level Government school in Pader District. Parents are really suffering. THE SPEAKER: So, you are saying that the private schools are expensive. MS MENYA: Very expensive for parents to pay. THE SPEAKER : They are not Government schools. Let Government provide Government schools. Private schools are personal schools. The Government provides schools- MS ACIRO: Madam Speaker, that is why I am saying that the Government schools should provide per district at least one secondary school with A-Level standard. THE SPEAKER:  For us private investors, we shall charge because we invest. Secondly, there is a very good point - Just a minute, Hon. Faith. There is a very good point that Hon. Lee is bringing.10.36MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha):  Madam Speaker, you reminded me about a section of the law that we passed. I have observed that the Ministry of Education and Sports is now moving to invest in public sports facilities. And the law we passed required that the minister should be able to gazette all public sports facilities and vest them properly, before we spend. I want to understand if the minister has done that. If he has not, then in addition to what you propose on the regulations, it is high time he moved to achieve that, such that the status of these public facilities is clear and they are well vested. THE SPEAKER: That is a very important point. You need to gazette all those facilities and then in your ministry somebody in charge of secondary schools must go and visit Pader and see whether they have schools or not. And if they do not have, is your policy of having a secondary school per subcounty working? There is a motion by Hon. Faith. 10.37MS FAITH NAKUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak):  Madam Speaker, given that the Budget Committee has exhaustively handled this matter and also that the Budget Committee will also examine it and bring back a report to this House, I, therefore, move a motion that a question be put, so that, we adopt the report.THE SPEAKER:  Is it seconded?MR OGUZU: I rise to second the motion that we -(Laughter)THE SPEAKER:  It is seconded by Attorney-General, by Minister of ICT, Hon. Kabanda, Hon. Sanon, Government Chief Whip, Hon. Odur Jonathan, by Hon. Lee, Hon Ekanya is even carrying his books –( Laughter ) Hon. Nsereko, Hon. Menya, Dr Opio, Hon. Max, Dr Bhoka, Dr Ruyonga, Hon. Donald, Hon. Goli, Hon. Wanda. 12729THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 12 APRIL 2024The motion is highly seconded, including by Hon. Ethel. Honourable Members, I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Education and Sports on the Ministerial Policy Statement and Budget Estimates for the Financial Year 2024/2025 be adopted by this honourable House.(Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.THE SPEAKER: Now when I hear Hon. Museveni say “Nay,” when his constituency is more of a small village; he is a primary teacher. MR OGUZU:  There were amendments to the motion; I do not know if we are considering them or we are just considering the report the way it is. THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, for the motion, the “Ayes” have it. We have adopted the report and the amendments are going to be made- salary enhancement is there. There is an executive order to that effect. Honourable members, I want to thank you very much for your commitment; this brings us to the end of the Ministerial Policy Statements. (Applause)This goes to the Government Chief Whip; on Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, we shall be considering the Rationalisation of Agencies and Public Expenditure (RAPEX) Bills. We need all your members to attend; we shall be here to do your work. Let us do what Ugandans sent us to do here. And you, people who have stayed here up to this time, are very special. I thank you; you stayed yesterday, today, and you are still going to stay on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday -(Laughter) May the Good Lord bless all of you. I will now adjourn the House to Tuesday at 10.00 a.m.(The House rose at 10.42 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 16 April 2024 at 10.00 a.m.)  