Tuesday, 8 April 2014

Parliament met at 2.41 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this special sitting. As you recall, last week I adjourned the House to today for our regular business but during the weekend, a sad event occurred hence today’s special sitting to pay tribute to the late hon. Stanislaus Kostka E. Okurut who passed away on Saturday. On behalf of the Parliament and my own behalf, we extend our very sincere condolences to the entire family of the late hon. Stanislaus E. Okurut, former minister, former Member of Parliament and distinguished Ugandan.

Hon. Members, when I had just joined the National Resistance Council, the then Legislature, it is senior politicians like the gentleman who is lying outside who were able to show us the ropes and mentor us in our work. We had the likes of hon. Okurut, hon. Adoko Nekyon, hon. Abubaker Mayanja, hon. Mayanja Nkangi, hon. Medard Kwamadi, hon. Joyce Mpanga who is up there, hon. Balaki Kirya and many others. They had been in Parliament before and were quite conversant with parliamentary procedures and practice.

I wish to commend and recognise their contribution as senior politicians to the development of democracy and for schooling us in the rigours and culture of Parliament. The late hon. Okurut was a very candid person who would always speak his mind. He was selfless, sociable and held his people - the Iteso - in high regard and very close to his heart. He will be remembered greatly mainly for the sacrifices he made for the pacification of the Teso region when it had gone into flames due to the rebel activities soon after the advent of the NRM Government.

Towards the end of this sitting, I will give our Government the opportunity to provide us with the programme for the burial so that those who are able can travel to Teso. 

I, of course, recognise hon. Mary Karooro Okurut, the widow, who is seated with us in the Chamber and other family members who are seated on the Treasury Bench. We will continue to pray for them and may journey mercies accompany the family as they make this journey to take their beloved home. Thank you very much.

(Entrance of the late Stanislaus Okurut)

National Anthem (Three Verses)

East African Community Anthem

(Laying of wreaths)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to thank you for that part of the ceremony. I would like to announce the presence of visitors in the VIP Gallery. First, we have members of Parliament and staff from the National Assembly of Zambia who serve on the Committee on Youth and Sports; if they could stand up for recognition. You are welcome. (Applause)
 
We also have the following former ministers: hon. Paul Etyang, former Deputy Prime Minister; hon. Anthony Butele, former minister for the Ten Point Programme; hon. John Ntimba; hon. Constantine Karusoke; and hon. Joyce Mpanga; and the following former Members of Parliament: hon. Johnson Mallinga; hon. James Kubeketerya and hon. Emily Otekat. Also in the Gallery is Mr Bashasha, the Chairperson of Bushenyi District Local Government. You are all welcome. (Applause) Thank you very much.

We also have a number of condolence messages. We have a condolence message from the Minister of Education and Sports, hon. Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo. I will just read two paragraphs from this message and they read: “… I wish to thank the Lord for the life of Stanislaus, which we shared while he lived. We should draw lessons from the positives of his life. He lived a humble and honest life and loved his country. On behalf of the Ministry of Education and Sports and on my own behalf, I convey our heartfelt sympathy and condolences to hon. Mary Karooro, the family and the entire nation.”

There is another message from the Government Chief Whip, on behalf of the NRM Parliamentary Caucus. In brief it says, “I first heard of the late Stanislaus Okurut way back in 1986 when he was one of the three elders from Teso who were abducted by the Uganda Peoples’ Army who were then fighting the hardly one-year old NRM Government. The late Okurut was then Minister of Labour and together with the late Aporu Okor (RIP), the late Robert Ekinu (RIP), who were shot dead at the time, trying to negotiate for the release – the late hon. Okurut was trying to negotiate for the release of the late hon. Aporu Okor. All the three were among the gallant sons of Teso working tirelessly for the pacification of Teso. 

It is while he served as Minister of Sports that the late Okurut revived the Chinese offer to construct the National Stadium on international standards and thus the construction of the now Mandela National Stadium, which we are all proud to have. 

He is remembered for working for the shortcut route to the east through the Iganga-Tirinyi-Mbale Road.”

There is a message from hon. Sarah Kataike Ndoboli and in brief it reads: “Losing such a historical legislator and peace lover at this time has robbed the country of a statesman whose wisdom and wise counsel will be greatly missed by not only us but Africa at large.”

A message is from the Acholi Parliamentary Group: “On behalf of the Acholi Parliamentary Group, we convey our sincere condolences to the Teso Community for having lost a peacemaker and a leader. We share with you the grief and pray to the Almighty God to give him eternal life. We offer a contribution of Shs 500,000 towards the funeral expenses.” I have got the money here. I will pass it over to hon. Karooro.

Another message is from hon. Mike Mukula and in brief it reads: “… in profound love for peace, harmony and wellbeing for all, he inspired many of us and our hearts are deeply waged down at this trying time. The late Okurut will be remembered for being a caring person who always stood by the truth. He told the truth as it is and this drew many people to him. The late Okurut will always be remembered for his active involvement in peacekeeping activities in Northern Uganda in the late 1980s and his profound contribution to this nation. He dedicated service as minister and Chairman URVS Board in the 1980s, later MP for Kumi County in Teso has gone a long way.”

We also have a message from the National Association of Women Organisations of Uganda signed by Consolanta Kabonesa and in brief it reads: “I recall hon. Okurut served the people of Uganda as Minister of Works and Communication, Culture and Sports and of Labour. As Minister for Culture and Sports, he commissioned the construction of the Namboole Stadium that is used as a sports arena but has also served our country for many religious and cultural events. He was a peacemaker. He loved Uganda and worked for peace in this country…”

We have another from the Parliamentary Women’s Forum. I didn’t know there is a women’s forum of Parliament which is not UWOPA. “The Parliamentary Women’s Forum wishes to extend their sincere condolences to the family of the late Stanislaus Okurut. It is our prayer that the Almighty continues to strengthen the family, relatives and in-laws. Enclosed is Shs 1,300,000/=…” I don’t have it but it is written in here. If I find it, I will pass it on. The message is signed by hon. Rosemary Nyakikongoro.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE STANISLAUS K. E. OKURUT, FORMER MINISTER AND MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT FOR NGORA, FORMERLY IN KUMI DISTRICT

3.17
THE PRIME MINISTER (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I rise under Rule 47 of our Rules of Procedure to move a motion for a resolution of this Parliament to pay tribute to the late Stanislaus Kostka E. Okurut, former minister and Member of Parliament for Ngora County, formerly in Kumi District.

The motion reads thus: 

“WHEREAS Parliament has learnt, with regret, the demise of the late hon. Stanislaus K. E. Okurut, which occurred on 6 April 2014, in Kampala;

AND WHEREAS the late Stanislaus K. E. Okurut was born in October 1929 in the village of Olwa, Kokong Parish, Kapir Sub-County, in the present Ngora District; studied at St Marys College of London University and Makerere University, taught in various schools and worked in government agencies and industries in Uganda;

NOTING THAT the late Stanislaus Okurut had an illustrious political career as a Member of the Legislative Council (LEGCO), State Minister for Works and Transport in the first post-colonial government and later served various ministerial positions in the NRM Government, among others as Minister for Sports and Culture where he is, as we have heard earlier, credited for his achievement in realising the construction of the Mandela National Stadium at Namboole in Kampala;

FURTHER NOTING THAT in 1987, while serving as Minister for Culture and Sports, the late Stanislaus Okurut volunteered and together with the late Robert Ekinu and the late Aporu Okor and was tasked by Government to negotiate with the Uganda Peoples Army (UPA) Rebels where he and his colleagues were taken captive and was rescued nine months later;

APPRECIATING THAT even after his life-threatening ordeal at the hands of the rebels, the late Stanislaus Okurut continued to pursue a peaceful resolution to that conflict as a peace builder in Teso and together with other political leaders championed the enactment of the Amnesty Law to benefit former rebels;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows:
    1. That it collectively conveys its deepest condolences to the bereaved family, friends and the nation as a whole upon the demise of this illustrious son of Uganda;
    2. That it takes cognisance of the distinguished services rendered and contributions made by the late Stanislaus Okurut as an affable servant of his people and a peacemaker; and 
    3. That it takes cognisance of the late Stanislaus Okurut as an accomplished politician who was a peace lover, tolerant and patriotic Ugandan.” 

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the late Stanislus Okurut was born in October 1929 to the late Ernest Ejau and Berita Isone in Olwa Kokong in the present day Ngora District. He attended Ngora Primary School for his early education before joining Soroti Angels School. He later joined Madera Senior Secondary School for his secondary education which he concluded in Tororo College. He proceeded to Mbarara where he trained as a secondary school teacher. He went to St. Mary’s College of London University and Makerere University. 

The late Stanislaus Okurut has been one of the few surviving legislators who served in the Legislative Council (LEGCO) before Uganda attained Independence. Having studied to become a teacher, the late Okurut had no intentions of serving in politics. When one of his uncles who had served in the LEGCO passed on, the people of Ngora urged him to replace his deceased uncle.

When Uganda attained Independence in 1962, the late Okurut was again elected on the Democratic Party ticket although he later crossed to UPC where he was appointed State Minister for Works and Transport. He was later to be appointed Chairman of the Advisory Board of Trade in the second Obote Government in 1980 to 1984.

In 1986, when the National Resistant Movement took power, the late Okurut was appointed State Minister for Transport although he remained a UPC member. He also served the country with dignity in several ministerial dockets under the NRM Government including Minister for Labour and Minister for Culture and Sports. The late Okurut served as National Resistance Member for Kumi County from 1989 to 1996.

While serving as Minister for Culture and Sports, the late Okurut was tasked by Government together with other ministers - the late George Aporu and the late Robert Ekinu who were all from the Teso sub-region - to lead a delegation and go and negotiate with the Uganda Peoples Army led by Peter Otai, which was fighting against the NRM Government and the leadership of Yoweri Museveni. Unfortunately, when the trio were captured by the rebels, it was on the pleas of Okurut that Aporu, who was the youngest of the ministers, was released by these rebels. The late Stanislaus Okurut was held in captivity for a period of nine months. It was unfortunate that his other colleague, Robert Ekinu, was shot by the rebels and died in captivity.

Immediately upon his rescue from captivity by Government, the late Okurut continued pursuing the peace mission for the Teso sub-region. The late Okurut managed to persuade the late Ateker Ejalu, one of the top rebels of the Uganda Peoples Army, to give up rebellion and join Government. Between 1986 and 1989, the late Okurut together with the late Ateker Ejalu, Aporu Okoru and the late Brig. Gen. Chief Ali met with rebels several times and asked them to give up their arms in exchange for Government support. It was through these tireless efforts even at the risk of being killed that the late Okurut helped the people of Teso in peace initiatives.

Apart from his fight for a peaceful Teso and Uganda as a whole, the late Okurut was also credited for improving the transport system in the country. As minister in charge of transport, the Tirinyi- Mbale Road became a reality replacing the use of boats on River Mpologoma. The water and rail transport also flourished under his reign.

As a minister in charge of sports, he revived the Chinese offer for the construction of Mandela National Stadium which to date is the largest stadium in the country.

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the late Okurut retired from active politics in 1986 and lived a humble and quiet life until his demise at his residence in Ntinda. The late Okurut is survived by a widow, hon. Karoro Okurut, and eight children. I wish to extend the NRM Government’s and my own sincere and heartfelt condolences to the family of the deceased, the people of Ngora District and the country at large for the loss of this gallant son. 

May God, the Almighty bless the soul of the deceased in eternal peace. I beg to move.

3.28
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Madam Speaker, fellow members of this august House, I feel greatly honoured to be speaking on behalf of my colleagues on this side of the House at this special sitting in the honour of the late Mzee Stanislaus Okurut. I have known Mzee Okurut and his wife, Mary, who is sitting in this House as a Member of Parliament, for some years.

We have assembled here to honour and celebrate the life of the late Mzee Okurut who served our country in various capacities with dedication. The late Okurut was an advocate for peace and was a peace builder. In his political life, he is most remembered for braving on a mission to the bush to meet with rebels of the Uganda People’s Army in Teso at the risk of his life to go and negotiate peace. His contribution in peace negotiation with the rebels was invaluable towards ending the rebel war in the Teso sub-region.

As a legislator, he submitted during the National Resistance Council session on 10 June 1987 thus; “This government has all chances of making a great government. I think we started well with our economic package but we should go further and look at the security of our people. I hear it being said that there is peace but there is no peace in some parts of the country and we should spare no effort to restore it.”

I used to share some social evenings with Mzee Okurut in the 90s whenever he visited our Rotary Club of Ntinda to which his wife, Mary Karoro Okurut, was a member then. To me, he came across as an objective and non-parochial statesman. You would never tell the political party or inclination he favoured or belonged to in his discussions. He was a democrat and always gave frank and objective advice whenever it was necessary.

Therefore, as we celebrate his life, we should ponder and reflect on our own lives; how have we lived our lives? How are we living our lives? What contributions are we making to the wellbeing of humanity and our country? Death will always unite us and the late Okurut has united us today; but why only unite in times of death? Why not work in unity all the time?

In his life, Mzee Okurut worked for the unity of Ugandans. As we honour him, we should take the opportunity to focus on unity for Ugandans especially at this time when our country seems to be at cross roads. For example, it is not normal for a country to be without a substantive Chief Justice and Deputy Chief Justice for over one year and the Executive seems unbothered. That is a pillar of the State that should never be vacant at its head.

Of recent, there are media reports everywhere indicating that there is a power struggle between the ruling party and the government. This also happened several times in past governments and the end was always disastrous for the country and for the people. Our history is there. The current struggles within the NRM are causing instability. The media is awash with information of leaked Police intelligence tapes showing that there is no unity in the ruling party. This should be a matter of great concern, Madam Speaker, to Ugandans most especially the elders who should be giving objective advice to the powers that be. 

Going by what we are seeing on the political landscape in our country, there is growing need to find a forum where we can meet irrespective of our parties, consult and discuss the way forward for our country. Some people may not see need for this but we think it might be the only way out to save our country from possible chaos.

Madam Speaker, death in our country always reminds us of a loud outcry of Ugandans for better health services and for better quality of life. As a nation, we need to meaningfully improve the quality of life of our citizens so that all our elders who have served this country so well in various capacities whether they are peasants, drivers, workers, politicians or managers can live with dignity and enjoy their evening life till they depart like Mzee Okurut has done. I am sure he has lived a dignified life and enjoyed his late evening life thanks to hon. Mary Okurut.

May the family of the late Stanislaus Okurut receive our deep condolences and be comforted during these difficult times and may all Ugandans come together and search for a lasting solution to our problems. May the soul of Mzee Stanislaus Okurut rest in eternal peace. For God and my country. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion has been moved, I do not see hon. Otada. Before I yield the Floor, I feel obliged to make a correction and it is a pity the Prime Minister has gone. The remarks about Mr Okurut convincing Mr Ejalu to return to Uganda are not true. I am speaking from personal knowledge. I was extremely close to Ateker Ejalu. When they left for the peace mission, he was right here in Kampala. So, what the Prime Minister has said is not true, for the record and I hope the Teso members can elaborate on that.

Now that the movers have used their time, I will now apply our usual three minutes for just the highlights.

3.38
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Cecilia Ogwal): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to pay tribute to the grandfather of politics, to a friend and to a distinguished Ugandan. Papa Stanislaus Okurut had rare qualities because he was a man who ventured into many struggles and distinguished himself as an achiever.

Papa’s life can be divided into three phases; the first phase of struggle was the struggle for independence. As a member of the LEGCO, they united Parliament behind the agenda to bring independence to this country and indeed they succeeded in the first struggle. The second struggle was to bring about peace and reconciliation to the people of Teso and also to the whole of Uganda and for this, he almost lost his life. We would like, in a special way, to also remember our dear brothers and friends, Dr Aporu and Robert Ekinu, who are not with us today.

We still have to remember Joseph Ekemu who is with us and who almost died but today Joseph Ekemu is around. I do not know how many of us talk to him on phone or visit him but that man almost died to make sure that peace returns to Teso. Today the people of Teso are enjoying peace and the Members of Parliament from Teso are proud to be leaders there but somebody had to sacrifice and these people sacrificed their lives to save the people of Teso.

The third phase was to tell the people of Uganda that unless you unite the tribes of Uganda, there cannot be peace. This was during the time when the Iteso were resisting the regime of President Museveni, a regime that came by the barrel of the gun.  The people of Teso indeed rejected that regime but Okurut was able to prove to the people of Teso and the people of Uganda that my rib is a Munyakole and indeed we are all proud of this Munyankole called Mary Okurut. This Munyankole has proved she is a Ugandan and is really a wife. She has been a wife to this old man and she was an incubator to the old man. Several times he spoke to me. There are many times that Mary Okurut asked me to pray with her because Papa had sunk so down in his health and she herself needed strength. She went through a very painful life for the sake of her husband so that she could give him a dignified life up to the end. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, before you cut me off, allow me say this –(Laughter)- people have been awarded medals but I did not see Okurut being named to receive a medal at all in Uganda. I pray that he must be given one posthumously, Ekemu must be given a medal and also Ekinu must be given a medal posthumously – (Interjections)- please, do not interrupt me. I am pleading for those who are not here to speak for themselves and many other people even from Lango and Acholi sub-regions.

Finally, if Papa were to be asked, “What is your last statement for the people of Uganda?” He would have said, “For the 2016 agenda, stop it because I saw Onama clash with Obote and it ended with a crisis where every Ugandan felt the taste and bitterness of that experience.” He would have said, “Stop it because I watched Obote clash with Mwanga and every Ugandan tasted the bitterness of that experience.” Therefore –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear information from the Minister for Gender.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (GENDER AND CULTURE) (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Madam Speaker, I just wanted to correct the information that has just been given by the Opposition Chief Whip; hon. Okurut received the medal and it was received on his behalf by the wife because he was bedridden. So, I just want to correct the Hansard that he got the medal. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I also want to announce in the Public Gallery, the presence of hon. Ojok B’leo, former Member of Parliament for Kyoga. I want to also announce Mr Mugulusi, the Under Secretary in the Ministry of Gender; we have citizens from Mayuge represented by hon. Nakadama and hon. Magyegere. I think that they are on this side; you are welcome. (Applause)

3.47
MR STEPHEN OCHOLA (FDC, Serere County, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I do not know why my brother, hon. Musa Ecweru is – [HON. MEMBER: “You are the same.”] I want to join the rest of this country to pay tribute to Papa. Just last week, I talked to Toto Mary because in our country, when a woman is married in our clan, we all call her wife. But Toto told me that she is my mother and she does not want me to call her wife and I always call her Toto. I talked to her last week asking about the health of Papa and she said he was doing quite well. It is unfortunate that we are here today to pay tribute to Papa.

Papa Okurut is one of the few leaders of Teso we shall miss. I remember I was a small boy in 1987 during the insurgency. That was the day and time I remember Papa Okurut very well. By that time, there was no government in Serere - the county that I now represent. It was the headquarters of the rebels and for a long time, we were only seeing a tractor that used to ferry food for the rebels until that particular day when I saw vehicles coming and asked where the vehicles were coming from because it was quite a surprise for us to see vehicles in Serere; but that was the day they were bringing the three ministers and Mzee Okurut was among them. He has been the last out of the three ministers to leave us today.

We were all surprised when we were told that the rebels had captured the ministers. After staying in Serere for some time, there was a disagreement; some of the rebel leaders were saying that they release the ministers while others said that they should keep them and I think that disagreement was the one that made Mzee Okurut and the other two, the late Ekinu and late Aporu to be transferred from Serere to Katakwi side. I followed it in Serere as a small boy at that time.

But Madam Speaker, I learnt a lot from Papa Okurut. By that time, it was not easy for a minister or even any other person – if you were not from that village to go to Teso especially where they went. But for the love he had for the people of Teso, he wanted peace and so they sacrificed, moved and went to meet these rebels. It was not easy because even some of us - personally, I could not leave where I was known and move about 20 kilometres away from home. One time, they almost killed me; the rebels got me and said that I looked like the westerners and they said, “This one must be a mulaalo and is not an Itesot.” I was only saved when I told them, “Please, I come from Adipala and that is where Mzee Omeda comes from.” They had to call the late brother of Mzee Omeda who came and said, “Yes, this is my brother. You are going to kill my brother.” Madam Speaker, you would have not seen me today. But Mzee Okurut sacrificed and went and you can see the love that he had for the people of Teso and this country. I really feel that we will miss him but God has decided. Papa, bye-bye and we shall meet again. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe, hon. Members, I will adjust to four minutes but it means fewer people will speak. 

3.49
MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is truly an honour to be able to pay tribute to a true son of Uganda. I was fortunate to have an opportunity to interact with the late Okurut and can say that his humility was something that you realised straight away. Meeting him for the first time, you would not know that he had such a colourful career in Ugandan politics. 

There are those who have spoken about 1987 but I would like to take us back to the foundation of this country. Those who led us into Independence and formed the first government really gave us a clear roadmap to follow and where I can really extend the tribute is that they had no role models. They were the pioneers and the dedication and achievements which they brought forth is something which we should really be thankful for. 

When I read the old Hansards, it is true that we had amazing young people who led us into Independence. And their commitment and dedication is clear throughout. On such a motion as this, I can gladly support the Prime Minister without any fear of contradiction. 

Another aspect is that very many of those who led us initially came from the humble profession of teaching. But in those days, the society respected the teacher. To our parents, what the teacher said was unquestionable; it was as good as “It is written…” Today, we must rediscover the role of teachers and respect and honour them the way these teachers helped build a foundation on which Uganda stands today. All of the achievements of 1960s are something which I always look back to and wonder how these young people – because our father lying here was truly a young man in the LEGCO and in the 1961 elections under the Democratic Party. Then after 1962, he was in the Opposition; joined the UPC again and the politics was a different sort of politics. There was politics of accommodation and all of them, if you read the old Hansards, were committed to see a better Uganda.

For many of us today, it is difficult to know exactly what it is we stand for; whether it is how we are going to get into power or maintain power. But at the end of the day, are we truly improving the lives of the Ugandan citizens? As I stand here, I can openly say that the late Okurut served this country and did it well. Whichever era – whether you look at the 1960s or the 1980s - he did what he felt was best for the people for whom he served. And on that note, I can only pass on my condolences and prayers to the family. But most of all, I thank God that I had the opportunity to interact with the late Okurut and I thank God for the service he offered to this country. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

3.53
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to register condolences on behalf of the people I represent – that is Rubaga North Constituency – to the widow, an honourable colleague, to the rest of the family and to the rest of Ugandans.

Hon. Stanislaus Okurut now lying before us, as it has been said, is one of the few Ugandans who worked hard to usher in Uganda’s Independence. We therefore gather here to celebrate a life of a man of history. We are not merely losing the life of hon. Okurut, but we are losing the history he had. Uganda today has a scarcity of former leaders at every leadership position. For the last 28 years, at presidential level, no one is even getting ready to be a former president of Uganda. Here, we have an honourable colleague, who has passed away and according to history, he is a former contributor to the future of this nation. There is only one absurdity; the late Okurut at 85 years of age was an old Ugandan beyond dispute. But he has not lived long enough to see a government changing hands peacefully in a Uganda to whose Independence he contributed. It is a challenge to the rest of us as we mourn the death of this gallant son of Uganda to further the struggle he contributed to of having governments changing peacefully.

At 85 years of age, the late Okurut has not received enough of our contributions to his life. To be lying in front of us here – and nowhere in the history of Uganda is it written that he was alive when a government in Uganda changed peacefully. We must blame ourselves for not having helped him to see that happen in a Uganda he ushered Independence to. 

Madam Speaker, we shall miss the late Okurut’s body but the good spirit he had for Uganda will never be missed by peace-loving Ugandans. Goodbye, hon. Okurut. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

3.58
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When we recently returned from the long recess, I met hon. Mary Okurut – wife to the late Okurut – and she looked different before my eyes. When I asked why she was bigger than before, she replied that she had never believed that stress would make people grow fat. The reason was that she had a lot of worries about her husband because at that time his health condition had deteriorated and it was so worrying that she did not have time to work out and be as fit as she used to be. 

Madam Speaker, I did not know much about the late Okurut but I used to see him while I was still a Member of the Eighth Parliament. I used to live on Gayaza Road and it was nearer to Christ the King Church, where I used to meet the late Papa and hon. Karooro Okurut together every Sunday. And this really indicates to me that the two were God-fearing because I never met one of them alone at any point in Church. I am very sure – because to me to know a good man, you have to look at the wife. When you look at hon. Mary Okurut and the way she relates to other members when approached in respect to her work as a minister, she shows that she had a responsible husband who we will all miss.

On behalf of the people of Agago District, I would like to condole with hon. Mary Okurut. I know it is not easy to be a widow – I am not yet one - Laughter)– but I saw the pain of being a widow from my late mother. She had to look after several children and children of her other siblings. So, it is not going to be an easy way for you, hon. Minister, but we will always pray and be with you forever, consoling you and I know God is going to provide for you and for the family. I say this for God and my country. May his soul rest in peace.  

4.02
CAPT. MIKE MUKULA (NRM, Soroti Municipality, Soriti): Madam Speaker, before us lies a great patriot, a great nationalist and a great Pan-African. Stanislaus Okurut was a peacemaker. Stanislaus Okurut fought for the stability and the peace of this country. He has had a galaxy of achievements and his political footprints not only in Teso are immeasurable. 

I want to associate myself, Madam Speaker, with the clarification you made and to say that the late Okurut and the late Ateker Ejalu all worked for the peace and stability, not only for Teso but Uganda as a whole. It is important for us to note that immediately the National Resistance Movement Government took over power in 1986; - when the National Resistance Army was pursuing the reactionary forces, on 19 February at 4.00 p.m. the Uganda People’s Army launched their first attack on the Army barracks in Soroti. From then, peace dodged the region. The whole of Teso was unstable and many people were sent into camps. 

The late Okurut with the late Ekinu together with the late Aporu Okor volunteered and came out as patriots and nationalists to go and talk the language of peace with the rebels of the UPA. Let me tell you that Teso at that time was not an easy place. But I would like to thank the late for having sacrificed his life because one of the comrades, the late Ekinu lost his life. The gunfire that surrounded the release of these three who broke out and ran for their dear lives – had it not been for the protection from the Lord Almighty, maybe all the three would have succumbed to that gunfire that the late Ekinu suffered.

I want to say that I took and I take the late Stanislaus Okurut like my father because he was born in the same year with my father. They were great friends and worked together. Let me also assert one very clear position that in life they say and we have a great saying that besides every great man, there is a great woman. Hon. Mary Karooro Okurut has stood as a very strong and great woman besides Stanislaus Okurut. No wonder she is the Minister of Gender. I appeal to the women to emulate this great lady. (Applause) 

The late Stanislaus Okurut has gone through difficult and trying times. But never did hon. Mary Karooro Okurut abandon her husband, not even for one day. (Applause) I want to thank our in-laws from Bushenyi for having given us a great woman. May the soul of the late Stanislaus Okurut rest in eternal peace and the people of Teso will forever miss him. We will accompany him to his last journey and lay him to rest with dignity. God bless him.

4.06
MR MUSA ECWERU (NRM, Amuria County, Amuria): Madam Speaker, in paying tribute to this peace crusader, the late Mzee Okurut, allow me use this very special occasion to put some record straight. On many occasions, people speak about the UPA, which was a rebel organisation in the Teso sub-region and interpret what happened from their own point of view. I am here as a person who was part of that group – (Laughter) - and what I am about to say is just a tip of the iceberg; the rest is coming in my book titled “The Teso Conflict from my own eyes.” But allow me say this: when the late Gen. Tito Okello took Government, and I want to say this for the record, the Karimojong were given guns by the Tito’s military Junta to attempt to stop the NRA that was advancing from Katonga River. When the Karimojong reached River Katonga and saw the gunfire which probably was not the type of fire used for rustling, they returned with the guns, boarded trains here and headed home with thousands of guns.

Madam Speaker, when the NRA came to Teso – and I want to say this too for the record and I have said it many times to H.E, the President and many people - they were welcomed very warmly from Kacumbala. The people at Kacumbala and Teso at large welcomed the NRA. What led to the formation of the UPA was a consequence of what I call mismanaged suspicion. I can elaborate on that with your permission, Madam Speaker. The second reason that led to the formation of the UPA was outright theft. Let me say something about this mismanaged suspicion. 

The officers who arrived in Teso who included Amooti Rwakatare and others, instead of mobilising the defeated special forces soldiers and the UNLA, they hunted for them. I want to put that on record – they started hunting for them. That is one.

Two, Madam Speaker, I was a humble boy. These are the people who brought me up. What then happened? In one day – and this is also for the record – the Karimojong rustled Wera and Gweri sub-counties and drove the cows away. The NRA led by a one Katagara went and intercepted the Karimojong cattle rustlers and rescued all the cattle. But instead of returning the cows to the owners including William Ecweru –(Laughter)- they loaded the cows into vehicles and drove them to Kampala. (Applause) I want this on record and I am happy the Vice President is here. Instead of returning the cows to the owners including the cows of William Ecweru, they loaded the stolen cows and brought them this way. That is another reason that led to the formation of the UPA.

Madam Speaker, the UPA was started and I can confess and I have apologized to the country many times that I was part of it. What then happened - and I want this also on record and to address myself to Teso before I say something about this late old man. When the war broke out, Teso is very unfortunate – from the days of Obote I, through the government of the late Idi Amin, to that of the late Tito Okello and the present government, Teso has always had a crop of opportunists, who always jump into the system and after that their responsibility is to mislead and misinform government. What then happened that time, as we were fighting, the opportunists w ere able to work their way into the government and misinform this government that all the elders of Teso were part of the war and they were the machinery that was driving the war.

The Government, therefore, was misinformed and ordered the arrest of 69 elders including Oguli. They locked them up in Moroto, in Kotido and in Mbale. Where the cows had gone; the elders were taken there.

By the time – and I want to make this clear - this peace pacifists were sent to bring peace, they came with a peace message but we said, “No, you are not going back. What we want you to do, we are going to keep you but you have to write a letter to the Government, first and foremost, to release the elders who were in prison.” We requested for the release of all the elders including Oguli, Tom and the Oducu’s. 
The second one is; we also requested Government to remove the officers who looted Teso immediately.

For the record, a man like the Brig. Gen. Kyaligonza took some property at gunpoint and he is our ambassador to Burundi. Col Katagara looted the country, cows. (Laughter)

We told them that we would keep them until they led us to Government. They wrote to the government. We think very strongly although I have not confirmed, that on learning what had happened, His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni made changes.

I want to report here today that if Government had not brought there the late Chefali - may his soul rest in eternal peace - if Government had not brought Gen. Angina, probably the war would have taken longer than it took. It is the coming of those people that changed the face of the army. It is the coming of those people that made us say, “We have made our point.” I told the rebels, “We have lost militarily; let us give this Government their guns, let us take pens and hoes and go and start another struggle.”

The struggle that we are on is a struggle of maintaining our peace, the struggle of consolidating.

I want to thank Mzee Okurut, Mzee Ekiro, Mzee Aporu because they said, “Even when we go back to Government, we are going to tell Government you should never be tried but instead be allowed to come out of the bush peacefully” and hence the amnesty. This man continued to respect us; the challenge that he had is that he was captured when he was old. (Member timed out.)

MR ECWERU: Allow me one minute, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, one minute to conclude.

MR ECWERU: The challenge was that he was captured when he was old. I want to appreciate what my brother hon. Ochola was talking about taking him to Serere. When they were taken to Serere, the problem was mobility, the rebels would be here in the evening, and yet, they wanted to sleep in Bombo at midnight. It was difficult for these elderly people. We, therefore, proposed that these elderly men be relocated to Kapelebyong where we had a main brigade so that they could be taken care of there. That is how they stayed there for many months.

The army then could not reach that place. It was when they were brought where they were brought eventually – and I also want to put it on record here - the death of late Ekinu was because the army attacked the unit in the morning to attempt to rescue and in the course of the attack, Ekinu died. It was not caused by the rebels.

We respected these old men despite the fact that we knew we were holding them as emissaries of Government. This Mzee used to tell us; “Musa, Otai, I know the war is legitimate because we lost cows but it has lost direction; let us leave it.” I want to thank “Toto.” I was a young man; I grew up in Maria Karoro’s home. These old men are the ones who raised me. I know them so much; I know this mother.

Many people say may be, when you marry from another tribe, you get problems. Karooro has proved that it is the heart. She is very special; she has stuck to this old man until death has parted them.

Finally, as this Mzee is laid to rest, we pray that the opportunists that have always been in Teso do not mislead people again. They are quick to take reports and misinform Government so that Government makes mistakes. I hope they do not mislead people again. (Interjections) May the soul of Mzee rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ecweru, I was expecting you to tell us whether Mr Ejalu was actually part of your rebellion. I want that for the record clarified.

MR ECWERU: This is also for the record; the truth is that Mzee Ejalu had never been in UPA. What is true though is that most of the elders, wherever they were in the world, were very sympathetic to us.

It is also not true that Peter Otai was our leader. In my book, I will be telling you the leader of the UPA. The commander was a rebel Francis Otai, this Musa Ecweru was a humble man around there but there was nothing. So, that is the position. (Laughter)

4.18
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I bring condolences and sympathies from the people of Igara West and Bushenyi District in general to hon. Mary Karooro Busingye Okurut, the family and the nation.

Uganda is mourning the demise of a great leader. The region of Teso is mourning the death of their dear son and an elder but we in Bushenyi are mourning the death of a beloved in-law.

The name Okurut is a household name in Bushenyi. I would like to inform our colleagues from Teso region that the late Okurut has left behind a name of a good leader, a good person and a good Muteso in Ankole. He has left a legacy in that name of a man who respects his in-laws, who bridges the people of Uganda across the district borders, of a man of peace and of great intellect.

We shall certainly miss him a lot as his in-laws. To you, our dear sister, hon. Mary Karooro, it is good and gratifying to hear the people from the area where you are married really coming out to thank you and to give all the tributes to you. I would like to pass on the information to you that the people of Bushenyi are standing by you, they are with you and they are very proud of you.

On Saturday, I was representing the hon. Minister at a function in my constituency and at 12.30 p.m as I was delivering her message saying that; “Hon. Okurut has sent you a message, she is with you, she is in Kampala in hospital nursing her dear husband,” then I got a message on phone to say he was dead. 

You can imagine the shock and trauma. However, I would like to assure you that thereafter, we had our own vigil in Bushenyi, led by the Bishop of West Ankole Rt Rev. Katonene and speaker after speaker came out very clearly with the same message we have heard from our colleagues from Teso. 

Hon. Karooro, we are proud of you for standing out as an African woman, a woman of courage, a woman of affection, a woman of great care. You were able to nurse your husband, you were able to feed him, clothe him and look after him up to the last minute. The picture of Saturday of a Cabinet minister on a boda boda rushing to save the life of her husband and to be with him in the last moments has won you great admiration in Bushenyi and I believe in the whole country. (Applause)

Even as we mourn the death of our dear one, it is good to put it on record for the future that this is the spirit of an African woman, which should be admired and upheld. May God strengthen you; may God protect the family and may God rest the soul of Stanislaus Okurut in eternal peace. I thank you.

4.23
MR JACOB OPOLOT (NRM, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to join the rest in supporting the motion and paying tribute to the late Papa Okurut. A lot has already been said about the person who is lying before us. In Papa Okurut, you could see someone very exemplary and honest. 

I want to talk more about what has been said. When you talk of Tirinyi-Mbale road or Namboole Stadium, for those who know this infrastructure, they know that they are very good art pieces and they have weathered the storm. I would use this as an opportunity to urge those colleagues who are responsible for putting in place such facilities to emulate what Papa Okurut did because he did something that stands the test of time.

His role in peace-building and peace-making in Teso can never be under-estimated. He was a very courageous man to dare face Musa Ecweru in whatever capacity he was. This could not be done by an ordinary person but he did it and he was able to convince hon. Musa Ecweru and the rest and we got peace. I want to thank Musa Ecweru for honouring Papa Okurut by bringing peace to Teso.

I will conclude by re-emphasising what has already been said and thanking God for the gift that he gave Papa Okurut in the woman, a wife, a mother, a friend and a nurse that we got in Toto Mary Karooro Okurut. It is very rare to find someone who will stand by you under such circumstances as regards what Papa went through to the very end. Toto, thank you very much, “Eyalama noi.” We shall always respect you for that and I would really say that much as hon. Mike Mukula urged the women, I would also appeal to all of us that we do the same for our spouses.

With that, I want to pray that Toto, the family and the rest of the Teso community will gain the courage to live on after Papa. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

4.26
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion and to pay tribute to an accomplished statesman and a family friend for I have known Stanislaus Okurut for as long as hon. Mary Karoro has known him, of course, not as closely, yet as a friend.

Hon. Stanislaus Okurut has served this nation in various capacities as many colleagues have said and has served with distinction and excellence and always putting service above self. He was a peace-maker and selfless to the extent of sacrificing his life for others. He valued friendship and invested in his friendships and I can attest to this. We used to spend valuable social evenings together as he was friends with my late husband.

Hon. Stanislaus Okurut was a true family man who loved his wife and children but he was also open handed because the two Okuruts; hon. Stanislaus and hon. Maria have raised very many children from the extended family. I would like to join others in paying tribute to hon. Mary Karooro for the love and care that she put into her marriage and certainly, this love and care has helped to prolong hon. Stanislaus’ life.

Hon. Mary Okurut, we are proud of you for providing a role model of a true African woman and a true Munyankore woman. Yes, I am proud to say this. 

The two of them lived a life of true partnership. We have been talking of partnership according to this year’s theme for Women’s Day. Hon. Okurut and her husband lived a life of true partnership. This should send a message to every man that when you love your wife and cherish her, she will love you back and complement the God given gift in you and propel you to excellence. 

Hon. Stanislaus Okurut was a dignified elder, very highly knowledgeable but one who loved mentoring young people and passing on wisdom and guidance to the young.

To hon. Mary Karooro and the children, God still has plans for you as His Word says in Jeremiah 29:11; plans to prosper you. Just trust Him and allow Him to work out his purposes in your life and take solace in the fact that all of us loved Stanislaus. Walk with your head high; he is gone but he did not live in vain. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

4.30
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also join colleagues in paying tribute to the deceased. I had an opportunity to interact with him and I will always remember him for three or so things. The first is that he was never tribalistic. He was a man of all people, whenever he would welcome you in his house, he would engage you and he was a rare politician. You would talk and he would immediately switch to politics and his politics were purely peace and stability for this country. That is how he managed not being sectarian, he was able to come to Bushenyi and get a Munyankore woman instead of getting one from his place in Teso.

Secondly, the late was never selfish. He worked for others first. He had all the opportunities to amass wealth for his own, for his family and for his people. We had trouble when we were organising for the burial, from his people. Most of the people from the Teso region passed through his hands. While arranging for his burial, people still wanted to be with him and mourn him. They wanted him to be buried after a week. That is the kind of person we are talking about. He was loved by most of the people in Teso and both the educated and rich, passed through his hands. So, he was never a selfish man.

Thirdly, he was very honest, strict and a very good family man. That is why he has been able to raise his family. His wife, who is our sister, hon. Mary Karooro Okurut, has been by his side. Being a strict man, he has been able to bring up all the people around him to be true citizens of this country. 

We will greatly miss him and as we said, for us as people from Bushenyi, he was really a mentor. His politics went beyond Teso. He was a pillar in our politics in Bushenyi and he used to advise us and that is why he even encouraged his wife to participate in politics in Bushenyi. That is the kind of person we are talking about. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

4.33
THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kahinda Otafiire): Thank you, Madam Speaker. What strikes me as important about the late Stanislaus Okurut was his humility and deep understanding of the issues of the country. I have heard people say that he married a Munyankole woman. No. He married his love who happened to be from that region. (Laughter) Otherwise, there are other Banyankore women he met in life. Why didn’t he marry them? He married his love who happened to be from that region. He never married a Munyankore but a woman of his choice.

I agree with hon. Akena when he says that these were young people at Independence. Yes, they were young people whose mission got clouded by lack of clear understanding of the sense of direction of the African nation. Had they stuck to their mission goal, then the other young people, who came to cause the present day dispensation, would not have had five years of war in Luweero. It is because we lost focus at that historical epoch. 

When leaders lose focus, get out of depth and lose sense of direction, then confusion reigns. The challenge is not the mistakes of the leaders or disagreements but resolution of conflict. How do you resolve conflict? 

Once you solve the question of resolution of conflict and misunderstanding, then you will never have the Okurut’s running for cover. We must learn – those before us ought to learn from history, for us, we must learn from the present, those after us must learn from what is obtaining today in order to ensure that this country remains on a clear path. (Interjections) I do not know. (Interjections) Madam Speaker, let me allow him. (Interruption)

DR OMONA: Thank you, my senior colleague. I first of all want to thank you amidst calls that made this information not important to make. I am just giving this information because from the contribution of hon. Members, this is what I want to say. By the time the late Stanislaus Okurut and his friends got caught up in the bush and then Robert Ekinu was killed, I was a very keen child. The late Robert Ekinu was a personal family friend. This is what I saw and I think these records are very important and this is the information that I wanted to give.

I do not know why this key concept is left out in this debate – the professionalisation of the army. I want to say that I just survived because I should have also died in the bush because of the poor management of the situation then. I had about five of my childhood friends who died in the bush because of anger of the then very unprofessional army. 

Colleagues, I am just saying, I think it is important that –(Interruption)

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Order, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Point of order.

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, this is not a sitting where we can joke with each other. It is a sitting where our tears are flowing. Please, can you – you can see the family, particularly the wife. Can we at least show that we are Ugandan and speak with the language that is befitting of this sitting? 

Is it, therefore, in order for this young man to stand up and interrupt our “muko” who is speaking and mourning with the sister who has lost her husband? Is it in order young man to stand and interrupt? (Laughter) Is it in order?

THE SPEAKER: Now, hon. Members, for the record, this is a special sitting and it is completely unusual to interrupt a tribute to the deceased. I hope this will be the last time. Please, conclude.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) KAHINDA OTAFIIRE: You know, Madam Speaker, age is wisdom. (Laughter) I do not know whether if I would have given way a few years ago but - 

But what I was saying is that for us, what is important is to learn from our past. History never repeats itself but men and women never learn from history. We pay the price of mistakes made by our fore-bearers because we do not learn from antecedent. If you do not learn from antiquity, you can never project into posterity. We have to learn our lessons and learn them religiously. When we learn our lessons religiously, then we shall know where we are. 

I would like to pay tribute to Mzee Stanislaus Okurut for courage. It takes a lot of courage to undertake the kind of mission he and his colleagues undertook. For them to go without weapons on a peace mission, to venture into the unknown, demanded a lot of courage and it is a man like him and his type who come once perhaps in 50 years or in a life time.
 
When I was in security like my colleague, hon. Musa Ecweru said, after his mission, there were three people who came to see me; Musa Ecweru – this man was a rebel - (Laughter) - Max Omeda and Sam Otai. That is what constitutes the difference. The difference is that we had capacity to turn swords into plough-shears and that is why hon. Ecweru is sitting on the same bench with me today. (Applause) It is true that we shot at each other and injured each other but like brothers, we have embraced and broken our swords and turned them into tools of production. That is the way to go, Uganda. (Applause)

I heard hon. Kasibante say that Mzee Okurut has not lived long enough to see change of Government but we have seen peaceful change of Government because after every five years, I go back to seek fresh mandate. Every time we seek fresh mandates, we change Government. Maybe, it is because the same variables keep winning – and you cannot stop that because it is the legitimate right of Ugandans who made their choices. But the fact is that we have had change of Government. If you are crying for change - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I now revert to three minutes per Member because I must close in the next 10 minutes. Let us have hon. Rukutana.

4.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LABOUR, AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (LABOUR, EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS) (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker, allow me, on behalf of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and that of the people of Rushenyi that I represent, to join those who spoke before me, to pay tribute to the late hon. Stanislaus Okurut. Allow me also to extend our deep-felt condolences to hon. Mary Karooro Okurut and her entire family for this big loss.

A lot has been said about the character and contribution to this country by this gallant son of Uganda. I do not need to repeat what has already been said but what I want to emphasise is that this is a man who sought to unify this country using all methods, including through the marriage institution. To me, that was great foresight. It is true that the late Okurut married his love but sometimes, people are bogged down by barriers even when they are in love and they fail to marry their “loves”. But it takes great courage and nationalism to go beyond those barriers and marry your love even when they are from a different region.

The late Okurut has accomplished his mission on earth and has moved on to the other world, where all of us will surely join him. He has run his race and has completed it and therefore, deserves a crown. 

As we celebrate the life of this gallant son of Uganda, I join the other Members to pay tribute to his dear wife, hon. Mary Karooro Okurut, who is my senior colleague in the ministry but also a personal friend. I can, therefore, adequately testify to her relationship with her husband from my own experience and her own words. To the best of my knowledge – like other people have said before – the two loved each other immensely. Hon. Mary Karooro truly loved her husband and I know that her husband loved her – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, use half a minute to conclude your contribution. 

MR RUKUTANA: She did a lot to provide for him in the evening of his life. She went farther than what is ordinarily expected of a spouse. Whenever I asked her why she was doing all the things she was doing, her response was always, “This man was there for me at the time of my need; he provided for me when I was not able to provide for myself. It is now my duty to reciprocate.” (Applause) How many of us can do that? At no time did Mary abandon her spouse.

Hon. Members, I want to commend her as a good example of our obligations to our spouses at all times and in all circumstances. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

4.48
MS STELLA ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative): Madam Speaker, I stand to support the motion to pay tribute to Okurut. When the war was raging on in Teso, I was in Soroti TTC. So, I know all those stories. However, I wish to first say that my mother is a retired nurse and she used to speak well of the likes of hon. Okurut and Apolon Isiagi. She used to say that these men were British-made in such a way that they are smart people, time-conscious, incorruptible and result-oriented. She would say, “As nurses, we take care of patients in the hospital; look at the wound -” And I am sharing this because I telephoned her to tell her about the death of hon. Okurut. 

How many of us will leave a legacy? We have been told about Namboole and there is no forensic audit that was done concerning it; we have been told about the Tirinyi Road and there is nothing bad talked about it. I think we need to learn from our previous leaders – who have come from afar. I would not want to talk about the war because hon. Ecweru was there and I was just at the periphery. The school where I was is where these people used to pass; there was Arapai the other side – you know Soroti Primary School was along the way of fire exchange and we witnessed this physically and we know what happened during the war.

On a special note, I thank hon. Karooro Okurut because she can never greet us in English; she uses Ateso. I admire her for that because in her three terms in Parliament, she has been the bread-winner; she has never abandoned the children but rather taken them all as a family and I think many of us need to learn a lesson that when your spouse is incapacitated, remain with them to the end. (Applause) Unfortunately, some of us sometimes do not look at this.

I want to call upon the family and Mama Okurut to remain as one. I know that Papa has died but let us remain as one and keep his name alive. And I know that as Teso, we have lost a gallant son; our elders are dying and they are dying with culture. Most of us no longer value our culture, we are now individualistic, we are now staying like in Kampala where you stay in a wall and what hon. Ecweru was saying is true. Right now in Teso, there is nobody who can move, like these three young men of Teso moved to go to – (Member timed out.) 

4.52
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Ngora District, I would like to bring our sincere condolences for the great loss of a great son of Ngora.

I know my colleagues have already talked very much about the late hon. Stanislaus Okurut. I would like to say that I am here because of the schools that the late lobbied for and initiated like Agu Primary School. I recall that when I told my grandfather that I wanted to contest for Member of Parliament, before he died, he told me to always emulate the likes of the late Okurut here, who built the primary school I went to.

When it comes to talking about peace in Teso – I was young and so I could not have been there at that time but history is read and history is told. You cannot talk about the peace that we now enjoy in Teso without mentioning the name of SK, as we call him in Ngora and that of the late Dr Aporu Okor.

I do not want to end my contribution before thanking his wife, hon. Mary Karooro Okurut. Immediately we got into this Parliament, she initiated a programme that saw us Members of the Teso Parliamentary Group meet every evening with the old man. We would go to their home, laugh with them – and actually, I realised something very special about these two people; hon. Karooro and her late husband. They could talk so much and laugh at their age; she was there for him? Hon. Mary Karooro Okurut, you have played your role as a mother and have been everything to the Okurut family.

As young members of Parliament, we have a lot to emulate from the life of the late hon. Stanislaus Okurut. Instead of asking what Uganda has done for us, what is it that as Members of Parliament we are committed to for the people to remember us for? The late Okurut is remembered for many good things.

Madam Speaker, I would like to inform colleagues who will be going for burial that the bus will be available at the Parliament southern parking at 5.00 a.m. to leave for Ngora. Hon. Rose Akol is coordinating that transport arrangement. We will be waiting to receive you in Ngora District. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.55
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to pay my last respects and tribute to our fallen hero. I thank Maria for the love she has shown the late. We shall always remain indebted to her.

I have three issues, which I have always advanced. One is that the day God puts you on earth, He gives you a return ticket. The question however is: what will the young generation learn about your contribution while on earth? Many people have spoken when dead Members of Parliament are brought here; a lot is spoken. But our record, is nowhere for us to read so that we do not repeat what Maj. Gen. Otafiire said here.

Madam Speaker, as Chairperson of the Parliamentary Commission, I want to beg you to acquire land within the city and create a memorial site for all the Members of Parliament who have passed on since Independence so that we can have monuments and books written about them. This will help us in not having the wrong history repeated.

I also would like to request you to ask the Parliamentary Commission to create a website where the contributions of great men such as the late lying here will be posted. Amb. Paul Etyang was standing there – Madam Speaker, I want to beg you to help us revise our Rules of Procedure. We could start to allow respected people like Amb. Paul Etyang who was so close to the late speak about his contributions from the Strangers Gallery so that a true record and facts can be recorded. I remember very well that the late Robert Ekinu, the late here and Amb. Paul Etyang - he coordinated them from Tororo to ensure peace returns to Teso. Remember, we also had rebels in Tororo. It was Amb. Paul Etyang who coordinated these elders although many of them are now dying away. We have elders like hon. Max Omeda who has been sick for some time but with only hon. Elijah Okupa contributing money for his upkeep.

Hon. Musa Ecweru has talked about the Teso cows but you will wonder to learn that up to this day, when we see the late off, people are still in court asking for their cows. These are historical facts that need to be put right. May his soul in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

4.57
MR ODO TAYEBWA (FDC, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The people of Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality and the people of Katungu Cell where hon. Mary Karooro Okurut and I reside will always remember our gentleman, the late hon. Stanislaus Okurut. The late has been spending most of the Christmas days in Bushenyi. He had even learnt our language because the people of Katungu cell would always come to him during Christmas. Even last Christmas, we were with him in Bushenyi. Many people came to him to learn more from his wisdom and love. We will miss him very much.

I first knew the late in 1984. That time, I was at Makerere where I studied with a brother to hon. Mary Karooro Okurut, the late Justus. I remember that every weekend, we went to their home in Nakasero, just crossing on foot from University Hall through Wandegeya. They would give us everything but most memorable, they would give us their Benz to drive and enjoy around town. It was at that time that I learnt how to drive a car. I used the late’s car. We will miss the person lying before us today.

There are two values that I have always seen in this family. They had a value of love. The late married our sister right across about 700 miles from Teso – my sister accepted to getting married to him to nurture a family. But also while the late has been a strong Catholic, hon. Mary Karooro is from a strong Protestant family, where even now the brother, Prof. Emmanuel Karooro, is the head of the laity of West Ankole Diocese. But these two stayed together in love for this long. Even hon. Mary Karooro was from a UPC family but the late came from a strong DP family let alone the fact that they even stayed together after hon. Mary Karooro Okurut converted to the NRM. 

That is why I say these people loved each other and that is why I love my motto: “One Uganda; one people.” (Laughter) And I want to –(Member timed out­.)

5.01
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to join colleagues in supporting the motion to pay tribute to the late Papa SK Okurut. In Ateso, that name is pronounced OKUrut, not OkuRUt. 

The man who lies before us this evening was a distinguished personality, a father, a true Itesot in work and deed. We the people of Teso boast about being trustworthy. We do not indulge in this thing of corruption. At least, that is true about our forefathers, name them; Papa SK Okurut, Apolon Ejalu, Apolon Ishagi Silvernas, Apolon Etyang, Apolon Omaria and all these people, including civil servants of the day such as Apolon Egwewu, Apolon Elangos are known for having a clean record wherever they worked.

Why pay tribute to our late Mzee? I would like to remember Papa SK Okurut through his attributes; humility, he did not discriminate people on political lines or tribal lines. That is why he got married to our mother and wife Mary Karooro Okurut.

Papa, it has already been mentioned was a peace-lover; he loved the people of Teso and he loved the people of Bushenyi. Bushenyi was always on his lips and generally, the people of Ankole and this is why, some of you may not know, we have got a relationship with the people of Ankole. We keep cows; they do keep cows as well.

Something to Karooro Okurut; you make the people of Teso proud. The way you have handled the life of our Papa is something that is commendable. You will forever leave an indelible mark in our hearts as people of Teso. 

Papa Yogado, may the Almighty God rest your soul in eternal peace.

5.05
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  On behalf of the people of Kasilo, I want to send condolences to the family and more especially to our in-law, hon. Karooro and the children. 

The first time I got to know Papa Okurut was the day they were kidnapped by the UPA because as they were taking them towards Kaberamaido Usuku side, they passed around Kasilo and our home is just next to the road. Somehow, they slowed down and addressed the people and told us the children who were on the roadside what had happened because in those days, it was rare to see a vehicle because Teso was almost a no-go area - the Musa Ecweru’s had stopped any movement of vehicles.

When we saw a vehicle there after two years of not seeing a vehicle, we were all shocked. That was the first day I met Mzee. We saw the three of them in the car together with the people who had captured them. We started following up to know what would happen to them until the day they were released after nine months.

We learnt a lot from them as being very courageous people who had sacrificed themselves to make sure peace returned to Teso. A lot has been said; I thank hon. Musa Ecweru for putting the record correct.

To the children, you have listened; you have heard what they have talked about the old man. Could you, please, for the sake of the old man, emulate him? Do not let him down; I would appeal to you the children.

Our in-law, Karooro Okurut, thank you for standing with the old man. I was disappointed this morning, colleagues, because there are some people who thrive on pedalling lies. I was shocked when a journalist approached me and said, “Is it true the hon. Minister had abandoned the husband?” I said “I can slap you.” He said, “We have heard all this talk around.” I said, “Stop that nonsense.” This was a journalist from the New Vision. You have heard what Members have talked about our wife and mother if you are in the Gallery. She has been there through thick and thin; I am a neighbour to them in Ntinda. So, stop that rubbish of wanting to taint people’s names for whatever reason you have. 

May the Almighty God rest your soul in eternal peace.

5.08
THE MINISTER,  OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This occasion has three dimensions. First, we come to this House to sympathise with the family that has produced a nationalist. The family of late Okurut, thank you for looking after him, thank you for being with him and thank the gods that made it possible that he became ours.

The second point is that we are here to recognise the virtues of a leader. I would like to thank those who made this decision that we have occasion to recognise the virtues of our fallen heroes. This is not a medal; a medal is a piece of material. Recognising a person in the words that have been spoken is a record of history, it is a record of success. So, that dimension is important and I think we need to emphasise that as many people as possible get on to the list of being recognised so that other people can emulate them.
Young people in schools can start saying “I also want to grow, contribute and be recognised in Parliament” even when you are not a Member of Parliament.

The third dimension is an education for us from a personality of SK Okurut. You choose a wife from where you want, no geography limits you and that should be guidance to us all. You settle and enjoy wherever you are. So, he was in Bushenyi, he enjoyed it.

Let us all recognise that Uganda is for all of us, we should be in every corner and feel at home. There is so much pettiness still in existence about boundaries, lines on the ground between Teso area and Karamoja and so on. 

I think Uganda is for all of us; we should be free to live where we can, marry where we can, build houses where we can, do anything we want in the rest of the country. I think in this Parliament, this is a score that we must put in the basket.

Lastly, a lot has been said about Mary Karooro Okurut. The name that was given to her at birth is Busingye and “Busingye” means peace. Thank you for having lived by your name and thanks to those who gave you that name; the late Karooro, may his soul and his wife’s rest in peace because in our tradition, a bad name can create problems for you and a good name creates good things for you.

Therefore, thanks to your parents who gave you the name Busingye and also the Christian name Mary. Mary is the mother of God, so, you have combined the virtues of religion and the virtues of tradition and you have embodied them in your life. Thank you for being an outstanding wife but above all, an outstanding leader. 

I was searching to find out whether in the past, there was any man or woman whose body was brought here and who had a partner who was also a Member of Parliament. So, Mary, you have scored and I thank God that we were given Stanislaus and we have been given you to lead Bushenyi and to lead Uganda like your husband did. May you be also as successful if not more successful than your husband for the benefit of our country. 

God bless the soul of Stanislaus and may all of us emulate him.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

5.14
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I have basically come to read the programme as per your command to the Prime Minister but he left earlier. So, he asked me to read the programme. Before I do that, I want to say a few words. 
I must also convey my condolences to the bereaved family for the demise of Mzee. He is Mzee but we are next Mzees because there is a difference of 10 years between him and me. If he was born in 1929 and I was born in 1939; there is a difference of 10 years. So, the category of second Mzee is now us. (Laughter)

Of course, this is God’s command; everybody is going to pass through what has happened to our Mzee but what I want to say is to thank Almighty Allah for allowing Mzee to benefit from his own efforts of contributing to peace, which is now prevailing in the country. This peace makes it possible for Parliament to be in this country; it makes it possible for the Speaker to call a special sitting and makes it possible for there to be no interruption; no shooting and so on. This is the peace that he is now enjoying because he contributed to it. For that, we thank the Almighty Allah. 

His colleagues, as has been said, were not able to enjoy the peace as he did.

Many people are paying tribute to Madam Karooro; yes, but the two go together; it is two-way traffic. I think during their time, Madam Karooro must have had good times also because I think she cannot continue to pay back what she was not given during that time. Of course, we are not witnesses but she is here and she can give testimony. So, for that, we must thank her since she is - she can receive these thanks for herself and on behalf of Mzee because she is the one still listening.

We are very happy that she has shown a good example to many but we must also thank Mzee for handling his wife kindly, peacefully, with tender hands and lovingly. But it is also said somewhere that till death do us part. This is a Bible quotation, I think. That, therefore, means these people kept to their faith till death did them part. This is exactly what happened; they put it in practice and we want to thank Madam for that.

To us, again, it is said that there is a time for everything. Today is for mourning. This is the time to mourn but in most cases, we politicians tend to divert. One day, I went to represent Government in Teso at the burial of Mzee Obangol. That time, the road was very bad and one of the politicians who attended took half of the time given to him castigating the government for bad roads. 

I thought that was diversionary, completely missing the target because this bad road has always been there. Even during the time of the man we went to bury, this road was there and we had a lot of time to talk about this road even after the burial. Why don’t you talk about the dead at that particular time? 

Like this afternoon, there was a problem of lack of a Chief Justice; two completely unrelated issues. This lack of a Chief Justice will remain there tomorrow and we shall talk about it because we have the time but we shall not talk about this death tomorrow. 

So, I appeal to us politicians to be honest and to respect our brother who has fallen.

The programme for burial. The direction for those who do not know the late Okurut’s home, it is eight kilometres from Kumi on the Soroti Highway. Branch off at Kapir Primary School from the main road, four kilometres following that road, you will reach a village called Kokong which is his village. May his soul rest in eternal peace. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: I thank you. Hon. Members, the question is that this House do pay tribute to the late hon. Stanslaus Kostka Okurut, as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

East African Anthem

National Anthem

(Exit of the late hon. Stanslaus Okurut)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as you have been informed, there will be transport from Parliament on Thursday morning for those who are prepared to travel to see off our colleague and friend. Otherwise, the House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.23 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 9 April 2014 at 2.00 p.m.) 

