
Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.





Thursday, 4 April 2019

Parliament met at 2.07 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. As I indicated yesterday, at the end of this sitting, plenary will be suspended to enable the committees do their work quickly so that they can report to the Committee on Budget and the whole budget process can continue.

Today is also private Member’s time and at the beginning of it, we should dedicate it to the private members to present theirs issues and due to that, we will be moving item 31 forward so that we can deal with that motion seeking leave of the House to introduce a Bill. 

You also recall that yesterday and the day before, we stayed two items that were awaiting proper constitution of the House so that we could take decisions on them. We will also be able to take decisions on those two matters today.

In the public gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation of district councillors from Bundibugyo District. They are represented by hon. Richard Gafabusa and hon. Josephine Bebona. They have come to observe the proceedings and I think they are interested in item No. 4 of the Order Paper. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. 

DESIGNATION OF A MEMBER TO A STANDING COMMITTEE IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 157 (2) AND (7) OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we have the Chief Opposition Whip -

2.11
MR JOHNATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Mr Speaker, I beg to designate hon. Ibrahim Kasozi, Member of Parliament Makindye East, to the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises and to appoint him the vice chairperson in accordance with Rule 157(2) and (7). Mr Speaker, I would like to request you to process this designation and appointment in accordance with Rule 157(8) of our Rules of Procedure. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Ibrahim Kasozi has been designated as you have heard from the Chief Opposition Whip. I put the question that he becomes a member of that committee and also becomes vice chairperson of the Committee on Public Accounts (Commissions Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises). I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Mr Speaker, I rise on a matter of procedure based on Rule 27 of the Rules of Procedure, which states that the order of business will be sent to Members at least three hours before the sitting commences –(Interjections)– Where? It has just come as I raised this matter; a minute after we had begun our sitting.

Mr Speaker, the Order Paper is not yet in and we are proceeding blindly. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you have noticed, for the last few days, we have had a problem with our internet system and that is affecting the operations of Parliament. This Order Paper was approved yesterday and it was up for uploading. That is why we are all carrying hard copies. The Order Paper was approved early enough and Members should have had access to it.

However, it is a technical problem with the server and that is why we do not have it. Let us try and see what we can do in the circumstances. At least, I have a copy. (Laughter)

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION BY DISTRICT COUNCILLORS AND COCOA FARMERS FROM BUNDIBUGYO DISTRICT

2.14
MR RICHARD GAFABUSA (NRM, Bwamba County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I move under Rule 30 of the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament to present a petition by the district councillors and cocoa farmers from Bundibugyo District to this Parliament. 

The humble petition of 21 district councillors and cocoa farmers from Bundibugyo District is here presented by me and it states that; 
The petitioners are councillors of Bundibugyo District Council and some are cocoa farmers from Bundibugyo District, who are aggrieved by the introduction of a new tax to be levied on their unprocessed cocoa called, “charges on cocoa trade” imposed by the district council;
 
The matter was first introduced at the district council meeting by the district chairperson, where a number of these district councillors challenged the legality and economic viability of this tax. They particularly cited the removal of cess on produce by the local Government;

Mr Speaker, the petitioners aver that there are already existing taxes both at local and national level, that are imposed on cocoa production and these are borne by companies and traders involved in cocoa trade. Cocoa being unprocessed agricultural produce is exempted from taxes under section 19 of the Value Added Tax Act, 1996 as listed in the second schedule; 

The petitioners further aver that the tax initially known as user fees on cocoa was rejected by majority of the councillors during the liberations by the Committee on Production, Marketing and Natural Resources of the District Council as well as the Committee on Finance, Planning and Administration where this matter was referred; 

However, the decision by the two committees was overturned and disregarded by the District Executive Committee, which made recommendations to the District Council approving the proposed tax and renaming the tax, avoiding the name cess on produce which was removed;

The petitioners contend that cocoa production in Bundibugyo District has declined due to a strange disease that has been attacking their crop for the past three years, reducing the average production per tree from three kilogrammes to one kilogramme. The farmers expected Government and the local Government to come to their rescue. They were only shocked to see the district council imposing a tax on them; 

The imposition of this tax on their only source of livelihood is harsh and would inadvertently be borne by the farmers and not the companies and the traders; 

The petitioners further contend that this tax will hinder value addition, investments and business and consequently affect not only the wellbeing of cocoa farmers in the district but also the entire cocoa sector;

The petitioners are concerned that imposition of this tax on cocoa trade by the local Government of Bundibugyo District is likely to affect the production of cocoa countrywide;

Now, therefore, Mr Speaker, your humble petitioners pray that Parliament intervenes in this matter and urges Government to halt and stop the imposition of this irregular and illegal tax and charges on the trade of cocoa; 

The humble petitioners, as in duty bound will ever pray and hereto, have appended their signatures.

They are the 21 councillors and hundreds of cocoa farmers.
I beg to lay on Table a copy of this petition with the signatures of the petitioners. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It has tax issues; so, I refer it to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to handle quickly. I think it is one of those things that will fit within the framework of the budget and it would be helpful that they do it alongside what they are doing on the budget and report to the House by close of this session. Thank you.

LAYING OF PAPERS

ALTERNATIVE POLICY STATEMENTS

2.20
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Mr Speaker, I would like to ask for some 10 minutes.

RESPONSE TO THE URGENT QUESTION  BY HON. JUDITH ALYEK ON THE DELAY BY GOVERNMENT TO RESPOND TO A MATTER OF SUSPENSION OF SOME RADIO PROGRAMMES IN LIRA DISTRICT ARISING FROM THE DEATH OF MR DICKENS OKELLO

2.21
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a statement in response to a question raised by hon. Judith Alyek, Woman Member of Parliament for Kole District, on the closure of Unity FM in Lira, which came as a result of the death of a young man called Dickens Okello.

I am aware that when this matter was first raised on the Floor, my colleague, the Minister of Internal Affairs answered questions by the honourable members on the circumstances leading to the death of Mr Dickens Okello and actions taken by security agencies to calm the situation.

My response will, therefore, be limited to actions taken by UCC on this matter, which falls under our mandate.

As Members are aware, the Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) was established under the UCC Act, 2013 as the regulator of the communications sector in Uganda with the mandate to monitor, inspect, license, control and regulate communication services in Uganda.

Section 5(1) of the same Act further gives UCC the mandate to receive, investigate and arbitrate complaints relating to communication services in Uganda and take necessary action. 

Between 17 and 19 November 2018, UCC received several complaints from the leaders in Lira, specifically from the Resident District Commissioner (RDC), District Police Commander (DPC) and Chairman LC V regarding the manner in which radio stations in the Lango sub-region were covering the incident relating to the death of Dickens Okello in Kole District on Friday, 9 November 2018. 

It was alleged that the radio stations were inciting the public against the Indian community in Lira for allegedly being responsible for the murder of Dickens Okello. 
As a result, several Indians were attacked and their property looted by the angry mobs. This prompted the police and other security agencies in Lira to close Unity FM for allegedly being the ringleader in the incitement.

Following receipt of the complaints, UCC undertook an investigation into the manner in which Unity FM was operating. This entailed UCC officers interviewing the relevant parties in Lira and listening to the recordings obtained from the radio. 

The investigations confirmed the following;

    a) Unity FM had, for the period between 9 November 2018 and 17 November 2018, aired many programmes that were in breach of section 31 of the UCC Act and minimum broadcasting standards. 

    b) Unity FM had turned a crime under investigation into a subject of daily radio talk shows wherein unstructured or unprofessional debate and discussion was allowed leading to the incitement of violence against the Indian community.

    c) Unity FM breached the professional ethics by allowing live phone calls into the studio where people expressed their anger without control by the moderators or editors and made unverified pronouncements declaring someone guilty without establishing the correctness of the statement and before a due court process had taken place.

    d) All the statements and allegations made were pronounced with confidence and made to appear as if they had been proven to be true, which is in breach of the professional ethics that prohibit pronouncing statements before establishing their correctness. 

    e) The investigations further revealed that Unity FM presenters showed lack of professionalism where the moderators and editors became partisan and started blaming the police and Indians yet journalists are supposed to be impartial.

    f) The show moderators allowed the public to make conclusions that Okello was killed by the Indians and encouraged the public to revenge against the Indians living in Lira.

Mr Speaker, all the above findings were contrary to section 31 and schedule 4(a)(2) of the UCC Act, 2013, which in essence provides that a broadcaster shall ensure that any programme which is broadcasted does not promote cultural violence or ethnic prejudice among the public.

As mandated by the law and following the conclusion of the investigations, UCC communicated the findings to the directors of Unity FM, who, in a letter dated 17 December 2018 acknowledged their mistakes, apologised and formally undertook to ensure compliance with the law. I have attached both the apology from the radio station and the undertaking made not to repeat the breaches and I wish to lay on Table the same.

In a letter dated 19 December 2018, UCC informed Unity FM of the outcome of the investigations and allowed the radio to resume operations with all its programmes. The radio is on air and UCC is monitoring its compliance with the legal undertaking, which the directors signed.

Current status of the matter

Since 17 December 2018, Unity FM resumed operations. The radio, however, suspended some of its errant presenters for a period of three months up to 17 March 2019 in an effort to mitigate a risk of reoccurrence of the breaches. 

On 30 January 2019, four employees of Unity FM namely; Patrick Rolex Akena, Billie Otto, Charles Osendro and Walter Ojok sued UCC, the Attorney-General, Milton Odongo - the Resident District Commissioner, Lira and Joel Tubanone, the District Police Commander, Lira for alleged violations of their human rights. They are seeking for declaratory orders against the manner in which they were allegedly arrested by the police before Unity FM was closed by the police. The case is Miscellaneous Cause No. 02 of 2019 in the High Court at Lira. Hearing of the case is set for 2 July 2019.

As a way forward, Mr Speaker, it is important that we appreciate that this Parliament passed the UCC Act wherein we gave UCC an oversight role over the communications sector. UCC has a duty to ensure that media players exercise their rights in accordance with the law. The media is supposed to be an impartial watchdog not a facilitator for disharmony and racial attacks in society. 

Since this matter is currently pending in court, I appeal to Members to allow court to hear and determine the rights of the parties. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. This matter was raised by the Woman Representative for Kole District. Is there any supplementary question from her? There being none, let us go to the next item.

LAYING OF ALTERNATIVE POLICY STATEMENTS IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 146 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you going to lay all of them, Leader of the Opposition? Please, proceed with all of them.

2.30
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Mr Speaker, I am going to lay the alternative policy statements for those who are not in the House right now because they were all sure that they would lay the documents on Tuesday next week.

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the following:

    1. Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement on Foreign Affairs.
    2. Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement on Energy and Mineral Development.
    3. Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement on Works and Transport.
    4. Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement on Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance.
    5. Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement on Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.
    6. Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement on Justice and Constitutional Affairs.
    7. Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement on Defence, Security and Veteran Affairs.

I beg to lay. 

I also I beg to ask the shadow ministers, who are available, to lay their alternative policy statements. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let the records capture the alternative policy statements for Foreign Affairs, Energy and Mineral Development, Works and Transport, ICT, Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Justice and Constitutional Affairs and Defence. They all stand referred to the appropriate committees to handle within the framework of the law.

2.32
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Ms Florence Namayanja): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table;

    1. The Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for the Ministry of Water and Environment for Financial Year 2019/2020.

    2. The Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities for Financial Year 2019/2020.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. We presume that all these matters are referred to the appropriate committees for expeditious handling. We also presume that the seven alternative policy statements laid earlier were for Financial Year 2019/2020.

2.33
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY (Mr Francis Zaake): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay; 

    1. Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for the Ministry of Internal Affairs for Financial Year 2019/2020.

    2.  Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for the East African Community Affairs for Financial Year 2019/2020.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the appropriate committees.

2.34
THE SHADOW MINSITER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Betty Bamukwatsa): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay; 

    1. The Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for the Ministry of Local Government for Financial Year 2019/2020.

    2. The Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for Human Rights Sector in Uganda for Financial Year 2019/2020.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. They stand referred to the appropriate committees.
 
2.34
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND CO-OPERATIVES (Mr Fred Tumuheirwe): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for Trade, Industry and Cooperatives for Financial Year 2019/2020.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the Committee on Trade, Industry and Co-operatives.

2.35
MR ROBERT CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for Financial Year 2019/2020.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It is referred to the appropriate committee to handle.

2.35
MR ROBERT CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay;

    1.  The Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for Science, Technology and Innovation for Financial Year 2019/2020. 

    2. The Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for Kampala Capital City Authority for Financial Year 2019/2020.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. They are referred to the appropriate committees to handle.

2.36
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE AND PRESIDENCY (Mr Jonathan Odur): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table;

    1. The Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for the Ministry of Public Service for Financial Year 2019/2020.

    2. The Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for Ministry of the Presidency for Financial Year 2019/2020.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture. It stands referred to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government and to the Committee on Presidential Affairs.

2.37
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE AND PRESIDENCY (Mr Jonathan Odur): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for the Ministry of Health for Financial Year 2019/2020.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the Committee on Health.

2.37
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for the Ministry of Education and Sports for Financial Year 2019/2020.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the Committee on Education and Sports. 

2.38
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR SPECIAL REGIONS AFFAIRS (Ms Joy Ongom Atim): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement on Special Regions for the Financial Year 2019/2020. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the appropriate committee. 

2.38
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR SPECIAL REGIONS AFFAIRS (Ms Joy Ongom Atim): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Alternative Ministerial Policy Statement for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development for the Financial Year 2019/2020.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development. Thank you. 

I think all the policy statements from the Government and the alternative policy statements from the Opposition have been laid on Table. The committees are now set to move. Thank you. 

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER ON THE DELAY BY GOVERNMENT TO RELEASE FUNDS TO REGIONAL WORK STATIONS TO ENABLE CONSTRUCTION AND REHABILITATION OF ROAD NETWORKS

2.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, hon. William Nzoghu, the Member of Parliament for Busongora County, raised a concern over the delay by Government to release funds to regional work stations to enable construction and rehabilitation of road networks throughout the country.

We have prepared the following answer to this question: 

The Ministry of Works and Transport was allocated Shs 107.876 billion, for maintenance of road equipment used for District Urban and Community Access Roads network.

To-date, Shs 82.228 billion of the above funds have been released to the Ministry of Works and Transport as of the third quarter for this financial year. This represents 76 per cent release of the approved budget allocation, which is slightly above 75 per cent, of what they should have got in the third quarter.

Under the Road Fund, Shs 527.297 billion was allocated in the budget for Financial Year 2018/2019, for routine and periodic maintenance of public roads in line with the Uganda Roads Authority Act, 2008. To-date, 75 per cent of these funds have been released to the Road Fund as shown in the table below.

The fourth and second quarter expenditure limits were issued within the first week of the quarter, while the third quarter expenditure limits were issued in advance on 17 December 2018, as shown in the table below.

However, it is important to note that while the ministry releases funds to the Road Fund on time, there have been delays by the Road Fund to release funds to the other agencies, resulting into delays in the implementation of works. 

To address the above challenge, the funds for road maintenance have been budgeted under the respective agencies starting with Financial Year 2019/2020. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will release the funds directly to the agencies on advice of the Uganda Road Fund.

The purpose of this communication to this House is to provide information on the budget performance of the Ministry of Works and Transport and prove that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has so far released 75 per cent, to the Road Fund and 76 per cent to Ministry of Works and Transport. We hope that the Ministry of Works and Transport will be able to follow up the implementing agencies to ensure that the road network continues to improve.

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is there any supplementary question? There is none. 

In the public gallery this afternoon, we have former Member of Parliament for Bundibugyo District, hon. Harriet Ntabazi. She is here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming her. (Applause)

We also have a delegation of pupils and teachers from Victoria Nile School Jinja, represented by hon. Grace Balyeku and hon. Joy Katali. You are welcome. (Applause)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW $100 MILLION, APPROXIMATELY SHS 380 BILLION, FROM THE DOMESTIC MARKET TO FINANCE CLASSIFIED EXPENDITURE UNDER MINISTRY OF DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2018/2019

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had discussed this matter and we were supposed to take a decision. I will put the question to this motion.

I put the question for a Resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow $100 million, from the domestic market to finance classified expenditure under Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs for Financial Year 2018/2019.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT
TO BORROW UP TO SDR 145.9 MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP, TO SUPPORT THE UGANDA INTERGOVERNMENTAL FISCAL TRANSFERS PROGRAMME (UGIFT) FOR RESULTS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the chairperson is advising me that for that particular item, the papers are not ready. Can you go to item No. 8?

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT
TO BORROW €40 MILLION FROM KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU
(KFW), THE GERMAN DEVELOPMENT BANK, TO FINANCE THE LIRA-GULU-AGAGO 132 KV TRANSMISSION LINE PROJECT AND ASSOCIATED SUB-STATIONS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion that I propose for your debate is for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow €40 million from KFW, the German Development Bank, to finance Lira-Gulu-Agago 132 KV transmission line project and associated sub-stations. The consensus is that I put the question to this motion.  

I now put the question for a motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow €40 million, from KFW, the German Development Bank to finance Lira-Gulu-Agago 132 KV transmission line project and associated substations.

(Question put and agreed to.)

2.46
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Syda Bbumba): Mr Speaker, I would like to lay on Table the following documents in support of the borrowing of €40 million, from the German Development Bank to finance Lira-Gulu–Agago transmission line:

    a) Report of the committee
    b) Brief to Parliament
    c) Letter from the ministry of state confirming availability of counterpart funds
    d) Minutes of the meetings held to consider the proposal
    e) The Bujagali project completion report
    f) Quarter one on-going project progress reports
    g) Disbursement status for on-going project
    h) Value-for- money audit report
    i) National Planning Authority clearance letter
    j) Draft loan agreement
    k) Draft design and supervision and Rural Access and Mobility Project (RAMP) implementation 
    l) Evidence of environmental impact assessment
    m) National Environmental Management Authority assessment; and
    n) Project implementation plan.

I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture all those documents in support of this request. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO SDR 145.9 MILLION ($200 MILLION) FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP TO SUPPORT THE UGANDA INTERGOVERNMENTAL FISCAL TRANSFERS PROGRAMME (UGIFT) FOR RESULTS

2.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PPLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that Parliament authorises Government to borrow up to SDR 145.9 million, equivalent to $200 million, from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group to support the Uganda Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfers Programme for Results. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this request was referred to the Committee on National Economy. I propose the question for a motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow up to SDR 145.9 million, which is equivalent to $200 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group to support the Uganda Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfers Programme for Results. 

That is the motion I propose for your debate, which starts now. Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by Nakasongola, Abim, Nyabushozi and Soroti. Would you like to speak to your motion? 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, Members have been raising concerns on the Floor of this House, regarding the health centres III and secondary schools in the sub counties. This loan has come to answer those questions; it is a loan to support the construction of health centres III where they are not and also secondary schools in sub counties which do not have any.

It is an infrastructure programme that is matched with the Government of Uganda resources to ensure that this happens, like we did with electricity where we extended electricity to all sub-counties. We are now working on health centres III and sub-counties which do not have secondary schools. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the motion that I now propose for your debate is for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow up to Special Drawing Rights 145.9 million, equivalent to $200 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group to support the Uganda Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfers Programme for Results.

That is the motion I propose for your debate but this matter was referred to the Committee on National Economy. To kick off the debate, I ask the chairperson to report and then we see how to proceed with this matter.

2.51
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Syda Bbumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is a report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow up to SDR 145.9 million, which is equivalent to $200 million from the IDA of the World Bank Group, to support the Uganda Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfers Programme for Results in the education and health sectors.

First of all, I would like to thank my colleagues on the committee for the job they did. Before I proceed to present the report, I would like to lay on the Table the following documents:

    1. The report of the committee
    2. The brief to Parliament by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the loan
    3. The letter from National Planning Authority, affirming that the programme is in line with NDP II and PIP
    4. A list of local governments identified for construction of seed secondary schools and expansion of the existing ones through the Uganda Intergovernmental Transfer Programme for Results
    5. A list of sub-counties of health facilities to be upgraded through the Health Development Grant and 
    6. The minutes of the meetings held to consider the proposal by Government to borrow the said amount.

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS BBUMBA: Mr Speaker, the committee on National Economy considered the request from Government to borrow $200 million from the World Bank Group, to support the Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfer Programme for Results in education and health sectors, in accordance with rules 175 (2) (b) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. The request was presented to the House on September 13 2018. 

The methodology followed is the usual; having meetings with the ministries concerned and documentary review –(Interruption)

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I did not want to interrupt my honourable colleague but I am constrained to raise this point of procedure. 

I am a new member on the Committee on National Economy. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right if the chairperson categorically states that this report was made by the old committee members, which some of us were not a part of, so that it goes on record that this is not the work of the current Committee on National Economy.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is a report of the Committee on National Economy. (Applause)

MS BBUMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In our examination, we looked at a number of documents which are indicated in paragraph 2.2. The background to this is that from the last three decades, Government of Uganda has been implementing the decentralisation policy, which is based on the 1995 Constitution and the Local Government Act, Cap 22. Their functions, powers and responsibilities are devolved and transferred from the Central Government to local government units in a coordinated manner, to ensure peoples’ participation and democratic control in decision making.

Mr Speaker, there was a study which was commissioned on the fiscal decentralisation strategy in 2002, which identified a number of shortcomings. The main findings of the study were as follows:

    1. The Fiscal Decentralisation Strategy was successful in streamlining budgeting, accounting and reporting processes
    2. Local governments had limited discretion to decide on allocation of resources
    3. There were sizable inequalities in the allocation of resources
    4. There was lack of incentives to local governments to account adequately for resources and
    5. There was reduced per capita value of transfers.

To implement the recommendations of the two aforementioned studies, a reform of Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfers was initiated in Financial Year 2016/2016 and led to the development of the Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfer Reform Programme by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

The reform programme sought to address adequacy in the financing of service delivery by local governments, ensure equity in the allocation of resources to local governments and achieve efficiency in local government service delivery efforts.

The reform of the Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfers identified and agreed upon the following four phases;

    1. Consolidation of conditional transfers
    2. Revision of allocation formulae
    3. Reforming frameworks for accountability and strengthening incentives for performance
    4. Fiscal Decentralisation Architecture and Share Transfers.

In 2017, Government started to implement the Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfers Reform Programme focusing on three main objectives, which particularly relate to those phases above. 

Uganda's medium-term objectives are guided by the NDP 2015/2016 to 2019/2020. The Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfer Reform Programme (IFTRP) for results in the education and health sectors are in line with the NDP, which I have referred to above.

The fiscal decentralisation strategy was given renewed impetus by the Uganda National Development Plan (NDP II) of 2015/2016 to 2019/2020. The fiscal decentralisation strategy seeks to strengthen the process of decentralisation in Uganda through increasing local government autonomy, widening local participation in decision-making and streamlining fiscal transfer modality to local government in order to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of local governments in service delivery.

On the performance of debt-financed projects in the Ministry of Education and Sports, their performance is only up to 32.7 per cent as of 2018. Out of the loan, which we have acquired for the ministry, only that much has been dispatched. There are also five approved projects in the health sector, amounting to $375.7 million of which, $207 million has been dispatched, representing a dispatch rate of 55.1 per cent.

The fiscal performance of projects under the Ministry of Education and Sports is attached under Table 1 and that of the Ministry of Health under Table 2.

Programme Description

The Fiscal Decentralisation Strategy was adopted by Cabinet in 2002 to address concerns about increased fragmentation and reduced discretion in local government financing. 

The Fiscal Decentralisation Strategy agenda was given renewed impetus by Uganda's NDP II. In response to the declining trends in local government financing, the NDP II includes objectives to increase financing and revenue mobilisation of local governments to match the functions of local governments, which commits the Government to redesign the fiscal decentralisation architecture to provide for adequate and sustainable local government financing and review grant-allocation formulae to promote adequacy in financing of decentralised services.

The IFTRP covers all fiscal transfers to local governments, which together fund the bulk of local administrative costs and service delivery in six sectors and account for 3.4 per cent of GDP. These sectors include; agricultural production and marketing, works and transport, education, health, water and environment and social development. Within this, the Uganda Fiscal Transfer Programme will focus on health and education sectors’ expenditures on conditional non-wage recurrent and development transfers.

The overall goal of the Uganda Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfer Reform Programme is to improve the adequacy and equity of fiscal transfers and improve fiscal management of resources by local governments for health and education services.

The specific programme objectives are the following:

    i) Increasing discretion of local governments over allocation decisions to enable them to deliver services.

    ii) Restoring adequacy and equity in allocation of funds for service delivery.

    iii) Shifting the focus away from fragmented input-based conditions towards accountability for budgetary allocation decisions, expenditure, and results.

    iv) Using the transfer system to leverage institutional and service delivery performance.

    v)   Allowing new national policies to be funded via the transfer system.

Mr Speaker, Table 3 has the selected key programme results indicators for the proposed programme. 

Programme Beneficiaries

Beyond the development objectives of the Fiscal Transfer Programme, it is envisaged that more equitable, adequate and efficient financing of both health and education services will ultimately lay the foundation for improved service delivery outcomes. 

Programme Scope

The programme will support the next stage of the reform, that is, the new consolidated framework for the grants, development of formulae, grant conditions, budgeting and reporting guidelines for the new framework in three areas, which include:

    i. Support the implementation of new, simple and transparent formulae for education and health non-wage conditional grants.

    ii. Help restore the adequacy of funding to local governments by providing additional resources to support the associated plan for uplifting transfers, which will a1so enable the phase in the new formulae.

    iii. Help improve fiscal management of resources by local governments for health and education services.

Table 4 covers the programme sequential steps.

Programme Financing and Expenditure Framework

The total cost of the programme is estimated at $787.59 million, of which 25.3 per cent will be funded from the IDA resources, the loan, which we are seeking now. This includes local government grants management, assessment and support over the five years, which will be Shs 2,795.96 billion? 

The programme will fund five years of enhanced fiscal transfers for health and education services. The programme will leverage Government resources far in excess of the value of the IDA resources. 

Table 5 –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, are you going to read the whole text? 

MR BBUMBA: Mr Speaker, I thought since this loan covers local governments which are dear to our hearts, I would minimise on summarising because even now, I am summarising the report. It is a long report but I am trying to summarise it as much as I can.

Table 5 contains the programme summary expenditure framework and Table 6 contains the programme sources and financing. 

Sector Utilisation of the IDA Loan

$130 million will go to the Ministry of Education and Sports and $55 million will go to the Ministry of Health to cover 124 health centres. 

The programme implementation component will be $15 million. 

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will be the implementing agency.

Conditions of the grant to access the IDA loan are the standard ones covered under Paragraph 13. 

Paragraph 14 is on the programme implementation which is more or less the usual standard. 

Programme Economic Impact

The provision of basic health and education services benefits not only recipients of these services but also others and the nation as a whole. The value from this loan will accrue to the whole country, beyond the direct beneficiaries.

The loan terms and budgetary implications are indicated under paragraph 16. This is an IDA loan, which is highly concessional. One important thing to note is that there is a charge of 0.5 per cent on non-dispersed amounts, which is a call to Government to expedite disbursement of this loan. 

Conditions for disbursement are covered under paragraph 16.1. The loan and the current debt situation of the country is still 42 per cent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP); we are still below the threshold of 50 per cent.

Compliance with Parliamentary approval guidelines

The combined score for the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Education and Sports is 65 per cent, which is above the minimum required.

Observations and recommendations

The committee noted that the inter-Governmental fiscal transfer programme is part of Government of Uganda’s response to the declining trends in local Government financing.

The programme is highly relevant as it will address the binding constraints of law and inequitable levels of funding for health and education at the local level. Funding levels for health and education in most local Governments are too low to achieve improvements in outcome. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that all the social service delivery components of this programme should be mainstreamed into the budgets of all the relevant sectors; Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) and local Governments to ensure greater involvement of all key stakeholders in determining the quality, quantity and location of social services delivery investments, especially in the disadvantaged regions.

The National Planning Authority should review the integration of this programme into the various sector budgets at the issuance of the certificates of compliance of the annual Budget for the subsequent years.
The committee noted that NDP II identified majority of the special programmes having a highly disproportionate investment in social service delivery to the disadvantage of investments aimed at revitalising the local economies and increasing the incomes of the local people. 

The committee recommends that future Government service delivery programmes aimed at increasing adequacy and equity in social service delivery should include a component on local economic development.

Study on the review of Local Government financing

The committee noted that in order to deal with the challenges of financing local Government service delivery and implementing the fiscal decentralisation strategy, Government in January 2012 commissioned a study on the design of fiscal decentralisation architecture and determining the share of local Government transfers under the leadership of the Local Government Finance Commission. 

The committee recommends that Government scales up plans for deliberately building the capacities of Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) and local Governments in conducting studies, designing and supervision of projects in order to cut down on the exorbitant amounts of project funds spent on consultancy services towards conducting studies, designing and supervision of debt financed projects.

Budgetary implications of the Programme

The committee noted that the facilities mapped out for a seed school include houses for six staff; four teachers, a deputy head teacher and a head teacher. 

For staff recruitment, the Ministry of Education and Sports will require at least Shs 27.98 billion for recruitment of at least 21 teaching staff and six non-teaching staff for the first batch of 127 schools in the Financial Year 2019/2020.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports should ensure the timely integration of the anticipated recurrent and development costs due to this programme in the respective sectoral budgets to ensure the adequate availability of funds for recruitment of staff, procurement of instructional materials and the pay of capitation grants for new seed schools. This will enable the beneficiary local Governments under this programme to engage in meaningful rehabilitation and construction projects to improve the education service delivery infrastructure.

The committee further noted that the Ministry of Local Government should ensure that the infrastructure facilities to be constructed are integrated in the respective Local Government Development Plans.

The committee further recommends that: 

The beneficiary local Governments due to this programme should liaise with the relevant stakeholders, that is the Education Service Commission and the Health Service Commission to ensure that the required vacancies due to this programme are filled in time to guarantee the timely realisation of the programme outcomes on service delivery.

Government develops a more tailored approach to improve persistent poor service delivery performance in local Governments beyond the increases in grants due to this programme.

The Ministry of Education and Sports strengthens technical supervision of construction works that will be undertaken under this programme to minimise cases of delayed completion of works, payments for unexecuted works and paying for works that do not conform to the expected quality specifications.

Procurement and Contract Management

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Local Government should ensure that the beneficiary Governments under this programme:

    1. Have in place the capacity to manage the procurement functions due to this programme;
    2. Have a comprehensive procurement and disposal plan covering infrastructure activities in the approved annual work plan, which is followed;
    3. Have prepared bid documents, maintain contract registers and procurement activity files and adhere to established thresholds; and
    4. Have certified and provided detailed project information on all programme investments.

Performance of on-going projects under the Education Sector

The committee recommends that Government expedites the execution of all on-going debt financed development projects in the Education Sector approved by Parliament without recourse to additional financing in order to meet their respective project objectives including enhancing skills development of the country. 

In addition, public investment management reforms should make it mandatory for all public projects to undergo a project assessment tool that demonstrates adequate project preparedness prior to its financing.

Performance of on-going projects under the Ministry of Health

The committee recommends that Government expedites the execution of all on-going debt financed development projects under the Ministry of Health without recourse to additional financing.
 
Programme Supervision

The committee recommends adequate institutional strengthening of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Ministry of Local Government and Office of the Prime Minister through training, tooling and promotion of community practices through peer-to-peer learning, mentoring and exchange visits. This will enable them to acquire adequate and appropriate skills for effective and efficient supervision of this programme.

Mr Speaker, based on the need for equitable distribution of Government secondary schools and health centres III in accordance with the Government policy, the committee recommends that the request by Government to borrow up to SDR 145.9 million ($ 200 million) from the IDA of the World Bank Group to support the Uganda Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfers Programme for results in the Education and Health Sector be approved, subject to the recommendations contained herein. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, let me make a correction in the motion that I proposed for your debate. There is something that was left out.

The motion that I propose for your debate is for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow up to SDR 145.9 million, equivalent to $ 200 million, from the IDA of the World Bank Group to support the Uganda Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfers Programme for results in education and health sectors. That was missing from the text that I read but that is the full description of this request. 

Honourable members, debate starts now. Each Member will take three minutes. Please, stick to three minutes to allow other Members to debate.

3.17
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion because this supports the constitutional ideology on balanced and equitable development. 

The Constitution states that the State shall take necessary measures to bring about balanced development in the different areas of Uganda and between the rural and urban areas. We know that through education and health, the Government is transforming the human resource, which is lacking, and hence needs reinforcement. We need quality human resource in both the education and health sectors; it has been a complaint in this country. 

Therefore, I support this motion and I urge colleagues to follow suit and support it because we have all been complaining about shortage of secondary schools and health centres. Even today, if you watch television, you will notice that so many sub counties lack health centres and secondary schools. Hence, this report comes at the right time and I beg that we support it. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.19
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will reserve my position until the end. However, I would like to invite colleagues to look carefully into the report presented by the chairperson. I have just picked one proposal and analysed it. In the report, it is proposed by the committee that we should indeed get Shs 200 billion to upgrade 124 health centres. This means that each health centre will be upgraded at a cost of more than Shs 1.6 billion.

This same NRM Government constructed a brand new fully equipped Health Centre III in Namutumba at a cost of Shs 476 million in February 2019. Therefore, I wonder how we are going to spend this much when we can get three times the number of health centres that have been listed. With the same amount of money of Shs 200 billion, we can get 372 brand new fully equipped health centres. 

Therefore, I would like to invite the House to look into that. We cannot just afford - we lack health centres in sub counties. The fact that there is a need, the House cannot just be bundled up and request for much more money because in the end, we stand to lose out. 

Mr Speaker, I invite you and the House to look at page 12 under paragraph 12.2 and compare that information with the one in paragraph 16.2, where it is stated that in the Financial Year 2018 – (Interruption) 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, if my ears are working very well, during the presentation of the chairperson’s report, I heard that this loan is for both health and education, not only health. This means there is a portion going to the Ministry of Education and Sports and another one going to the Ministry of Health. Therefore, I would like to know where you got your calculation that everything is going to the Ministry of Health. 

Mr JONATHAN ODUR: Mr Speaker, the report is segmented. I have just highlighted the amount of money in the report under paragraph 12.2. It says the $ 55 million, which comes to Shs 200 billion, is going to be used to upgrade 124 health centres, which means that each health centre will take Shs 1.6 billion. I am saying that a new health centre III has just been constructed in Namutumba with beautiful pictures at the cost of less than Shs 500 million. It means that this same amount of money can get us three times the 124; so, we can get 372 health centres and no sub county will remain without a health centre. 

Therefore, I am inviting the House to pay attention to that because even in the Financial Year, 2018/2019, under paragraph 16.2, the report says that Shs 69 billion was provided to upgrade 124 health centres. It means that the committee did not pay attention to this matter and this House cannot afford to just donate money, when we have many health facilities limping. 

I have not even gone to look at the part of education but I am sure that the reduction of Shs 320 secondary schools that were earmarked to 242 is due to inflated costs. While there is need for us to get the health centres, let us balance the equation and not allow money to just be taken, yet our people are suffering. 

I beg this House to modify and find that - we need this same amount of loan, which I support, should give us –(Member timed out.)

3.23
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion for the request to borrow and I thank the committee for the presentation.

As members of Parliament, we know very well that the biggest problem that we have in this country concerns our lives; that is health. I know my brother has put up some concerns but I think if you read the report very well, it talks about health centres and district hospitals. If we share that money, I am sure it comes to the figure that has been indicated in the report. 

Secondly, the NRM manifesto states that we must provide health facilities and schools in each sub county and the localities that have been mentioned in the report. I am sure that we are performing our obligation, as Government. 

Among the Sustainable Development Goals, (SDGs) we have health as the third in ranking. I am sure this money will help us to meet the obligation of fulfilling the fact that we have to meet the SDGs. 

We also need to narrow the distances to the schools. We know the problems that the girl-child faces in our district, especially when it comes to secondary education. Some of us come from regions where we have a high dropout rate of children and so, this programme will help us to solve some of these problems. 

There is also the issue of maternal health that has led to the death of most of our mothers. I would like to urge Members here that to support this motion so that we cut down the number of mothers who pass away due to lack of hospitals. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are not debating the report but the request by Government to borrow this money. The report is only facilitating our debate so what we are supporting or not supporting is the motion that the request be approved. We are dealing with the request.

3.26
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. While we had issues with the International Specialised Hospital in Lubowa, I did not support the motion because we were not dealing with the poor. For the first time, I am supporting this request because of its necessity.

In principle, we need to agree that health comes first. What hon. Johnathan Odur has raised is a major concern but in principle, should we support the motion or not? I support this loan. There are concerns that I would like to raise and one of them is the issue of equity and gender balance. How are the women going to benefit from these contracts? The people who are going to construct these projects; how many women are going to be involved? It is a concern and I am a Member of the Uganda Parliamentary Women’s Association. 

Secondly, you are talking about constructing these health facilities; are you going to equip them fully?

Thirdly, you left out most of the health centres IV. For instance, when you go to Kumi District, the health centre IV has an operating theatre but it is not equipped. Should we just construct buildings for the sake of it, without providing the services? This is the question that you need to answer.

Mr Speaker, in our planning, we need to include the Rural Electrification Agency. There is a project that we are about to start implementing - the loan that we passed here; they are going to launch that programme. Are we in touch with them so that they can put power in these places? The issue concerning the environment needs to be addressed. All these health facilities need trees so that the mothers can sit under tree shades when nursing their babies.

I would like to urge the people who are implementing this to think along those lines. The world is getting hotter and warmer; what are we going to do to cool it? This is a question that needs to be answered. The issue of staffing also needs to be addressed. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has always said, “Do not recruit”. How are we prepared to deal with this? We are going to have over 100 health centres on board without staff. What is our plan in the Financial Year 2019/2020? What is Keith Muhakanizi going to say about this or is he going to overrule Parliament in terms of recruitment? This is a pertinent question for us to answer.

Mr Speaker, in principle, I support the loan. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, our debates are taking three minutes.

3.29
MR NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to tell Parliament that we are wasting time debating this loan and nobody has ever rejected any borrowing here. What I would like to propose is that they bring the amount of money that we need to borrow and we all say, “Aye”, they go and borrow and implement the projects.

We waste a lot of time debating and sometimes, they use it as an excuse that we have delayed the process of doing an activity because the money was authorised late. I am one of those who requested that in this next budget, any money which you want to borrow in the budget – we want to render the Committee on National Economy redundant on presenting reports – they should only go and inspect the projects where the money has been invested. 

Mr Speaker, this is a loan for schools and education –(Interjections)– I wanted to find out if you are awake. (Laughter) This is a loan for education and health; therefore, it is for schools and health centres. For schools, there is no problem because there is a lot of demand. However, we have health centres which have been constructed and they are not operational. What is the purpose? Are you trying to bring buildings for people in the villages to say that there is a health a centre? Please, let us be realistic?

Why don’t you build a few and equip them rather than building many that you will not equip? This is very dangerous and it is wastage of public resources. I would like to plead with the members of Parliament not to stand here and claim that the loan will not benefit their constituencies. I would like to inform you that in this report, I am not included among the beneficiaries but I am supporting those who are going to get schools and health centres because I am not here to make laws that must benefit me directly. 

We would like to ask you to do things the right way. Come up with the total budget of hospitals and schools to be built and say, “We are starting from up -”, and even if we benefit in 2040 or 2050, we have no problem with that. Please, list them so that we tick them off every year that this and that is done, instead of planning in piecemeal because at the end of the day, we get no results. Thank you.

3.32
MR ERIC MUSANA (NRM, Buyaga County East, Kagadi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to support Government to borrow this money to make sure that the education and health sectors which are limping can get better services. I have two serious issues and they are to do with quality assurance vis-a-vis value for money, like my honourable colleagues have mentioned. 

More often, we borrow money and go into the construction process but there is no value for money; quality is not guaranteed. This shoddy work by the construction companies that we contract, most times brings out issues that are not good. Guess what happens; the companies contracted and all the processes are managed from the centre. When you go to the districts, they do not have anything.

Secondly, I would like to find out if the committee also looked at the issue of land acquisition. Most of these health centres and schools are being proposed in areas where Government does not have land. In these projects, we must make sure that there is land where to build these structures. I know projects where they have told communities to provide land for the construction of either schools or health centres.

These health centres must be equipped. There must be training of human resource. We would not want to have just buildings. Buildings are there but do we have enough equipment? We went to Nakaseke District and found idle equipment and there was no training at all. The equipment is very good and people would benefit from it but the human resource is not available.

Finally, I would like to make sure that this is addressed; operationalisation of these projects. You may find a very good project and we know the demand is there and the people would really want this project –(Member timed out.)

3.35
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa County North, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I support the motion because this borrowing is meant to fulfil Government policy, which requires that every sub county must have a secondary school and a health centre III and districts must also have hospitals. 

Secondly, this loan is an attempt to increase funding to local governments. If you look at the local government levels of funding now, around 95 per cent of the money transferred to local governments is for wages. Not much money goes for development. Therefore, this is also an attempt to fulfill it.

I would like to say here that my concern is about uniformity of structures. When you look at some of the secondary schools that have been constructed, particularly seed secondary schools, there are some storeyed houses, there are those which are not and there is no uniformity. Since these are Government programmes and structures, it would be very important for Government to come up with a standard structure for all secondary school buildings throughout the country so that there is uniformity. However, if that is not done, there will be a challenge.

On the issue of quality assurance, in some of these projects which have been implemented, many of our committees do oversight. There was a complaint that in some of the schools and health centres, the contractors are contracted from the centre and when they do the implementations, there is not much supervision. The district officials tend to look at these projects as projects that are being implemented by the centre, so, there is no proper supervision.

My idea here is that if the local contractors do not have enough capacity to implement the projects, when the contractors are got from the centre, there should be a team built at the district level in conjunction with the team from the centre, to ensure that there is proper supervision to avoid compromise of quality assurance.

Mr Speaker, I would also like to challenge the House that when Government comes up with implementation or creation of new structures, say, sub counties, it must be a prerequisite that the funding to these sub counties must include funding to implement such things as the health centres II – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have students and teachers from Namengo Girls’ School from Budaka District represented by hon. Kezekia Mbogo and hon. Pamela Kamugo. You are welcome. (Applause)

We also have students and teachers from Busiro Children’s Centre Nursery and Primary School from Iganga District represented by hon. Stephen Kisa and hon. Esther Mbayo. You are welcome. (Applause)

3.39
MR FRANCIS MUKULA (Independent, Agule County, Pallisa): Thank you for giving me an opportunity. I have three issues. One is to urge the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, as we are all aware - I think we all do not know the status of these loans; we just pass them. It would be prudent that when a request for a loan is made, the House should also be updated with the status of the previous loans.

I am wondering whether proper statistics was carried out in order to arrive at the figure of what is required to construct these schools and health centres.

Throughout the country, as has been stated by some of my colleagues – for example, in Agule, for the last five years, there were three health centres that were constructed in Akisim Sub County, in Apopong and in Chelekura but what you find there are “equipment” known as bats. When you go there, you are welcomed by bats. Therefore, I wonder whether proper research and statistics were carried out. 

The third issue is about the implementation of the projects, especially the construction. As you are aware, we now have a mindset of corruption. There is no longer a heart for Uganda and Uganda’s development. Somebody sleeps and thinks of “what percentage can I get from such a project?” In other words, all stakeholders must be involved. For example, the previous World Bank money that was used for constructing secondary schools, it was the centre – the Ministry of Education and Sports – that did all the procurement processes and the money was channeled into secondary schools’ accounts. The work of the district and the secondary schools was just to receive money and to sign documents –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am going to reduce the time to two minutes because I cannot accommodate you all.

3.42
MR FRED TUMUHEIRWE (FDC, Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. For the first time in a long time, I stand here to support borrowing by Government –(Laughter)– specifically because it addresses the local person and it is also in line with the policy of the Government that I support, of the Forum for Democratic Change. (Laughter)

The people in Rujumbura have suffered for a very long time. We have had schools, which have no roofs and health centres, which have no mattresses. I once visited a health centre in Buhunga Sub County and I found pregnant women lying on beds with no mattresses. I had to personally fork out money to alleviate that problem.

Therefore, even though I support what my colleague, the Budadiri West Member of Parliament has said, I do not want to be selfish that they start with Rukungiri but we shall be happy. My people will be happy if I support this borrowing so that any Ugandan who has been suffering benefits from this. 

I hope it will be put to good use so that Ugandans, for the first time, benefit from this kind of borrowing. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On that note, can I just put the question now? 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: No.

3.44
DR MICHAEL BUKENYA (NRM, Bukuya County, Kassanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before you put the question, I would like to clarify in the absence of my minister. Maybe, it was an error by the Committee on National Economy. The initial plan was to do 120 health centres III. However, debate came up that the cost was too high and it was agreed that it should be revised to do the 120 plus 70 plus 60 in three consecutive years. Therefore, the cost significantly changed. That is the clarification. That they were supposed to be 120 health centres III to be upgraded as indicated in the report - (Interjections) - I am giving information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, how many are they doing now?

DR BUKENYA: I think they are now doing 250 over a period of three years because the cost was revised to about 500 –(Interjections)– I mentioned that I am correcting what is there. The people from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development can testify to that. That is the clarification I wanted to make.

Finally, I would like to support the motion of borrowing that money in view of the NDP II and Sustainable Development Goal No.3 for universal health coverage. Thank you.

3.46
MR ISMAEL OROT (NRM, Kanyum County, Kumi): Mr Speaker, I would like to observe that in the construction of these schools, let us emphasise the matter of vocational training by including subjects such as technical drawing and woodwork in the rural areas. 

Why have I brought this issue? To join a primary teachers’ college, you have to pass mathematics and English with credits. However, many rural seed secondary schools have failed to produce children who pass mathematics and English with credits. They may get a credit in English and a pass in mathematics.

However, when they leave the schools, having known how to make a table, repair a bicycle or how to do craft activities, they will be of great benefit to our society. Therefore, when implementing this budget that has to be on our minds.

On regulation of quality, you can see that if we include vocational and technical training in these seed secondary schools, we shall produce a competent human resource that can be able to fit in the production sector in our rural areas. We are discussing about borrowing but if people are not productive, paying back these heavy loans will be very difficult. Therefore, after learning in these schools, people must be able to get to production and earn –(Member timed out.)

3.48
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the request that health and education services are needed by our people. Many sub counties in this country, especially the new ones, do not have health facilities and secondary schools. I think this is an opportunity to make sure that we get these facilities there.

However, there are also many that have not been captured to be attended to. Let the ministries concerned also consider those that have not been captured.

The second issue is about staffing and equipment. It is good to have health facilities but it is also important to equip them and have capable staff to operate those facilities.

Thirdly, I call upon the implementing agencies that absorption of these resources must match the delivery time. If the project is meant to be delivered in a few months, the schedule should be adhered to such that we deliver these projects in a timely manner other than the rollovers and absorption problems that are common and have made many loans not to perform well. Government should also give assurance, if there is a component of counterpart funding, that the resources will be available.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, as it has been said by other colleagues and hon. Orot –(Member timed out.)

3.50
MR GENENSIO TUMURAMYE (NRM, Kashongi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee and the chairperson for the good proposal for Government to borrow money for the construction of schools and health centres. 

Mr Speaker, the issue of schools and health centres cuts across the country. We all want schools and health centres in our constituencies. Some constituencies do not have government-aided secondary schools and it is good that we are going to build them. However, much as we are going to build these institutions in our constituencies, we need to address the issue of staffing and equipment. 

In my constituency, we are benefiting from the health centre III project. They are already doing the work and I thank Government for that. However, I was in the constituency last week and I spoke to the contractor who said he was given eight health centres to construct. The concern is, how are they going to finish all of those in time?

The second issue is the question of equipment. Recently, I mobilised Hepatitis B vaccines for Kashongi Health Centre III. Mr Speaker, it is very challenging that the drugs are going to expire because we do not have the equipment, particularly the refrigerator. I call upon –(Member timed out.)

3.52
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support the motion. I agree with those issues that have been raised by my colleagues. 

However, the case in Ssembabule District is very alarming. Ssembabule has a health centre IV. For the last 10 years, Ssembabule was recommended to have a district hospital but this has not happened. At this health centre IV, there is something, which I do not know whether to call a mortuary or something else. When people die from the health centre, they take the bodies to that thing – I cannot call it a mortuary. 

By the time the relatives come, the dogs would have taken the body because of the situation. The relatives find nothing –(Interjections)– I am talking about Ssembabule District. Relatives compete with dogs in that mortuary. I can lay pictures on the Table.

Secondly, there are staff who take a long time and you find other staff who are cleaners – I have evidence. I was with the minister –(Member timed out.)

3.55
MR MOSES ADOME (NRM, Jie County, Kotido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also support the fact that Government is requesting this House to allow them to borrow money to build schools and health centres. These two sectors are very critical in Karamoja. When we talk literacy, Karamoja has the lowest level of literacy. Karamoja also has the poorest health infrastructure given the fact that some districts like my own, Kotido, do not even have a district hospital.

I looked through the report of the request and I have seen that apart from seed secondary schools, which we are about to get in case this request is allowed by this august House, you realise that the health centres II and III to be upgraded are not captured in Karamoja. Therefore, I would like to request the committee to consider issues of equity such that Karamoja is concluded –(Interruption)

MR AYEPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When you look at the loan for the health sector, you realize that Karamoja is supposed to get Shs 54 billion of the loan from the Italian Government but in the report, the loan is separate. 

Mr Speaker, I thought this would be the time for us to pass that loan - the Italian loan of Shs 45 billion - specifically for health centres II in Karamoja. That is the information I wanted to give - it was an Italian loan but it has not been passed yet they are attached together. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable member, your time was up. 

3.57
MS JANE AVUR (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the loan because it is going to address one of the key social issues of education.
	
Most of the people we represent in our constituencies are suffering; they travel long distances to access education. The fact that we are going to have 127 schools built is a positive gesture to support Government’s policy of having a seed school in every subcounty.

I also welcome the loan since it is going to facilitate the construction of new health centres. However, I would like to urge Members to support the view of hon. Onzima who said that we should have uniform designs.

Mr Speaker, when you go to most of the health centres III, you find that these contractors build something close to rental rooms not wards. The wards are very small and congested. The loan should be properly supervised. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.58
MS RUKIYA CHEKAMONDO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also stand to support the loan.

When you look at the health sector – there is an area in Kapchorwa where we have had several accidents and people die in that area every time an accident happens because that area has only a health centre III. 

We have written to the concerned authorities to upgrade that health centre to a health centre IV in order to save the situation. Sometimes, when an accident happens in that area, by the time the victims reach Mbale or Kapchorwa hospital, they are in a bad shape and others end up dying.

We lost many UPDF soldiers after an accident occurred at that point. If this place had a health centre IV, it would have saved many lives. I support the loan but I would like to request that in the districts where these loans are going to be used to construct schools and health centers, we should make sure that any contractor that does shoddy work should not be given work to do anything on this loan because this loan is for the people. 

Therefore, I propose that any contractor who has done shoddy work should not be given chance to construct these health centers and/or schools. I support the motion and thank you very much.

4.00
MR NOAH WANZALA MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to concur with the presenters of the report and support the loan.

However, my concern is about the titles. A number of schools have been constructed and others are going to be constructed, if the loan is passed. However, we have had wrangles on school land for example when land is given to construct schools by good Samaritans but once they die, other people come on board and say, “We do not know you. Can you please vacate?” I would like to, therefore, urge this Parliament and the Government that as we plan for this loan, we should plan for the money, which will help community members to process land titles for those schools and health centres.

I would like to also talk about the construction of health facilities. Places like Migyera, Wabigalo and Nakasongola, have had a number of accidents. Gaagaa and Link buses have had two fatal accidents there and all the patients were carried to Nakasongola Health Centre IV that does not have facilities and could not manage the situation.

My humble prayer is that Nakasongola be considered among those to be accorded district hospital status in order to help the accident victims and the people of Nakasongola. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I have tried to balance as much as I can but we also have time limitation.

Honourable members, it is supposed to be Prime Minister’s Question Time; it is 4 o’clock but I will allow the Leader of the Opposition to respond to some of the issues before we take a decision so that we can go to Prime Minister’s Question Time.

4.02
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the fact that we have to go by the policy and according to the policy, all sub counties are supposed to have one seed secondary school and a health centre III. That is what the policy says. Whether we do not have enough staffing, we have to start to implement the policy directive. That is the minimum that we should have.

On Friday, last week, I was in Gulu District - Mr Speaker, I have been disturbing the Minister of Education and Sports about a seed secondary school in Patiko Sub County but the sub county is not included yet the minister promised me that it would be included.

Mr Speaker, equity is a big problem here. In Gulu District, we only have Palaro Sub county and the renovation of Sir Samuel Baker Secondary School. For the health centres – [Ms Franca Akello rose] - I have been given very little time.

Mr Speaker, I know that for these health centres, we are supposed to have a uniform amount - I saw about Shs 500 million - let me give space for information.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you very much, the Leader of the Opposition, for giving me part of your time to give information to this august House.

In 2016, as we prepared for campaigns, a team from the Ministry of Education and Sports moved across the country, telling all local governments to prepare land for the construction of seed secondary schools in all sub counties.

Today, we are borrowing money to construct just a few. I am saying this so that it can back-up the information that you are saying that according to the policy, every sub county is supposed to have a seed secondary school. Thank you.

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you, honourable member. I would like to interest all of us into analysing this matter deeper and see if our areas are covered and to monitor this money. As hon. Jonathan Odur said, 124 health centres were upgraded at Shs 69.3 billion yet we now have billions of money that can help us increase the number of health centres to be upgraded and the number of seed schools supposed to be built.

We must, therefore, pay keen attention as leaders to the country. We must love our country to make sure that policies are implemented. If they are to implement the policies, let people stop being corrupt. Corruption is very high in Uganda. 

In some of the health centres or schools, you find there – in some health centres, it is one billion shillings. Isn’t it going to be double standards when the other one is Shs 500 million? We need to critically analyse this. It is for a good cause that we are borrowing this money but I would also like to warn that whenever we borrow, we must prepare Government counterpart funding a lot earlier and even then –(Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I will now put the question to this motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow up to SDR 145.9 million, equivalent to $200 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group, to support the Uganda Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfers Programme for results in education and health sectors.  I now put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion agreed to.

PRIME MINISTER'S QUESTION TIME

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is Prime Minister’s Question Time.

MR SSEKITOLEKO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. A Bill entitled, “The Landlord and Tenants’ Bill” was read for the first time in Parliament in mid-February. We were given 45 days, as per our Rules of Procedure –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, it is important that we attend the House. We made a ruling here and extended the period that for now, we are going to handle the budget. All business of Bills should be stayed to accommodate the budget process. If you would like to make your request, please come and do so after the budget.

MR SSEKITOLEKO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prime Minister’s Question Time. Let me start from Moroto.

4.08
MS STELLA ATYANG (NRM, Woman Representative, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask the Prime Minister when the sachet waragi ban will take effect. In 2016, this Parliament resolved that sachet waragi should be banned. We have been pushing for this and in September 2018, it was agreed that by March this year, there will be a total ban on sachet waragi.

However, up to now, sachet waragi is still on the market. When are we going to implement that ban? Thank you.

4.09
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, there is agreement in this House and the country that sachet waragi should be banned. The minister responsible for trade and industry has already issued a programme of banning sachet waragi. I do not have the exact details of the dates but I know that within a couple of months, it will be out of the market.

4.10
MS JULIET KYINYAMATAMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Quarantine was lifted in the Masaka-Nkole corridor after an outbreak of Foot and Mouth Disease in the area. However, we still face a problem from the Ministry of Security, which is carrying out an undercover operation against the people of Rakai and Ssembabule, even when the quarantine was lifted. They are taking money from the business people who borrow money from banks.

According to police, there is no quarantine because it was lifted but they are still extorting money. We are wondering what Government is up to. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what are you up to? (Laughter)

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the responsible minister for animal industry has assured me that there is no quarantine at the moment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But they are still confiscating cattle. That is her point.

DR RUGUNDA: Let me thank the honourable member for reporting the thieves. Fortunately, the Ministry of Internal Affairs is going to swing into action against them.

4.11
MS MARIA AJILO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there is a zebra crossing between Parliament and Development House. For those of us who frequently cross that road, there are a lot of threats to our lives and you cannot blame the motorists because the zebra crossing is hardly visible.

My question is who is supposed to work on zebra crossings and when will it be done?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, we would like to secure the lives of all honourable members and the people of Uganda. So, the ministries responsible – the Ministry of Works and Transport in particular and other related ministries including the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – will be reminded to take the responsibility to secure the lives of our honourable members. (Applause)

4.13
MR ANDREW KALUYA (Independent, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Many of us in this country have fallen prey to the many pyramid schemes and crypto currencies. I remember one of our colleagues raised that matter here but we are still waiting to know when Government will regularise the pyramid and Ponzi schemes (crypto currency).

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I beg to know what Government is doing to regularise those schemes.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development is working on a programme to deal with Ponzi and pyramid schemes, many of which have been used to fleece the population.

4.14
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, last week, the Government of Rwanda called for talks with that of Uganda on the current border tension between the two countries. What is the position of Uganda on that offer?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, on the border situation, Uganda respects her neighbours and is dealing with them to sort out any irritation as peacefully and amicably as possible. 

4.15
MS ROBINA MUKISA (NRM, Woman Representative, Namayingo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you came to Namayingo in 2015 where we had a function in Bumeru. Over 2,000 people were going to be evicted but you promised that Government was going to compensate the owners of the land. Up to now, however, our people are living in fear. I would like to know the status of that land so that our people stop living in fear. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: I am sorry, honourable member. Which land are you talking about?

MS MUKISA: Bumeru Estate. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I am much acquainted with Bumeru Estate. This matter has been handled by Government, a solution has been arrived at and the amount of money has been agreed on. What remains is for the Government to mobilise the requisite amount of money to pay the landlord.

4.16
MR FRANCO CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, I remember Parliament carried out an investigation into the mismanagement of Uganda Telecom and along the way, there were reports that Uganda Telecom had been given to one Mrs Morgan Tsvangirai on the premise that she helped to link Government to a factory which manufactures ARVs. Until now, even that company which was given UTL has not met its contractual obligation.

When are you coming to give us the proper status on the current owner of UTL and the allegation that your deputy and other officials from your Government took a bribe to irregularly award UTL to that particular company?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Government has not successfully given out UTL to anybody. It is true there was a company UTL was given to in a given time to do work. However, this company did not live up to the expectations. Therefore, Government of Uganda is now actively looking for credible, tested and capable people and companies to work with the Government of Uganda to solve the issues concerning Uganda Telecom.

Secondly, the allegation that my colleague may have taken a bribe over this matter is scandalous because we are all acquainted with it. It was done in the open; there was an advert. I think we should be a bit careful at throwing mud because it is not good to throw mud everywhere and character-assassinate people. If there is any specific information, bring it to any investigative agency to follow it up instead of coming to this august House to tarnish the name of a respected Deputy Prime Minister. 

4.19
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, on 4 February 2019, the Minister of State for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries launched the construction of a cattle market in Amudat. He was also in Kween doing the same. Today, it is 4 April 2019; meaning it has now been two months since the construction was launched. When will the contractor begin the construction because the people are eagerly waiting for the market?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, if the contractor is not following the construction obligations, he should be dealt with in accordance with the law. I will, nevertheless, take this information seriously and discuss it with the Minister of Local Government who is normally in charge of these markets. I am glad the minister is here and he will have time to come and explain to this august House the details concerning the market. 

4.21
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Mr Prime Minister, it is coming to three years since Government announced the planned restructuring, rationalisation and mergers of Government agencies to avoid duplication and parallel programmes. We are now in the budget process - the third budget of this Parliament - and we can see that the problems are not yet solved. The people working in those entities are insecure. Some are beginning to look for jobs elsewhere. I am sure they are underperforming due to that fear and I hope they are not trying to run away. What is the progress on the restructuring, rationalisation and mergers? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Ndugu Biraahwa Mukitale has a valid point. Government has taken concrete steps to restructure, merge and reduce the number of many of the Government agencies. However, some final details are being worked out to ensure that those decisions will help the country and the economy. 

Let me also assure this House that one of the issues Government is considering concerns the workers and leaders who are involved in those parastatals and agencies. The idea is that they should be treated as rationally and legally as possible. Therefore, let me reassure them that they will be handled properly.

4.23
MR JOSEPH KOLUO (NRM, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On 28 December 2018, a strong wind blew off the roofs of two schools in Toroma. Up to now, nothing has been done. The children are not studying and those who go to school, because of the sunshine, escape at any time. Mr Prime Minister, does the Government have emergency responses to save these children’s future? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Government has programmes and sometimes, materials to deal with emergencies. However, I must say that in the recent past, the demands have overwhelmed what is available. That is why there has been some slow response to some of the issues, not that they are not important but because of the capacity of Government to effectively respond to all of them in time. Nevertheless, efforts are being made to ensure that Government does what it is expected to do.

4.24
MS GRACE NAMUKHULA (NRM, Woman Representative, Namisindwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, in 2014, the Government of Uganda signed a memorandum of understanding with Manafwa District Local Government to construct a cross-border market in Lwakhakha, which is now located in Namisindwa. A contractor was introduced but he has not been to the site and there is nothing taking place. May I know what is happening? What plans does Government have for the people of Namisindwa? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I keep advising that we should deal with policy issues at this time. It is because specifics like what the Member just asked about can be addressed through other channels. 

DR RUGUNDA: I thank you, Mr Speaker, for the guidance. Fortunately, the Minister of State for Local Government who is in charge of many of these markets is available; he will, next week, come and make a more comprehensive statement covering not only these two markets that have been raised but also how we are doing with the construction of markets and assurance on the programme to ensure that the contracts entered into are indeed going to be actualised.

4.26
MS BEATRICE RWAKIMARI (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concern is about promotion of Buy Uganda, Build Uganda (BUBU) without amending the necessary law. When it comes to technical and financial evaluation, most local companies are outcompeted. The business continues to go to foreigners yet we are here singing about BUBU without actualising it.

What is Government doing to ensure that the local companies benefit from the BUBU policy? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the point about BUBU is a good one. It sometimes requires a number of laws and policy positions to effectively implement certain policies. In this particular case, the BUBU policy, varied as it is, will be helped by amending the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (PPDA) law and other procurement laws to ensure that it is indeed effectively supported. 

Suffice to say, Government means business on BUBU and will amend other laws, if necessary, to ensure that it is given effect.

4.27
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Mr Speaker, I would like to ask the Rt Hon. Prime Minister whether he has reminded His Excellency the President of his promise, during the campaigns, that he would supply all schools with scholastic materials, sanitary pads for girls and hand hoes for our voters. Whenever we mix with them, they keep urging us to remind him.

I am asking if you or the President is aware that this is the third year into the five years that we are entitled to be in power. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, my sister knows very well that the Movement is scoring a great deal in fulfilling the manifesto promises. (Applause) In fact, the performance is going to be even better for the remaining part of the five years or the kisanja, including doing some of the things that my sister has talked about.

4.29
MS SHEILA KABAIJE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question to the Prime Minister is about land titles of land owners where Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) has constructed tarmac roads. For instance, the road from Nyakahita that cuts through my district to Ibanda that was constructed in 2010. Whenever such roads are constructed, land owners are required to hand over their titles for sub-division to remove the road reserve. 

It is now close to 10 years. With the land fraud that is going on between UNRA and the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, returning those titles has become a problem. Some people who handed over their titles have since passed on and it is going to be a problem for such families to settle on who will receive back the titles.

My question is, what is Government doing with the land titles of people who willingly gave them to Government to sub-divide?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is an important point, especially knowing the fraud that has characterised land transactions in the recent past. I will, therefore, ask the minister responsible for works and transport to make a statement next week on what is happening with those land titles, including those that have been kept for as long as 10 years.

4.31
MS SILVIA AKELLO (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are all aware that Government introduced the thematic curriculum in primary schools but it is only in rural schools. When you go to urban schools, children start learning English in Nursery up to Primary Seven.

Last month, I went to see my personnel and I saw that a primary teacher had written a letter to the personnel in vernacular. How do we expect children in rural areas to sit for Primary Leaving Examinations in English yet they are taught vernacular from primary one to primary seven? How do we expect these children to compete favourably with those ones in urban schools? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I must commend the Ministry of Education and Sports for ensuring that our vernaculars are taught in our schools.

Secondly, I expect the Minister of Education and Sports to obviously have one national curriculum for primary and secondary schools. If this is not the case, and I see my sister shaking her head and moving her hand, I think it is something that needs to be looked at, especially by the Ministry of Education and Sports, to explain to us. 

There may be issues that you and I may not be familiar with. The ministry can come and explain to us the curriculum. If there is a variation, the minister will explain why because at the end of primary seven, they do one national examination.

The minister responsible will come to this august House and educate us about the position they have taken over this very subject matter.

4.33
MS EVERLYN CHEMUTAI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukwo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in 2016, you came to Bukwo and visited the Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs). You gave them hope that it would not even take a year before they are resettled. This is 2019 and we still have the same people in camps. 

Many committees have come from Parliament visiting the very people who are living in dilapidated houses. They are sleeping outside and the same question still stands; when are you coming to resettle the IDPs who are misplaced in their own land? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I confirm that I visited Bukwo with my colleagues and our sister. It is true there are some land resettlement issues; some people who require to be properly resettled.

The resettlement programme is taking very significant shape in our environment. Bulambuli has taken off quite well as well as Kyaka. There has been delay but nevertheless, that programme is coming.

4.35
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the policy of Government is that in most cases when there is a loan or a donation – for this case the Spanish Government brought some money for the renovation and rehabilitation of two hospitals: Busolwe and Kawolo. 

Government committed itself to paying Shs 6 billion as part of counterpart funding. The contractor visited the site. They have finished constructing Kawolo Hospital but up to now, Government has not paid its capital contribution. The contractor and the Spanish Government have now said they are going to withdraw the remaining money they injected into the project because Government has not met its obligation of the Shs 6 billion. 

I raised this issue while we were in Kyankwanzi in the presence of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and the minister assured – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the question?

MR WALUSWAKA: When is Government releasing the money for that counterpart funding? They had told me that it would be released this quarter but the quarter has ended. When is the money going to be released so that the contractor moves from Kawolo to Busolwe? May I know the time? Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Well, Mr Speaker, it is true the honourable member was assured, in my presence, that money would be released this quota. We should really ensure that, that old hospital, which is in bad shape, is rehabilitated. I am glad that Government has already given a contract and if it is just Shs 6 billion required for Government counter funding, the Government of Uganda cannot fail to get it. 

4.37
MR VICENT WOBOYO (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Last year, Government deployed Eng. Badru Kiggundu to carry out feasibility studies on tourism roads in the Mount Elgon Sub Region. He particularly came to Sironko District and saw the viability of those roads. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when are these roads going to be built aware that some tourism roads, particularly in western Uganda, have been earmarked to be built? When are those in the Elgon sub region going to be built? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: I am fully aware that two categories of roads are being accelerated in terms of them being built - the oil and tourism roads. Subject to getting details, I, therefore, expect the roads in Mbale area (Elgon Region) to benefit from this accelerated programme. 

4.38
MS MARGARET ALEPER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kotido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the challenge of water for livestock in Kotido has become so persistent yet Government continues playing melodies of promises to provide a larger dam. When will Government make it a reality to save the Jie herdsmen from the conflicts with the neighbours over the search for water? 

DR RUGUNDA: Which area are you talking about? Well, I do not see the Minister of Water and Environment. There has obviously been a problem of water, especially during this recent drought. As you perhaps know, many of the water points even dried up. Government intends to quickly restore many of these water points and address some of the very distressed areas. I do expect that Jie will be one of those areas to benefit from this programme.

4.40
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, our LC V chairperson died and the six months elapsed on 24 March 2019. When will you provide funds for the by-election? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when is the by-election for the deceased LC V chairperson to be replaced in that place?
  
DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, we share the concern of the honourable member to have elections as directed by the Constitution and the laws of the land. Government is in search of the resources but they are not yet available. Therefore, as soon as resources are available, Government will discharge its responsibility. 

4.41
MS JACKLET ATUHAIRE (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. A long time ago, when I was still in primary school, we used to do hand work. These days, our learners are being pumped with tests and exams day in, day out and they do not have room for innovation. Is it possible to at least get two life skills at primary level so that our learners can have that room of being innovative and learn these life skills in primary school? Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the honourable member’s question is consistent with the Government policy on vocationalism of education and ensuring that more skills are made available to our young stars, both in secondary schools and vocational centres. I urge us, members of Parliament and other opinion leaders, to encourage those who are in charge of institutions to focus on the promotion of skills acquisition by our young stars for them to use them out of school or even in school.  When they are out of school, they can then use these skills to make a living for themselves. 

4.42
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what is crypto currency? When are you bringing the law regarding the crypto currency?

DR RUGUNDA: My brother, hon. Okupa, should be the one explaining to this august House issues concerning crypto currency? Suffice to say, crypto currency is now a catchword globally. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will be bringing the necessary framework to guide the country on the management, regulation and use of crypto currency and other related financial –(Interjection)– give the honourable minister the requisite time because this is a new issue.

4.43
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, a few years ago, Government came up with a policy to ensure that this country does not suffer from food insecurity. You introduced silos, which were supposed to be constructed in every district. 

With the looming climatic change, which is posing a danger to our agricultural production, what is Government doing to ensure Uganda is secure when it comes to food? 

DR RUGUNDA: This is a very important point that has been raised. It is true that Government had substantial storage capacity. However, during the wave of privatisation, a number of them in Kyazanga and Masese were privatised. Nevertheless, I must say that there is now rethinking in Government; that Government should invest in substantial capacity for food storage to ensure that we promote food security and increase Uganda’s capacity to participate in the regional trade, especially with regard to food crops.

4.45
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are aware of the exercise that was conducted by the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to secure the boundaries of Mt. Elgon National Park and it is taking ages. As we talk, there is strained relationship between the community and the Uganda Wildlife Authority personnel. It has culminated into some people being arrested and incarcerated. What is the progress of concluding this exercise?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the information from hon. Nambeshe is consistent with the information that Government has on the matter. This matter has been discussed and the minister responsible for lands has been asked to expedite the process, get reports and other things out so that the population can be properly advised on where the boundaries are, where they should go and not go.

Furthermore, the wildlife authorities will be advised accordingly. We believe this will promote the relations between the wanainchi and the Uganda Wildlife Authority.

4.47
MR ROBERT KASULE (NRM, Nansana Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The economic situation in Uganda is not good as far as businesses are concerned. Most of the businesses are falling under the weight of the interest rates. In 2016, Government promised to revitalise and revamp the national bank. In that budget, the President said that they were going to combine Post Bank and the Microfinance Support Centre to create a national bank. Is Government still pursuing to create a national bank in order to control interest rates?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the focus of Government is to build strong national institutions that will help business, trade and investment by Ugandans. Among the things that Government is doing is increasing, strengthening and capitalisation of Uganda Development Bank, support for Post Bank and SACCOS and microfinance institutions.

The focus is to support those institutions that will support doing business by the people of Uganda. The question of national bank is something that – I have really given you the focus of Government; to strengthen the institutions that I have listed. 

4.49
MR OTHIENO OKOTH (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Through you, may I know from the Prime Minister - under the presumption that 60 per cent of Ugandans are permanently in the subsistence sector, the Government has been championing a cause to lift this percentage to the market production and they have responded by selling everything that they produce to the extent that there is nothing retained for home consumption? Year in year out, we continue disturbing the Office of the Prime Minster (Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees) for emergency provisions. 

May I know from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister the policy that Government has put in place to ensure food security amidst the desire to live the 68 per cent to the commercial economy?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is true the concern has been about the 68 per cent, who have lived a subsistence life for quite some years. The new policy or focus is development to be based on the parish so that we can reach these people who have not been reached. We believe that when we get to the parish, this will help in increasing production and therefore, in changing the lives of these 68 per cent. We, therefore, expect these 68 per cent to be reduced significantly with this parish model development.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.51
MS JANE AVUR (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, currently Government is implementing the policy on ensuring that fishermen catch mature fish. Henceforth, they are not allowing undersize fishnets. Where are these undersize fishnets being manufactured? If they are manufactured locally in Uganda, what steps is Government doing to ensure that these undersize fishnets do not get into the Ugandan market?

If they are coming from outside Uganda, why is Government allowing these undersize fishnets into the country? There are communities that purely depend on fishing and have never held hoes in their life. What other alternatives does Government have for the fishing communities? Why are we not getting support through the National Agricultural Advisory Services? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the essence of making sure that the small fish are kept in the lake is to support the people who merely depend on their income and livelihood on fish so that they can have fish grow and therefore, generate the requisite amount of money.

The manufacturing of these nets - I do not have the specific details but I agree with her that those which are imported should be stopped because they are just a menace to our fishing industry. If there is anybody manufacturing them locally, they should be controlled so that our lakes, fish and fishermen and women can have a decent living.

4.53
MR GENENSIO TUMURAMYE (NRM, Kashongi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are aware that in July 2018, the country went into polls to elect LC 1s and 11s. Some villages for one reason or the other did not elect their LC chairpersons.

Kashongi County has two cells that did not vote. My question is, when will Government conduct elections for those people because there is insecurity in these areas and it is becoming a problem? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, after elections of this nature, there is normally smaller elections that take place to fill the gaps. I, therefore, expect the ministry responsible for local government to be considering steps to ensure that the gaps or areas like Kashongi that had some of the areas not electing can then be addressed.

The Minister for Local Government is around and I am sure will follow it up.

4.54
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I know that a lot of policy issues have been raised. We get very disappointed, especially when we have disaster in our areas. The disaster ministry is only functional here. Is there a way we can have a structure or structures in all the governments – and when we say “governments” it is sub counties, divisions and districts – in all the local governments and then the national government if you can? 

We also had a tourist kidnapped in Queen Elizabeth National Park and later on a ransom was demanded. How do you ensure our safety in all other tourist sites?

I also would like to ask about the – you know, we are in the multiparty dispensation adopted in 2005 and we have never had an official National Order of Precedence. On some occasions, certain political party leaders are given preference over others. Can the Prime Minister lay on Table the official National Order of Precedence in Uganda so that we do not get confused? 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, according to some publications, like www.naijaquest.com, Kampala ranks fourth among the dirtiest cities in Africa, after Onitsha, Kaduna, Aba and Umuahia cities in Nigeria. What strategies is Government coming up with to ensure that Kampala gains a clean attractive city status? 

The Uganda judicial system is in a dire state to the extent of premises rented for the Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court being inaccessible to the elderly and people with disabilities. Can the Prime Minister inform the House when they intend to construct official premises for the Judiciary?

Yesterday, there was a lot of teargas and shooting in Bushenyi. Just last week, there was also the same in Jinja. Can you tell us when we will allow Uganda to be free for everybody? 

The electoral law, which I asked for last year in October, does not seem to be coming at all and you said that it was in the pipeline. We are still waiting. When is it coming? 

The country is awash with different mushrooming religious denominations and there are reports of many innocent Ugandans being defrauded, women raped while others are killed. Can the Prime Minister explain as to whether there is a Government policy regulating the manner of worship? If not, when is Government going to come up with the necessary law of regulating those places of worship?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, you are violating the rules. The rules say that the Leader of Opposition shall have a right to comment or reply, not ask questions again because then you extend the period beyond what we expect - you are supposed to speak like the alternative Leader of Government.

MS AOL: Well, Mr Speaker, I just would like to say, as the Leader of the Opposition, that Government is failing us on a lot of policies and also institutional building. 

At the moment, we would expect, in case of disaster in my area – it should not just be me always – like people reporting here about the roofs of classrooms – if we probably had a disaster management committee at district or sub county level – that makes a big flow.

When we talk about insecurity, it is real in this country. If tourists can be abducted, are we really taking security seriously? People are being killed. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when I talk about insecurity and also killing without due regard for the lives of the people – even this other man who was killed. Why would we kill people like that? Somebody who was already handcuffed; the hands were tied behind his back and someone still gets a gun and shoots? Are we being mindful? If your life was taken like that, would you love it? 

I would also like to comment on what came out of the electoral reform, which should be embedded in the constitutional amendment or review which should be taking place now. We are just about a year to elections – there was also an elections’ roadmap yet we do not allow people to be free to conduct rallies. 

Therefore, we are failing the country. Let us work for the country. Let us love Uganda and love every Ugandan. We may differ in our perceptions but when it comes to love for the country – (Interjections)

MR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I am seeking your guidance, after listening to my respected Leader of the Opposition in Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just summarise your response to the LOP.

MR RUGUNDA: With the guidance you have given, on the Order of Precedence, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Uganda issues the Order of Precedence and amends it as and when necessary. I will ask the ministry responsible to do so and lay the list on the Table for the consumption of my colleagues in this House.

On structures, yes, there are disaster structures at different levels. Definitely, every district has a disaster management committee, therefore, I would like my sister, the LOP to work closely both with the national structure on disaster as well as the district disaster management committees.

On the tourists, it was unfortunate of course that some of our tourists have had a problem. This is where we should all work closely together to ensure their rescue and to get to book the criminals that were involved in violating their security and also the security of the country. 

Let me also point out that almost in every country, you have such occasional situations where innocent people are hurt and injured whether in the United States or the United Kingdom. Therefore, let us all be vigilant to minimise these bad incidents that my sister has made reference to.

On the question of Kampala being the fourth dirtiest, I have not seen those statistics. However, I saw a report actually saying that Kampala is one of the best cities in the world. It was in the newspapers, I think about a week ago. Therefore, my sister, if I were you, I would take pride in Kampala being one of the best cities in the world. Definitely, the Government of Uganda is making money available for construction of critical High Court buildings. Some of the money will be made available in this budget that will start on 1 July 2019.

On the question of teargas being used in Bushenyi, Jinja and a few other areas, I think none of us really enjoys teargas being used anywhere. Let us endeavour to ensure that we do not provoke the use of teargas. (Laughter) Let us ensure that we even give peace to enforcement officers so that they can enforce the law without resorting to either teargas or other things.

Regarding freedom of worship, the Constitution of Uganda guarantees freedom of worship. Let worshipers use this freedom well. Sometimes some of them use it excessively and they disturb others with singing and the like. Let us all use our constitutional provisions well without violating the rights of other Ugandans.

The last comment was on the election roadmap. The election roadmap is essentially on course and we should all endeavour to ensure that as we prepare for elections, we keep peace and stability. If there are constitutional and legal provisions required, let us all work on them as quickly as possible to ensure that the elections are safe, fair, credible, and consolidate the peace and stability in our country. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. This brings us to the close of the Prime Minister’s Question Time.

BILLS
COMMIITEE STAGE

THE PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES BILL, 2018

The Sixth Schedule 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, yesterday we dealt with all the clauses and schedules of the Bill, including a new schedule. However, when we came to the sixth schedule, there were issues. 

Hon. Safia Nalule Juuko raised an amendment and her argument was that what is provided for in the sixth schedule, as of now, creates a situation that is not good because it undermines the principle of equity and discriminates against the woman, who is supposed to be elected through this process. Her argument is that all the other four MPs are elected regionally but there is only one woman MP who is elected nationally. She proposed that the sixth schedule should be the same with what obtains now. Therefore, she proposed an amendment to that effect and that is what we were debating.

The principle and provision of the Bill in the sixth schedule states that all that has been happening is that the elections have been national but the foundations have been regional. Much as there is no provision for regionalisation of members of Parliament representing people with disabilities, structurally from the time it started, it has been agreed that there should be regional representation.

That is why even in our directory, the constituency of hon. Hellen Asamo is “People with Disabilities, Eastern” and the constituency of hon. William Nokrach is “People with Disabilities, Northern”. However, when it comes to hon. Juuko, her constituency is “People with Disabilities, National”. They are saying, instead of leaving this as loose and informal as it is, there should be a legal provision that should provide for regional elections of these representatives and that is what is contained in the Bill.

Hon. Juuko argued that what is contained in the Bill would create discrimination against the one candidate, who is a woman. All the other four, who may be women or men, are regionally elected but the one MP, who is supposed to be a woman, has to contest in the whole country and she calls that discrimination.

Honourable members, we had reached a decision point on this matter and I hope my brief has been sufficient on what we need to do. I am now going to put the question to the amendment as proposed by hon. Juuko, which I have explained to you. If we support that amendment, we would have removed what is in the sixth schedule and replaced it with what hon. Juuko has proposed. Therefore, I put the question to the amendment as proposed by hon. Juuko.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The sixth schedule, as amended, agreed to.

The title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Florence Nakiwala Kiyingi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House report. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Florence Nakiwala Kiyingi): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House considered the Bill entitled, “The Persons with Disabilities Bill, 2018” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Florence Nakiwala Kiyingi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the House adopts the report from the Committee of the whole House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE PERSONS WITH DISABILIIIES BILL, 2018

5.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Florence Nakiwala Kiyingi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Persons with Disabilities Bill, 2018” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that Bill entitled, “The Persons With Disabilities Bill, 2018” be read for the third time and do pass. I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES ACT, 2019”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Congratulations, honourable minister, chairperson and Members for finalising this Bill. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON
AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES ON THE REPEATED
POSTPONEMENT OF THE OPENING OF THE SOROTI FRUIT FACTORY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, you will present in five minutes.

5.16
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Ms Janet Okori-Moe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the repeated postponement of the opening of the Soroti Fruit Factory.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS OKORI-MOE: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the minutes of the meetings we had during the investigations of Soroti Fruit Factory.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS OKORI-MOE: Mr Speaker, during the plenary sitting on Thursday, 21 February 2019, hon. Charles Ilukor, MP for Kumi County, raised the matter of the repeated postponement of the opening of Soroti Fruit Factory and the general fear by the population that the factory may never work. The Speaker then directed the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to immediately visit the factory to verify the status of the factory and report back to the House.

In execution of the directive, the committee interfaced with:

    a) The Deputy Chairperson, Soroti District Local Government;
    b) The Teso Tropical Fruit Cooperative Union;
    c) The Soroti Fruit Factory board members;
    d) Uganda Development Corporation;

The committee also carried out an oversight visit to Soroti Fruit Factory.

Committee Observations

The committee learned from the Auditor-General’s value-for- money audit report of 20l2 that the Government of Uganda allocated Shs 5 billion each year, starting with financial years 2009/2010 and 2011/2012, to the project while the Government of Korea offered a grant of $6.5 million to finance the activities of the project. The construction and operationalisation of the factory was to be completed over a five-year period, commencing on 1 July 2009 and ending on 30 June 2014.

When the committee visited the factory, we found out that construction and installation of equipment were 100 per cent complete but the factory had some challenges. One of the challenges was that there was no proper plan for waste management and waste disposal. The other challenge was that there was no preparation to ensure that once the factory starts operations, there would be a constant supply of fruits. 

The committee also observed that there was no close interface between the Uganda Development Corporation and the local government of Soroti where the factory is located.

When we visited the factory, we also saw that packaging of the fruits is going to be a problem. We did not appreciate the kind of packaging that we saw. It looked like the juice that will be produced will be for children. Mr Speaker, this is the type of packaging we got and I beg to lay it on the Table. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chair, just show us what it is. I hope they are checked.

MS OKORI-MOE: Yes, we checked. This is what the juice pack will look like and this is from the Pearl of Africa. 

Mr Speaker, we interfaced with the Uganda Development Corporation. I think from the pressure that Parliament mounted on them, they assured the committee that the commissioning of the factory is scheduled to take place on 13 April 2019. The details of what the committee discovered is in the report, which has been uploaded on your iPads. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, on the delay of opening this factory, the finding is that on 13 April 2019, it will be opened. That matter cannot be debated. Next item. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (CENTRAL GOVERNMENT) ON THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2016/2017

5.22
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (CENTRAL GOVERNMENT) (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Mr Speaker, we would like to apologise. We are a new committee and we have not internalised the report that is supposed to be presented. I think we need to study it before we can defend it. Otherwise, as a new committee we cannot defend it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, this report was ready before the changes in the committee.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: If it is ready, then we can pass it. Otherwise, I cannot defend it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The reports were ready before you took over office. Do we re-open everything? Why don’t we allow the person who presided over that matter, with your authority, to guide us through it and then we see what to do with them?

MS NANDALA-MAFABI: That is okay. Let her present because I am not conversant.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

5.23
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Actually, during the handover, we agreed and I thought it still stands. I thank my successor for that position because it would be difficult for them to present this report. Therefore, we agreed that we still present the reports. Since you have given us five minutes, I will just present the conclusion of the report.

Mr Speaker, I present the report of the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) on the report of the Auditor-General for financial year 2016/2017. The report comprises 35 entities of Government Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) and it stipulates a number of things but I will read through the conclusion. 

Mr Speaker, the committee notes that generally across the board, there was evidence of systemic failure in administrative responsibilities and management. This is an indication that accounting officers and staff of MDAs have relegated their roles and should henceforth take them more seriously in order to achieve the desired output in line with their given mandates.

Furthermore, on the whole, Government officials lack the culture of proper record keeping management and adherence to financial regulations. Notably, mischarges were found to be very common in most of the agencies - mischarge of expenditure and the failure to follow the procurement guidelines in the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act, 2015. This was rampant and it continued to occur across the board during the financial year under review.

The committee also urges accounting officers to follow the recommendations relating to specific issues and give them immediate attention, as per the report. In some instances, we have recommended that some accounting officers be disciplined. We have also recommended that Government rethinks the transfers of culpable accounting officers. If somebody has committed a crime in one agency, there is no reason to transfer them but discipline them and if need be, fire them because there are provisions in the law. 

It is the committee’s belief that if these observations and recommendations are taken into account and implemented, they will enhance accountability, effectiveness, transparency, efficiency, prudent management and better service delivery in our MDAs. I, therefore, move that the report of the Public Accounts Committee be adopted by this House and the recommendations contained therein be approved. I beg to move.

Mr Speaker, I need to add that these financial reports of 2016/2017 and 2015/2016 were laid on the Table, so the minutes and original copies of the reports were already tabled before Parliament. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, as I stated earlier, the Constitution tasks Parliament to deal with these queries from the Auditor-General within six months after he brings them to Parliament. The Auditor-General is also given six months from the closure of the financial year to carry out audits.

When he compiles the reports and brings them to Parliament, we are required to deal with them within six months and dispose of them. However, these are reports for books of 2016/2017 and 2015/2016, so we are way out of time. We are not in line with what the Constitution asked us to do. We should now have been considering the 2017/2018 report and be up to date. That is the background that I would like to lay as we proceed with these discussions.

I propose that we receive all the reports in this sector and then we see how to carry out the general debate on all of them and see what to do with them at once. So, let us present the other one as well.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (CENTRAL GOVERNMENT) ON THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2015/2016

5.29
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Mr Speaker, I hereby present a report of the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) on the report of the Auditor-general for the Financial Year 2015/2016. This report, too, contains 39 agencies of Government that were audited by the Auditor-General in the said year. I will read the conclusion of this report, assuming that Members have been able to read through.

Conclusion

The committee noted the following pertinent issues evident in a cross-section of entities in the financial year under review:

1. 	Generally, there was evidence of failure in the mandate, responsibilities and functions of MDAs involved in the delivery of goods and services. The committee, therefore, recommends that deterrent measures be implemented and the monitoring and supervision function be enhanced to prevent future occurrences of this nature. 

2. 	The accounting officers severally failed to comply with financial regulations and instructions and contravened the provisions of the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (PPDA) Act, 2015. Therefore, the political leadership of MDAs should provide deterrent sanctions against officers found culpable of breaching financial regulations. These ones are detailed in the body of the report.

3. 	The recommendations relating to specific issues be given immediate attention and action taken as per the report. The committee recommends, therefore, that the law enforcement agencies carry out further investigation. The Criminal Intelligence and Investigations Directorate (CIID), Directorate of Public Prosecutions (DPP) and Inspectorate of Government (IG), upon receipt of the PAC report, should brief Parliament within six weeks upon actions taken to implement recommendations bordering on fraud and corruption.

I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson. Honourable members, under item No. 9, the report was okay but we did not adopt it. I put the question for its adoption.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have received items 11 and 12, which are Public Accounts committee reports. We still have three more reports from this committee. I also think we should receive all of them. The next ones are value-for-money audit reports.  

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (CENTRAL GOVERNMENT) ON THE VALUE-FOR-MONEY AUDIT ON THE COMPENSATION OF PROJECT AFFECTED PERSONS UNDER THE REFINERY PROJECT

5.32
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to lay on the Table the minutes for the proceedings of the committee as it processed the report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes.

MS OSEGGE: Allow me to also lay on the Table the original signed copy of the report on the said subject. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the full text of the report.

MS OSEGGE: Mr Speaker, this is the report of the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) on the value-for- money audit on the compensation of Project Affected Persons (PAPs) under the refinery project. I will give the recommendations of the committee and then the conclusion.

The committee makes the following key recommendations:

1. 	The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development should ensure that the key planned project activities are prioritised, closely supervised and monitored to ensure that the expected deliverables are achieved as planned. We notice failure to achieve planned activities in time and some of them stalled.

2. 	In the subsequent projects requiring compensation of PAPs, the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development should ensure the following:
    a) Comprehensive planning should be done, including sensitisation of the PAPs and the involvement of Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs). 
    b) The committee recommends that the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) consultant adheres to the compensation guidelines for purposes of fairness. 
    c) The project affected persons should be profiled so as to ensure timely payment to avoid speculation. There were many instances where the regulations were not followed.

The Chief Government Valuer, according to the committee, should closely supervise and monitor the valuation exercise for future compensation project and ensure that the approved valuation methodology is adhered to by the implementing entity or consultant. 

Similarly, where circumstances may require deviation from the approved methodology, the Chief Government Valuer should ensure that the amendments are approved before they are applied for valuation. This will not only avoid discontent among the project affected persons but would also save Government funds allocated to specific compensations.

Mr Speaker, the committee also recommends that the ministry should liaise with the Chief Government Valuer to ensure that the following are done:

a) 	The rates used in compensating PAPs are the prevailing rates in the year of payment in order to minimise disputes with PAPs.

b) 	Guide District Land Boards (DLBs) on when they should submit proposed rates in order to ensure timely approval. In case of non-approval, the Chief Government Valuer should communicate his or her responses to the District Land Board in a timely manner because they are the ones who implement.

c) 	The rates submitted by the HDLB are comprehensive to cater for all categories of non-permanent nature before approval. In cases where compensation rates are determined at the discretion of the ministry, department or consultant, they should be done in consultation with the Chief Government Valuer and applied uniformly. 

d) 	The compensation value should be adjusted annually to reflect the prevailing market prices. In addition, the ministries and departments, in liaison with the Chief Government Valuer, should ensure that in future compensation projects, the Resettlement Action Plan consultants apply the adjusted rates uniformly to all PAPs to ensure fairness and adequacy in compensation. 

e) 	The accounting officer should ensure that: 

    i) Payments are effected as per the terms in the signed contract as any delay in effecting payments affects the contractor’s cash-flows and subsequently, the progress of works.

    ii) Better planning for any future project in respect of delayed site possession by the contractor.

    iii) Adequate planning and salary review of designed documents before approval and implementation. This would enable any major omissions to be noted and included at the earlier stage for better planning. 

    iv) Better coordination with any of the line ministries involved in future projects in respect to approvals of designs for health facilities and opening of boundaries where boundary disputes are impeding project implementation. 

    v) Defects are remedied by the contractor before handover of the school and expiry of the defects liability period for the 46 houses and health centres that are in the report. 

    vi) Supervision and monitoring of capacity for works is strengthened to ensure adherence to agreed quality standards during contract execution. 

    vii) In future projects, issues of concern discussed with the project affected persons are duly implemented and where there are deviations, adequate sensitisation of PAPs should be undertaken for acceptance of the projects and compliance with international standards.

f) The ministry or department should ensure that proper grievance management mechanisms are put in place to address any complaints that arise as per prescribed processes. 

g) The ministries and departments should ensure that in future projects, sufficient data of PAPs is captured during the socio-economic surveys to enable proper reconciliation of the total population and the PAPs eventually paid for assurance that eligible people benefit from the compensation.

Mr Speaker, there were a lot of complaints because there were people who benefitted when they did not deserve the compensation.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, there were notable achievements in the compensation of PAPs in the refinery project. The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development successfully compensated 99 per cent of the PAPs who were eligible for compensation. Some infrastructure works such as construction of 46 residential houses and improvement and expansion of Buseruka Health Centre have been completed and handed over to the ministry. 

The above notwithstanding, significant delays were noted in the overall implementation of the project, particularly in payment of PAPs and construction of resettlement infrastructure. Key activities in the Resettlement Action Plan such as procurement of a consultant to undertake monitoring and evaluation of the project, construction of schools and places of worship, as well as implementation of the livelihood restoration programme were delayed. The use of unapproved or obsolete valuation rates was noted in almost all the years of compensation and rates were not applied uniformly, thereby causing grievances and delays in the compensation process.

Failure to adhere to the PAP’s proposal during construction of resettlement houses also affected acceptance. It is hoped that the proposed recommendations will go a long way in improving the management of future compensation projects. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson. Can we call the next one. Let us receive all of them.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (CENTRAL GOVERNMENT) ON THE VALUE-FOR-MONEY AUDIT REPORT ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF SOLAR ENERGY INFRASTRUCTURE IN SELECTED EDUCATION AND HEALTH FACILITIES UNDER THE ENERGY FOR RURAL TRANSFORMATION PROJECT II

5.48
MS ANGELINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the minutes of the proceedings of the committee as it processed this report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes.

MS OSEGGE: I also beg to lay on the Table a copy of the signed original report of the committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the full text of the report.

MS OSEGGE: Mr Speaker, I would like to present the report of the Public Accounts Committee on the value-for-money audit on the implementation of solar energy infrastructure in selected education and health facilities under the Energy for Rural Transformation Project II (ERT II). I will follow the same procedure, if you may allow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed, honourable chairperson.

MS OSEGGE: Mr Speaker, key recommendations as far as the report is concerned are:
1. 	We should ensure that in future implementation of the programmes, the selection of beneficiaries is comprehensively undertaken by the implementing agencies in accordance with a clearly defined criterion. More guidelines need to be developed for the application of the established criteria. A weighting system could be introduced to avoid subjectivity in the selection process. 

2. 	We should also ensure that the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Ministry of Health closely monitor and enforce compliance of the needs assessment contract provisions by specifically visiting the schools during the process of undertaking and reviewing the energy needs assessment, to ensure full delivery of the contractual outputs.

3. 	The committee also said that we should ensure that the necessary approvals from the funders of the programme are properly planned and obtained in a timely manner. In addition, funds for contract effectiveness should be made available to contractors within the shortest time after contracting. I think we noticed cases of counterpart funding not being available in time.

4. 	Government should also ensure that future solar package installations are properly monitored and maintained for proper and continued functionality. 

5. 	There should be an assurance that the Ministry of Education and the Ministry of Health put in place asset replacement policies to ensure continued functionality of the infrastructure. This is because when they get spoilt, there is no one to repair them.

6. 	Government should also ensure that adequate measures are put in place for protection of the installations. We found many of them had been stolen.

7. 	Government should ensure that maintenance of the infrastructure encompasses provision of maintenance kits to the schools and health facilities, to be able to effectively operate and maintain the solar infrastructure now and upon project closure. 

8. 	There should be follow up with the implementing ministries to ensure that the contractors train and develop the capacity of the beneficiaries who should subsequently train others to install and maintain the solar packages. This was supposed to be part of the contract but it was not done.

9. 	The committee also recommends that a forensic audit be conducted to ascertain the actual installations and beneficiaries.

10. 	The committee further recommends that investigations be carried out by the Inspector General of Government (IGG) with a view to prosecute the responsible persons or officers and the contractors.

In conclusion, whereas the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development had undertaken specific interventions aimed at increasing access to energy through provision of energy technologies under the implementing sectors of health and education, inadequate planning, beneficiary selection and energy needs assessment resulted in irregular distribution or installation of packages and uninstalled packages staying uninstalled. This has led to underutilisation of energy output. In some instances, vandalism was reported due to poor security measures. 

Inadequate contract management, monitoring and supervision led to significant delays in implementation of the project. It is hoped that with the implementation of ERT III, the lessons learnt will be applied to fulfil the objectives of the project as it stands. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable, for that. Can we go to the next one.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (CENTRAL GOVERNMENT) ON THE VALUE-FOR-MONEY AUDIT ON THE REGULATION, MONITORING AND PROMOTION OF THE MINING SECTOR BY THE MINISTRY OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENI, DECEMBER 2015

5.48
MS ANGELINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the minutes of the proceedings of the committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes.

MS OSEGGE: Allow me to also lay on the Table the original copy of the signed report of the committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that too.

MS OSEGGE: Mr Speaker, this is a report of the Public Accounts Committee (Central Government) on the value-for-money audit on the regulation, monitoring and promotion of the mining sector by the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, December 2015.

Mr Speaker, I will still follow the procedures agreed and present to the House a summary of our recommendations and the conclusions of this report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

MS OSEGGE: Mr Speaker, the committee recommends as follows:

1. 	The accounting officer and the Directorate of Geological Survey and Mines should, with immediate effect, consider regulating and levying mineral fees from commercialised building materials.

2. 	The Minister of Energy and Mineral Development should ensure that the review process of the Mineral Regulatory Framework is fast-tracked so as to enhance the administration of the mineral sector for improved mineral exploitation and development.

3. 	It is also recommended that close monitoring of licensees operations should be done and prompt action taken against mining rights holders who contravene the terms and conditions of the secured licences.

3. 	The committee recommends that the IGG should investigate the directorate headed by the permanent secretary with the intention of prosecuting the culprits in various reported irregularities. 

4. 	The accounting officer should follow up and ensure that the National Minerals Laboratory in Entebbe gets its ISO accreditation with immediate effect.

5. 	The directorate responsible for minerals should track the results of tests carried out abroad to ensure that they comply with the requirements in place.

6. 	The accounting officer should put in place regulations aimed at streamlining export of samples and receipt of test results.

Mr Speaker, in conclusion, the committee says that Government of Uganda put in place the mining policy in 2001 and subsequently the enabling legislation in 2003 to guide the department of geological surveys in overseeing the mineral sector. However, regulating, monitoring and promoting the sector has not been effective as commercialised building materials and artisan and small scale mining operations, producing over 90 per cent of the national mineral output and employing over 200,000 people, have remained informal and unregulated. 

Whereas the number of issued mining licences increased from 157 in 2002 to 818 (192 per cent) in 2015, the inspection and monitoring coverage geared towards enforcing compliance with prescribed conditions and regulatory framework remained low at only four per cent. This has led to many non-compliant licensees not being followed up, resulting in loss of revenue to Government.

The Government should embark on the process of the review of the legal framework. It is important that the existing gaps in the regulatory and operational framework are addressed.

The committee noted that Uganda’s mineral sector remains underdeveloped with a variety of mineral endowments remaining unexploited due to failure to attract potential investors.

Further, the committee ascertained that mining companies are hoarding vital information on the quantities and quality of minerals that have been found and the potential revenue to the country.

The ministry, on the other hand, has had a lacklustre performance in its monitoring function, which should have enabled the compliance of such companies in accordance with provisions of the Mining Act, 2003. Mr Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable, for bringing this report. You have brought five reports, which help us reduce on the backlog that we keep suffering from as  Parliament. 

Honourable members, those are the five reports that have been given to you. I am now going to propose a motion for debate on each of them, one by one, and we see how to handle them. The motion that I propose for your debate is the motion that the report of the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) on the report of the Auditor-General for Financial Year 2016/2017 be adopted. 

If there is no debate at this moment, I will put the question so that the recommendations can be extracted and sent to the appropriate institutions of Government for implementation. We will get back the report, under rule 217 of our Rules of Procedure, on action taken on what would have been adopted by Parliament. I put the question that the report of the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) on the report of the Auditor-General for Financial Year 2016/2017 be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The question that I propose under item No. 12 for your debate is on the motion that the report of the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) on the report of the Auditor-General for the Financial Year 2015/2016 be adopted.

If there is no debate, I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) on the report of the Auditor-General for the Financial Year 2015/2016 be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Under Item No. 13 on the Order Paper, I propose for your debate that the report of the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) on the value-for-money audit on the compensation of project affected persons under the refinery project be adopted. That is the motion I propose for your debate. 

If there is no debate, I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) on the value-for-money audit on the compensation of project affected persons under the refinery project be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Under item No. 14, the motion that I propose for your debate is that the report of the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) on the value-for-money audit report on the implementation of solar energy infrastructure in selected education and health facilities under the Energy for Rural Transformation Project II be adopted. That is the motion for your debate. 

If there is no debate, I now put the question to this motion that the report of the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) on the value-for-money audit report on the implementation of solar energy infrastructure in selected education and health facilities under the Energy for Rural Transformation Project II be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is the final report from the Committee on Public Accounts. The motion that I propose for your debate is that the report of the Public Accounts committee (Central Government) on the value-for-money audit on the regulation, monitoring and promotion of the mining sector by the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development be adopted. That is the motion for your debate. 

5.58
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report on the regulation of minerals. 

I would like to urge the Auditor-General to move very swiftly on the quantities of the minerals that we export from Uganda and their true value. A lot of our people in the islands, Mubende and some in Kigezi have been undertaking mining and mineral development. However, we would like to know how much Uganda is worth. How much do we earn? If we export these minerals, are there returns to the people or to the Treasury? Who manages these mines? 

Recently - Members might have read this in the papers - Government allowed and licensed the setting up of the Africa Gold Refinery in Entebbe. However, we were surprised when the police raided the factory. The reason was that there was suspected smuggling and undeclared gold from a blacklisted country, Venezuela, which found its way to Entebbe, Uganda, and there were clashes. The police and the army were deployed. The last we saw was the Attorney-General’s opinion, stating that since that gold, allegedly from Venezuela, had been cleared and declared to Uganda Revenue Authority (URA), it was normal gold, yet we all know Uganda cannot have over seven tonnes of pure gold. That is why I am calling on the Auditor-General.

Is Uganda turning itself into a conduit for smuggled minerals such as gold? How much gold deposit do we have? Can we sustain a refinery in Entebbe to handle Uganda’s gold or it is some other gold from somewhere else? We saw the police and the army pulling ropes over the entry into the refinery and seizing gold. Later, the Attorney-General ordered for the release of all the gold, without telling us which source this gold, amounting to seven tonnes, was got from. It becomes a matter of concern.

Our only eyes would be the Auditor-General and the Attorney-General himself, if he was around this Parliament, to tell us what exactly is happening so that as a country we do not lose money if we have the gold deposits. If indeed, as they say, we are a conduit of other mines from other countries, we should know. It was so disturbing that one can export seven tonnes of gold without paying taxes to URA; that is very serious, Mr Speaker. It is as if we have taken these mines and deposits as personal deposits and yet the Constitution very clearly states that all minerals belong to Government.  

If you allow people to export these vital and critical minerals without taxes being remitted for the people, we risk losing this resource and once it goes, we may never recover it. Secondly, it is being individualised and personalised. People with money own mines to the disadvantage of our poor people. The poor people set up their mines but they are expelled from those mines. This has come to pass in Bukuya and other places. 

Lastly, as a country, we need to know how much we are gaining from this. If indeed it is the seven tonnes as we hear them – For seven tonnes of pure gold to leave the country and we remain the same, it is a matter that needed to be interrogated.  We needed our auditors to tell us how much we lost without allowing these foreigners, with their local counterparts, become billionaires overnight at the expense of the suffering Ugandans. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the very eloquent debate from the honourable member for Lwemiyaga on the very genuine and legitimate concern he has raised does not fall within what we are debating now. This report checked out the status and viability of the set of regulations and monitoring mechanisms that we have and they have given their report on what needs to be changed and done properly. You can bring a motion and we have a full debate on that issue. 

For now, it is on the value-for- money audit on the regulation, monitoring and promotion of the mining sector by the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. It is basically about the framework that the ministry has in place in terms of monitoring. If there are gaps in the law, that is what they are pointing out and we should be able to deal with them. 

Can I propose that we deal with this matter and at an appropriate time, we can have a debate on those issues? They are legitimate issues; how can these things happen like that? However, this is not the correct housing for that debate. Can I put the question to this? Honourable members, I put the question to the motion that the report of the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) on the value-for-money audit on the regulation, monitoring and promotion of the mining sector by the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, December 2015 be adopted. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. Thank you, hon. Angelline Osegge, for stepping in and bringing what the committee did under your leadership and bringing it to fruition in Parliament today. Thank you, honourable chairperson of the Committee on Public Accounts for allowing this to happen because this clears your desk and you almost start on a clean slate, where we want to be. As we start, you can now start with new items and we move on.

Honourable members, this is the situation we have. Let me just outline the rules then I can handle what you would like to say. As of today, we have received – let us have that laid on the Table and then I make this communication. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

6.06
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Johnathan Odur): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the alternative ministerial policy statement for rehabilitation, relief and disaster preparedness for the Financial Year 2019/2020. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the appropriate committee to handle. 

Honourable members, this is what I wanted to brief the House about: Our rules provide a timeline on how we handle this budget process. From rule 148 of the Rules of Procedure, the ministerial policy statements together with the alternative policy statements that have been submitted to this House, must be examined by the committees and presented to this House by the 20th of this month. You can see that we have lost a lot of time already. That is why the timeline initially said by 15th of last month. We have lost a lot of time. 

By the 20th of this month, we should be receiving reports from the sectoral committees that have examined the ministerial policy statements and aspects of the budget that are already in their particular sectors. The House should debate these reports from all the sectoral committees - that is what we call the budget debate on the policy statements and other things - and conclude its debate by 30th April. When it concludes its debate, it must transmit the result of the House’s debate to the Budget Committee so that the Budget Committee has sufficient time to harmonise all those things that have been presented to the House from the different sectors. The sectoral committees can then harmonise the figures and submit to the Budget Committee so that the Budget Committee can work on the final document that the House will debate in terms of the budget.

Under sub rule (3), the Budget Committee shall present its report to the House not later than the 15th May. Therefore, by the 15th May, we expect the Budget Committee to come back to the House and guide us on what we need to do with the budget. Thereafter, the Committee of Supply will consider what has come from the Budget Committee and must finish it by 20th May. 

Those are the timelines that we have in our rules to guide the budget process. These timelines are extracted from the Public Finance Management Act so that when we do business here, we are in tandem with what the principle law provides.

Of course, the time given is that we should finish with that by 20th May because there are Bills that are submitted and rule 149 makes a declaration on that. By now, we have already received all the Bills that operationalise the collection of taxes - the revenue Bills. They were already laid here - the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill; all those were laid here and they are with the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

All those Bills and items must be concluded by 20th May because when we finish by 20th May, you have one budget Bill called the Appropriation Bill, which we must deal with and pass by 30th May. When we conclude passing the Appropriation Bill by 30th May, it means that we have passed the budget. 

The Chairperson of the Budget Committee is just looking at me and thinking, “What a job we have to do in this very short time!” This is what we have forced on ourselves. The culpable people know themselves and some of them are looking at me. However, we will have to find a way of trying to gain time and finish with this within this timeframe.  By 30th May, we should actually sign out of this Parliament the Appropriation Bill, supplying all the figures. All the details for all the votes should be completed. 

I thought I should give you this brief so that we know the enormous task. We are going to have to work beyond the normal schedule to catch up and finish these things within time. I urge members of the committees to be there. The leadership of the committees will, of course, be there; I know they are committed people and they will do the right thing to catch up with time. Members, be there in time when the committee meetings are called. 

That is the reason plenary will be suspended today, to give opportunity for full time engagement. That is also the reason that other standing committee operations have been suspended and all other activities have been ceased with the exception of those who have been allowed to do a few things so that we can try and gain time and do these things. It will not be anybody else looking bad; it will be us if we fail to finish within the time that is in the law. I thought I should communicate this before we suspend plenary.

6.13
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker –(Mr Okupa rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They are going to open up these matters. Can you let the Government Chief Whip speak? 

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I understand the reason you have taken time to explain this. However, we think that we all have to work under pressure now and this is caused by the delay of the submission of the policy statements. That is why I thought I should say something before the Government Chief Whip speaks. You can now understand the pressure we are going to put ourselves in. Next time, do better please, because if we fail to beat the deadline, it is Parliament that is going to be blamed, not the Executive. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stood up immediately after the disposing of the last report presented by the former chairperson of the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) just to thank her and her team and I am being sincere. (Applause)

This committee is, of course, chaired by the Opposition. We had a very huge backlog of these reports but as we speak, at least we can smile a bit. I thought that I should stand and congratulate her and her entire team. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We were also hoping that you would take responsibility and encourage Members by saying that we made mistakes; please help us so that we can correct them. It would also energise them. (Laughter)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Yes, Sir. However, as you continued to guide this House, more issues came up and I think it is befitting that I sincerely inform this august House that as chairperson of the National Resistance Movement (NRM) Caucus, I announced yesterday when we sat that I had suspended all the activities I had. I have scheduled meetings on a quarterly basis with regional whips and leaders of committees. I suspended all those meetings so that we can handle the policy statements. I am just committing that I will continue whipping Members to attend committees, which are processing the policy statements.

Regarding the late submissions, it is really very unfortunate that up to now we still receive policy statements very late, which disorganises the running of the House business. For that, I apologise and pledge that I will continue interfacing with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. This is because the process of writing the ministerial policy statements has a bearing on the budget call circulars that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development circulates to the ministries. 

If they do not come early enough for the permanent secretaries to organise these policy statements, the ministers in charge of these ministries are left with nothing to do but to wait for the budget call circulars. Sometimes they come late and sometimes in bits and then the complete policy statement cannot be produced for submission in the House on time. We shall continue identifying where the gaps are so that we abide by the timeframe that we set for ourselves.

As for hon. Ssekikubo, I would like to assure him that I will tell the minister in charge of energy to bring a list of all the minerals that we have in Uganda because we have that record. However, you guided very well that we will have an opportunity to discuss a substantive presentation from the Rt hon. Ssekikubo and the Government will come in to explain –(Interjection)- Yes, “Rt Hon. Ssekikubo” because he is a veteran Member of this House. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Chairperson budget committee, do you want to say something?

6.17
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thought that the rules that you have just read are very important. Unfortunately, many people do not go to these rules to check on what they provide in terms of deadlines. 

As we suspend the plenary sittings, I thought you should issue a circular to the committee chairpersons in writing so that they are fully aware – (Interjection) - a directive or whatever. I know he has read but many of them are not here. Hon. Bukenya is there but many are not here.

Mr Speaker, from experience, these deadlines have been pushed up to the tail-end of the process and we have had to work under a lot of pressure to conclude the process. You will see that the last presentation will happen here around 29th May if we do not take this matter seriously at this stage. They will keep on pushing this matter forward. As I speak, many committees have not started meetings. I keep going around and in fact, all have not started –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I know of a committee that would have finished tomorrow. The Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs could have finished tomorrow if they had finished with the people who appeared before them today. I am saying there are those who have worked ahead but there is also the category you are talking about. The administrative communication will be issued to guide the leaders of the committees.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, 20th April when we are supposed to start receiving reports from the sectoral committees will be a Saturday. The nearest date, which will also involve Easter Monday, would be 23rd April. 

In accordance with what the rules say, I am not going to declare a recess. What I am going to do is to suspend plenary so that all the committees work hard and by 23rd April, which will be the first sitting day after Easter, we restart here. By that time, all the reports from the sectoral committees should be ready so that we can debate and finish them in about four sittings so that we can be ready to transmit to the Committee on Budget by 15th of next month. If we are able to do that, it would help.

Therefore, committee chairpersons who are here, please take this seriously. If you have persons who have failed to appear, do not wait for them. Do not postpone or delay your activities because you think somebody must first appear. The policy statements and everything are already with you. Examine them and if you have gaps, report to the House and say, “we called so-and-so but they did not show up”. If there are gaps that need to be filled, bring that to the House and we sort it from here. After all, you are doing these things to facilitate the functioning of the main assembly.

Honourable members, I will not, therefore, suspend plenary indefinitely because it is clear that the date is already known. Therefore, plenary is now suspended up to the 23rd of April. Accordingly, the House is adjourned to 23 April 2019 at 2 o’clock. For those of you who subscribe to the Christian faith, have a happy Easter. (Applause)

(The House rose at 6.19 p.m. and adjourned until 23 April 2019 at 2.00 p.m.)



Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.
 

