

Thursday, 15 April 2021

Parliament met at 2.58 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I have two issues to communicate. The first is to congratulate Hon. Kakoba Onyango, the former Member of Parliament for Buikwe North in the Sixth and Eighth parliaments and was also in the Pan African Parliament. He is now the Secretary General of the Conference of Great Lakes Region. 

Hon. Kakoba had just completed his first term as a Secretary General. In that capacity, he is also the Chief Diplomat of the Kinshasa-based body. The Great Lakes Conference includes Uganda, Kenya, Zambia, Burundi, Rwanda, Tanzania, Sudan, South Sudan, Democratic Republic of Congo, Congo Brazzaville and Central African Republic.

On Monday, we were able to discuss with my colleagues in the Great Lakes Region to extend his tenure by giving him a second term of three years as Secretary General. I would like to congratulate and wish him well in that position. 

Secondly, yesterday I received a petition from private teachers on matters of their welfare. They are still under lockdown and therefore not earning. They also came to inquire about the Shs 20 billion given by the President. As you know, that is a matter, which we have been discussing in this House; wanting to establish who is eligible and how it can be accessed. This remains an issue. 

They came to petition about that money. They say that since they are not earning, they deserve to have access to the money. I hope that this time, Government will tell us where the money is, how it can be accessed and who is eligible among the teachers.

The other thing I found interesting is when they told me that originally they were part of the 19 groups of Emyooga but they were removed in a manner they did not understand. I hope the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will tell us whether the teachers were part of the group approved to receive Emyooga and how they were removed.

Those are the two matters I wanted to communicate. There are few matters of national concern. 
  
3.03
Mr lyandro komakech (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu.): Madam Speaker, I rise to move a matter of national importance in relation to the failure of Government Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) to carry out all Government printing with Uganda Printing and Publishing Corporation (UPPC) as required under Section (5) of the Uganda Printing and Publishing Corporation Act cap. 330 as well as need for financial assistance to Uganda Printing and Publishing Corporation. 

This corporation is created under the Uganda Printing and Publishing Corporation Act and grants it the mandate to, among others, provide printing and publishing facilities to Government Ministries, Departments and parastatal bodies, and to private individuals and organisations.

The broad mandate and function of the corporation places critical public and Government information, including security documents such as the Uganda Gazette and all Government legislation, in its custody.

Whereas Uganda Printing and Publishing Corporation is the Government mandated printer and custodian of Government legislation and security documents, the corporation is not supported financially to fully execute its mandate.

The machinery at the corporation’s office in Entebbe is worn out and in need of urgent replacement as was noted by the Auditor-General’s Report of 2015.

The lack of modern machinery has affected the work of UPPC and has resulted in delay in delivering contracted work hence outsourcing of contracted works to private organisations, which have better and modern machinery and equipment. 

As a result, the corporation has lost 98 per cent market share due to failure to recapitalise and equip its production line with the good state-of-the-art equipment that can cope with the changing consumer behaviour, in spite of it having monopoly over their competitors to provide general printing and publishing services to Government and its MDAs.

In spite of the Act granting it monopoly over Government printing works, most MDAs do not adhere to these legal requirement and instead engage the services of private printers to provide those services. This has not only affected the revenue of UPPC but also led to loss of Government revenue through taxes and other benefits.

I know that whereas the minister in charge of the presidency who is the line minister for UPPC is empowered to, after approval by Cabinet by statutory instrument, to direct any ministry or department to have its printing and publishing work done by the corporation, it has not been done. This has affected the work and operation of UPPC since it cannot raise its own revenue to meet its obligations, pay its staff adequately and acquire modern printing equipment.

Whereas the corporation was given additional obligation to operate a joint venture with Veridos, a company incorporated under the laws of Germany to print driving permits, Government has not invested any additional fund in UPPC to ensure smooth operation of this joint venture and also to prepare it to take over the issuance of the driving permits at the end of the joint venture with Veridos.

My prayers are:
    1. The Minister in charge of the Presidency should forthwith direct all Government MDAs to carry out all their printing with UPPC as required in Section (5)(i) and (ii) of the UPPC Act cap 330.

    2. Government should, in the upcoming budget, provide funding to UPPC for purposes of acquiring a modern and state of the art printing machinery.

I beg to move.

The Speaker: Thank you, Hon. Komakech. You raised very serious issues, in particular the failure by Government to follow the law which we made ourselves with regard to the printing of Government work and also the failure to equip our own yet we have been talking about, “Buy Uganda Build Uganda.” 

Therefore, the Minister for the Presidency is required to come here in a fortnight and explain these issues to the satisfaction of the House, so that we can support the Uganda Printing and Publishing Corporation. 

However, I also invite the Budget Committee to take an interest in the provisions under the budget for this corporation, so that when you report, you have some recommendations related to its further equipment. 

3.09
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning failure by the Minister of Health to appoint the commencement date for the Mental Health Act, 2019. 

The Parliament of Uganda passed the new Mental Health Act, 2019 and the same was assented to by the President of the Republic of Uganda, and later gazetted in September 2019.

The main objectives of the Act, among others, is to ensure the safety and protection of persons with mental illness and the protection of their rights and safety of the people, who come into contact with them.

Madam Speaker, section 1 of the Mental Health Act, 2019 provides that this Act shall come into force on a date to be appointed by the minister by statutory instrument and different days may be appointed for the commencement of the different provisions.

Without the commencement date appointed, the Act in question cannot commence, which leaves the lives and rights of the intended beneficiaries, mental health service users, at risk of having their rights and freedoms abused.

On Saturday, 10 April, 2021, NBS TV ran a worrying story from Ntoroko. The district leadership had resolved to arrest all persons with mental disability roaming the streets as a security measure taken to stop threats from the Allied Democratic Front Rebel Group (ADF). 

In regard to the above story ran by NBS TV, such intended acts threaten human rights, especially of people with mental illness. 

My prayers are that: 

    1. The Parliament of Uganda calls the Minister of Health to explain the delay in the appointment of the commencement date for the Mental Health Act, 2019. 

    2. The minister fixes or appoints the commencement date for the Mental Health Act, 2019, as soon as possible.

Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Hon. Aol, for raising that important issue, because this House took time to research and enact the law in 2019. The minister is required to come on Tuesday to explain to this House why there is no commencement date two years after the law was made. She will also answer the other questions on Tuesday. 

3.12 
MS NORAH BIGIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity you have given me to raise this important issue before this august House.

I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the closure of Butiaba Health Centre IV in Buliisa District. We are aware that Buliisa District was hit by floods mid-April last year. Due to that, Butiaba Health Centre IV was submerged and they were forced to move to Butiaba Primary School, where they have been operating since 23 July 2020.

This very primary school has been hosting three schools because of COVID-19, but from 18 March 2021, the health centre was vacated and they were told to leave the school. As I speak now, the people of Butiaba have not been accessing health services since 18 March 2021. 

You should know that travelling from Butiaba to Biiso is about 15 kilometres before you reach another health centre. From Butiaba to Buliisa Health Centre V is almost 35 kilometres. 

Madam Speaker, it is very important that this Government understands what they call “emergency.” The Government is aware of this situation because the Prime Minister of this country has been in Buliisa more than two times, and he is aware of the situation in Buliisa, especially Butiaba Health Centre IV. 

It is my prayer at this very moment that the Government of Uganda, through the Minister of Health, regards this as a very important issue. Out of urgency for them, they should provide health services to the people of Butiaba Subcounty, because we are talking of a number of close to 30,000 people who do not access health services; look at the women in this area, and the elderly. 

I think it is only important that the Ministry of Health prioritises this and makes sure that the people of Buliisa access immediate health services. 

I beg to submit. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Hon. Nyendwoha. Honourable members, the situation is serious. First, the Government Health Centre was overrun by floods and, therefore, it had to be moved to a school but that was before the schools reopened, and now they have been required to abandon the school. 

Therefore, there is no health centre at all in Butiaba. This is a very serious issue. Let us require an answer from the Minister of Health on Wednesday next week as regards to when the health centre of Butiaba that was destroyed by the floods will be rehabilitated. In the meantime, when the health centre is not yet reinstated, where can the people of Butiaba get medical treatment? Thank you. 

3.15
MR APOLLO OFWONO (NRM, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I rise on the issue of Tororo Municipal Central market. The Government of Uganda, under Markets and Agriculture Trade Improvement Programme (MATIP) constructed and improved several markets, in cities and municipalities in Uganda.

Most of these markets have been completed and were commissioned by His Excellency, the President of Uganda before the last presidential and parliamentary election. 

The Ministry of Local Government, being the line ministry, was responsible for coordinating of the commissioning of these markets. However, as we talk now, these markets are not operational. The market vendors are currently operating under very harsh conditions because of the bad weather. 

My prayers are:

    1.  I request the Minister of Local Government to intervene and speed up the opening of this market.
 
    2. There is a Market (Amendment) Bill, which is being handled by the ministry, but let them speed up so that it can also be operational. 

    3. Thirdly, there is the issue of disbursement of Emyooga funds for Tororo District. The Government of Uganda and the Ministry of Microfinance have been supporting groups across the country, with funds to enable implementation of groups under Emyooga Programme. Tororo District has several groups, which registered, opened accounts and are waiting for training and disbursement of these funds.

Currently, most districts have received this money but Tororo does not know when it will receive the money. You know, according to the survey carried, it is now one of the disadvantaged districts. 

Therefore, we want to know the programme; when are they receiving the money? We are just in dilemma. Let the ministry come out and tell the public when these people will benefit. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Yeri. Honourable members, the Minister of Local Government is required to come next week on Wednesday and explain to the House why Tororo Central Market, commissioned last year, is still not operational. Secondly, the Minister of Finance, I do not know what you can say about the Emyooga money for Tororo.

3.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much Madam Speaker and thank you Hon. Yeri for raising that question. I will check tomorrow what is happening to Tororo and then get to Hon. Yeri directly tomorrow morning on that matter.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

3.20
MR OKIN OJARA (Independent, Chua West County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to raise this matter of national importance which involve the safety of our bank savings and the life of the customers who normally deposit their savings in commercial banks.

Madam Speaker, it has come to my notice that there is a network of fraudsters involving bank officials, Judiciary and even some lawyers within the city here who normally connive. After noticing your savings in the bank, they connive and then go to the Judiciary to issue statements and orders to siphon that money from the respective bank accounts.

Madam Speaker, the cases in point is that in 2018, a South Sudan’s General lost $740,000 from his account purportedly from a court order that actually attached that account because of a failed business.

Similarly, an Eritrean also lost Shs 1.2 billion from a commercial bank here under a similar arrangement. There was connivance and then a court order was issued and account is garnisheed.

Most recently, and that is where my area of concerns lies, we have a one Oyik Kenneth Charles who had saved with Standard Charted Bank to the tune of $200,000. Under a similar arrangement, his money was siphoned from the bank and then withdrawn by these fraudsters. This is a common phenomenon, which we need to attend to and address. 

My prayers are to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; first, I am not sure whether they are aware of this kind of scenario happening in the country.

Secondly, to the regulatory authorities - Bank of Uganda, Financial Intelligence Authority - whether they are aware of this kind of scenario and what they are doing to address this kind of fraud that is happening.

Thirdly, to the Ministry of Internal Affairs which has the prerogative mandated to investigate criminal activities. These fraudsters are all over Kampala and defrauding people of their savings. What has the Ministry of Internal Affairs done to investigate this fraudulent activities and then probably apprehending the culprits? I hope my prayers will be addressed as soon as possible. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much Hon. Okin. I do not know whether the Minister of Finance wishes to say something because this really goes to the core of our banking industry, and then maybe the Minister of Internal Affairs will say something. For the case of the Eritrean, apart from taking the money out of his account in full, they also killed him- I think I remember that one.

3.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable thank you very much for this information. We all want to bank with commercial banks and be sure that our savings are safe, and they are handled with integrity. I think the Central Bank is doing all it can to ensure that this is solved.
I think these specific cases can be handled if we got more information about which commercial bank, who was affected and then see the details of the case. 

I think since the Minister of Internal Affairs is here, the easiest and the most important thing to do, if something happens, is to report to the bank and at the same time report to the police so that the matter can be investigated. 

I will get more details, see whether this is a general trend, and then see how the Central Bank can tighten its own supervision. However, the Minister of Internal Affairs can be able to make some comments on these fraudulent activities in the banking institution.

3.26
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Jeje Odongo ): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank Hon. Okin for raising this matter. I would like to inform him that on the three cases that he has mentioned, particularly involving the South Sudanese, the Eritrean- I do not remember the third one, I would like to inform you that the department of criminal investigations did undertake investigation in all these cases. 

I think in one of them, if I remember correctly, prosecution was undertaken but I do not have specific details. However, I do recollect all the three cases have been investigated and specific actions have been taken.

However, if you allow me, I can go and dig up this matter with the Criminal Investigation Department and report specifically on what happened on each case next week as you may wish. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Hon. Ojara, if you could forward the details to Hon. Jeje Odongo and Hon. Bahati so that this matter can be handled.

3.28
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. A couple of weeks ago, we raised a concern of many Government entities that lack leadership. One of them is Uganda Human Rights Commission. 

It is close to a year since Hon. Med Kaggwa, the Chairperson of Uganda Human Rights Commission, died. Up to now, there has not been any replacement. 

Madam Speaker, you gave us a task as the Committee on Human Rights to investigate human rights violation during the 2021 elections. Indeed, Uganda Human Rights Commission is one of the institutions that we wanted to interact with. They, however, wrote to us saying they do not have the mandate of appearing before our committee without the chairperson of the commission. To date, they say they cannot come to our committee to share with us what they have in as far as human rights violations are concerned.

Through you, Madam Speaker, I do not know how best the appointing authority could expedite – It has taken a full year without having the leadership of Uganda Human Rights Commission, and yet we know that there are so many issues Ugandans are concerned with including compensation – (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Hon. Sebaggala, my senior colleague, for giving way. 

The information I would like to give the honourable member is that Uganda Human Rights Commission was not fair to you, and they are giving you misleading information. It is because they wrote a report and gave their comments on how the 2021 elections were free and fair without violence. 

Therefore, if they managed to write that report, and then when you call them to the committee, they refuse, then they are disrespecting the committee. I know that gentleman who is the acting chairperson very well.

We need to investigate the commission. How does the acting chairperson of the commission write about the elections as free and fair and then when you call him before the committee, he fears to come and yet you are investigating what the Speaker directed on. That is the information I wanted to give you.

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, they put it in writing and they quoted that the law does not allow them to interface with us on such a very important matter without their leader. 

I request your indulgence. There are so many Government entities that are lacking leadership, and yet His Excellency the President is the appointing authority. Given the fact that we are now done with elections, I think he has time to look at those entities so that people can be appointed for those entities to operate normally.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue of the leadership of Uganda Human Rights Commission, IGG and Equal Opportunities Commission are all matters I asked the Attorney-General to come and update us this week on why we still do not have their leaderships, and he has not come. 

So, I am directing that the Attorney-General comes here on Tuesday to explain when these bodies will have substantive heads because we are really looking stupid. How can a country of 40 million fail to find just four people to head these commissions? 

Let us go to Item 3. 

Hon. Muheire, I know you want to talk about tobacco, but about a month ago, the Minister of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives answered your question on tobacco. Was it Hon. Timuzigu who asked the question?

3.32
MR DANIEL MUHEIRWE (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Three months ago, this House passed a supplementary budget of close to Shs 3 billion to pay tobacco farmers who were defrauded by sponsoring companies that were licenced by our Government. 

Immediately we passed that supplementary budget, all the other beneficiaries started earning money. To our surprise, our peasants have not benefitted from that money and yet it is now almost end of the quarter. 

I am requesting that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the other ministers in line with that issue come and give a commitment on when our farmers will be paid. Give us at least a deadline. 

Farming tobacco is so tedious. You start preparing the bed in December and you sell in October. Most of the students who are children of those tobacco farmers have not gone to school. It has become a problem wherever we have public meetings. Let me get the information from Kibaale. 

THE SPEAKER: I would like to know from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – we passed this money. Even the debate on why the Government should spend money to pay for these investors was really heated here. We gave you the money. So, tell us where it is. 

MS KISEMBO: Madam Speaker, let me give this piece of information as the minister comes to respond. Just like my colleague, Hon. Muheirwe, has rightly put, I come from Kibaale and we have farmers who were largely affected. They have been expecting payment. Since the supplementary budget was passed, I have received so many calls and the question the people ask is, “When are we getting our money we were promised?” Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We should not even be discussing this matter because we provided the money. 

3.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING): Madam Speaker, when we were passing this money, you asked the question how Government is going to recover the money. We want to thank the House for passing this supplementary budget. You passed it with conditions that we should be able to get the money back from the companies which were supposed to pay the farmers. 

After the supplementary budget was passed, we were supposed to do a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with the tobacco companies and then start the payment. Nevertheless, I do not have the information on where we are at the moment. I promise that before the end of this month, this money which was approved by Parliament will be passed over to the farmers.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you are taking us too far. Where is the MoU? That is what we want to know. Has it been done or it has not been done? Did you people go to sleep after we passed the money?

MR BAHATI: Can I inform the House on Tuesday next week? 

THE SPEAKER: Yes. We want an answer next Tuesday. I do not want to see this matter coming back and yet we have provided the resources for it. 

MR BAHATI: Okay, Madam Speaker. 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you for this opportunity. I wanted to seek clarification from the minister. Indeed, the minister should stop fooling the House. Every year, whenever this Parliament passes a supplementary – moreover they first come to the House and put the House on pressure to pass supplementary budgets, but releasing the money to the rightful people becomes a very big problem.

So, I would like the minister to state very clearly what he means by “next week”. On which day are the farmers going to receive their money? 

I remember about two years ago before the COVID-19 pandemic, a supplementary budget was passed, and part of the money was supposed to pay some SACCOS, including Agaro SACCOS that serves Pader, Agago, Lamwo and Kitgum. It was promised part of that supplementary budget, but up to now, the money has never come to Agaro SACCOS. We do not know where the money is. Moreover, the House is always duped to pass such monies.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us wait on Tuesday when the minister will tell us where the MoU signed is, where the money is and when they are going to pay the farmers. 

Let us go to Item 3.

STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER ON MISSING PERSONS

3.37
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Jeje Odongo): Madam Speaker, I thank you for giving me, once again, an opportunity to update you on this particular subject. Following a question by Hon. Ibrahim Semujju Nganda, on the Floor of this Parliament, on a matter relating to a person he claimed that was missing, you directed that I make a statement in response to that inquiry.

On 4 February, 2021, I made a statement presenting a list of 44 names of persons that originally had been claimed to be missing.

On 4 March, following what I heard earlier being said and following your directive to give a more comprehensive list of missing persons, I again made a statement in which I presented a list of 177 names which indicated where the person was arrested from, when the person was arrested, why the person was arrested and showing, at the time of reporting, what had happened to that person.

In the debate following my presentation, Hon. Mathias Mpuuga presented a list of 423 names of missing persons on behalf of the National Unity Platform. I promised to look into that list and indeed, in the course of that debate, honourable colleagues also sent me chits bearing names of persons they claimed were missing.

Today, I am once again presenting to you, in fulfillment of what I had promised, a list of individuals that have been arrested since 18 November, 2020 to date. The list I am presenting clearly indicates that from 18 to 19 November, 2020, 269 cases involving riotous situations in the country were registered; cases and not persons.

Of these, 175 persons were taken to court, four of whom the Attorney-General was able to conclude and resolve; 90 of the 269 cases are still under inquiry; 1,035 suspects were arrested; 901 have been charged in court and among those was Hon. Robert Kyagulanyi. 734 were remanded after being presented to court, 167 were released on court bail, 113 were released on police bond and they included Hon. Patrick Oboi Amuriat. 21 were cleared by police and released.

51 convicted individuals were sentenced as follows: 28 were sentenced for community service, 20 were cautioned and three were imprisoned for six months. Regrettably, 54 persons of the 1,100 we are talking about were killed during that period of the riots of the 18th to 19th. 45 of these were male, six were female and three were male juveniles.

Of the 45 males who were killed, one died out of a car accident involving vehicle number UAW 827N. Toward election day and after, more people were arrested for election related offences. These have either been charged in court, remanded or are still held by security agencies to assist in investigations. The list of these I have attached as annex (a) to this report.

Of the 423 persons that Hon. Mathias Mpuuga presented, 58 have been released or are on remand. We have not been able to verify the whereabouts of 365 because the list was blank; it did not indicate the time they were arrested or the location they were arrested from to enable us follow up this matter.

However, intelligence reports so far seem to indicate that some of these individuals could be hiding in villages, and other places for fear of being arrested for various offences committed.

The list of the 423 individuals I have now summarised in annex (b) attached to this statement. In conclusion, this statement which I am making today, we should remember, is a continuation of our conversation as Parliament on the matter of missing persons. Secondly, it is a fulfillment of my promise which I made on 4th March that I would continue to brief this august House as long as I continue to get new developments and new information on this matter. 

Finally, this statement is to clearly show that the persons are not missing but they were arrested and have been processed as I have indicated in the statement earlier on. Madam Speaker, I beg to report. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, minister. I am trying to make sense of the annexures because I can see the Uganda Government prison Kitalya, date of arrival 8th January on remand and there is a long list. I also see people taken to court martial 11th, 14th December, 25th February – The dates are really -

3.47
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The list of the missing people being accounted for by the Minister of Internal Affairs is not satisfactory - he has not accounted for all of them. 
Besides, when you arrest people, why don’t you subject them to the laws of Uganda; when people are kept either in police custody or military detention, in complete disregard of the 48-hour rule - To date, you have also accepted that there are still 90 people under inquiry without being taken to courts of law.

Honourable minister, why don’t you help our people better. When we say we are under a dictatorial regime, are we wrong? That you cannot subject people who were arrested to the laws of Uganda? I personally stood surety for Hon. Patrick Amuriat Oboi in Gulu but he was arrested for nothing. He was not allowed to hold rallies.

Honourable minister, we are very sad that even when we debate in Parliament here, we are not taken to be effective because we have missing people but we continue to do business as usual. It is the guns which are turned on us if we decide to go for demonstration.

I asked some of these people how you can support Uganda and keep abusing the rights of people, when you get equipment from our friends, the development partners and other countries for Police to operate with? 

There should be some conditions not to allow outright human rights abuse, without even hiding it. Sometimes, at least some curtains should be put in order to show that you have not done this but this is outrightly done.

Our partners continue to support this. Why do we then send vehicles, teargas and all this to abuse the rights of Ugandans? Ugandans deserve better. If we all follow laws, what is in the Constitution and our laws which we make here, I do not think –(Member timed out)

MR KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, I am moving on a point of procedure.

THE SPEAKER: I want to know under which rule?

MR KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, the minister has presented a very comprehensive list, for which I am the Shadow Minister and part of the list is what we presented as the National Unity Platform.

We would have loved to give us an opportunity to study his response and the list he has presented, and come back to this Parliament with a comprehensive response to that response. We want to put name to a particular location and be clear to detail.

Right now, we may not be able to respond adequately to that list. We beg that we stay the debate and you give us an opportunity because the matter of disappearance of our people is continuing. For us to make a quick spot-on response, it may not be in the best interest of the country.

We beg for your indulgence, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I appreciate what you are saying but I think there are other members who are not of your party who want to say a few things. Let us listen to a few other members then we shall take a decision. However, of course, you are entitled to get the information, so that you can either confirm or advise on what is happening. We shall come back to it; do not worry.

3.53
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Obongi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you for this opportunity. Honourable minister, I would like you to refer to your contradictory statement, “There are no missing persons”.

When you were also referring to the list provided by Hon. Mpuuga, you provided a list of missing persons derived from that list; that you were not able to establish where they are, by virtue of the fact that the information provided to you did not indicate clearly where they were arrested from.

My main point here is, can you first admit that there are missing persons because the record must be set right? Madam Speaker, if you follow the statement of Government of Uganda within and outside - particularly the one of outside which I am referring to – it was from the UN, where Uganda’s representative to the UN was quoted as saying, “There were no people who were kidnapped”, therefore going to the same issue that there are no missing persons.

Set the record right, honourable minister. This is not an issue to criminalise you. Given the mere fact that this issue is brought by you, it means that people still respect you as a responsible person. What will you say, the day Ugandans refuse to be arrested? What will you say the day Ugandans refuse to seek for explanation from you about their missing people? Uganda has this history.

Madam Speaker, I would like to say this on behalf of the people of Obongi, whom I represent here. We went through this kind of pain but because of our isolation where you may not see mass media - the internet was cut off – people were subjected to this but we still have not gotten sufficient responses from the Government. People are giving up in all directions.

Therefore, I say that Ugandans should bear this and we, the people from the north, should stand with the people of Buganda. Majority of the people who are missing this time round – if you check - are from Buganda here. 

In the past, kidnaps and missing people were from the north and east because of the concentration and epicenter of dissent against this regime being in the north and east. Some people thought we were telling lies about the badness of this Government.

That is why these days, much as Buganda has done well in our view - as people from the Opposition because they voted massively for the Opposition - many people from the north are saying that when we were crying, you people from Buganda did not support us. You taste it now but I do not like that position. Mine is that bad is bad; good is good. Join us, those of you who are in pain –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know you are on the microphone. You do not have to shout. (Laughter)

MR FUNGAROO: Madam Speaker, I pray that we stand together. We should congratulate the people of Buganda for joining us who were crying first. We should now cry together with them; we should not say they should be left alone. I stand with Buganda.

3.56
MR ROBERT CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister spoke about people who were arrested for electoral offences. I would like to find out from you, honourable minister, whether the elections are still ongoing, to the effect that on your list, you still have people who were arrested for electoral offences.

Secondly, do you ever think that this power you are using and misusing to arrest, kidnap, detain people arbitrarily will one day shift to another force and that this very power can be used against you?

Don’t you think these people you are detaining have families that are suffering? They have children, wives, parents and are traumatised. They are looking forward to seeing their people, at least dead or alive. 

Why don’t you have pity over these people, honourable minister? We have well facilitated courts of law. Why don’t you arraign them before the courts?

My other disappointment is about taking civilians to military courts. Why do you apply double standards? Uganda is supposed to be a democratic country. The Court Martial was created for soldiers, specifically the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF). It is under the UPDF Act. Why do you subject civilians to military court yet they have never even been part of the military? 

The people you are detaining in the various prisons that you have talked about – the list is not even clear – have a non-derogable right. First, they have a right to bail and bond. I do not know how much it takes you to inquire and investigate into the criminalities caused by those people yet you had reasons why you detained them. I am about to think that you are incompetent. 

If you cannot inquire and investigate small offences, then we do not need to have you in these offices. You should resign and allow more competent people to come in and carry out these investigations in a very swift and timely manner.

The extra-arbitrary arrests are making Ugandans feel as though they are not part of this country. The drones, when I was growing up – (Interjections)– pandagari - my father was a soldier in Uganda National Liberation Army (UNLA) and people used to think that UNLA was a bad force. I am telling you that history will judge you right and people –(Member timed out.)

4.00
Mr abdulatif sebaggala (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of missing persons across the country is of great concern to this House and all Ugandans.

I have listened attentively to the minister’s response in as far as Hon. Mathias Mpuuga’s list is concerned. Out of the 400 people Hon. Mpuuga brought out, the minister has acknowledged only 56 as having been verified.

Many Ugandans outside there whose relatives have not been seen for a while have a lot of pain. Someone would believe that, “Yes, I have my relative in prison facing such and such charges and he is being brought to court.” That way, they would be comfortable.

There are the likes of Mr Kibalama John Bosco who went missing on 03 June 2019 – honourable minister, take keen interest because up to now, he has never been seen anywhere. On humanitarian grounds, we need to come to the rescue of many Ugandans who are crying because of their missing relatives.

I am sure there is no harm in Government coming out to say, “Yes, we have been having these people unconstitutionally but they have been released.”

If we are to honour what the late Archbishop was yearning for, he was fighting for human rights, let us do this as a way of recognising what the Archbishop has been standing for. Otherwise, we have so many people going through pain at different levels – (Member timed out.)

4.03 
Ms jane nabulindo (Independent, Woman Representative, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  The people of Busia are in tears. We have four people missing. The boys were arrested in Busia. One was a candidate aspiring for mayorship. He is called Yokana Were Musa. He was a dealer in produce. The other is Erias Wamusi who was a parliamentary candidate. There are also Stephen Wabwire and Edrisa Wafula. Wafula is a primary teacher at Madibira Primary School.

Schools have started. Primary five class has no teacher because we do not know Edrisa’s whereabouts. These people have families. Parents are crying and calling us to assist. We cannot feed them. We do cross-border business and you know that the maize no longer crosses. That is what we would use to support their families.

Honourable minister, just sympathise with the people of Uganda and free these people who were arrested. Thank you. 

4.05
Mr Stephen mukitale (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for adhering to your directive. I think it is abundantly clear that national dialogue is long overdue. 

Elections polarise the population. There is no way we can develop as a country when we continue to be polarised. I was humbled this morning when I saw the President of United States of America, Biden, kneeling after Government paying 27 million dollars to the orphan of the late black, George Floyd who was killed by the police. 

Government knows that it was an individual officer who made a mistake, it has paid the $27 million but the President knelt to apologise to the young boy. Do we learn something from that?

What I expected from the minister is - first of all, at this point in time, can we hold the individual undisciplined military officers personally liable? Government has said it was not her policy but excesses of individuals. At one time, even the Chief of Defence Forces (CDF) had humility to apologise.

The cheapest option is for this country to take the courage - the National Resistance Movement (NRM) is a Government, which came from fighting forces. We have people in Cabinet who were shooting at the National Resistance Army (NRA). 

Why can’t we forgive these people and the country moves on? We are overstretching courts. I do not think there is social distancing anymore. The problems are manufactured by politicians. We are overstretching our security forces to almost becoming partisan. 

We do not want to lose our army or police the way we lost UNLA and Uganda Army because of politics. Let us do everything to have a national dialogue. We have had amnesty for those who fought and killed people. Gen. Jeje, you know that. You are a man of all seasons. 
I pray that the President, before swearing in, should move that magnanimity as a Head of State and announce that all children of this country be released. Whatever it takes, I know there are some details of amnesty – the way it is handled – but it sounds ugly and you cannot convince investors that Uganda is an investment destination. 

Nature has promoted us as a good tourist area – as I conclude, it does not market Uganda. Even the Ugandans in the diaspora that want to come back think Uganda has gone back to the dogs. 
Therefore, I pray we have a national dialogue as a matter of emergency, so that this country can have a new solution for the generations to come. 

4.08
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I have just got information that there were 20 people dropped around Mpigi and that was the manner of release. That is Hon. Lubyayi’s constituency. 

Madam Speaker, these matters of human rights are the ones that distinguish the difference between the governments before and now. If one of you should take time to read the book by Prof. G W Kanyeihamba, the one which was recently launched by Prof. Patrick Lumumba, read about the history of Uganda between 1963 and 1980. You will see our past and decide that we must be settled and clear headed so that we know where we are going. 

Madam Speaker, there are people said to be on remand. I do not want to doubt the capacity, the capability, the energy, the effort and the commitment of the honourable Minister for Internal Affairs. Gen. Jeje Odongo is formidable and nobody should doubt him; maybe the problem is the orders from above (Laughter) 

Even when you talk about “target” - we have that information because I am an Itesot like him. If you want to know that he is a true soldier, just light your cigarette, place it there and ask him to point at it, he will get it. Shoot the cigarette at the lighting point – that is him. General, with all that capacity, don’t you think you are in position to properly advise Government, to now release everybody? Madam Speaker, he has the capacity to do so. 

Madam Speaker, are we going to compensate the lives of the 54 people who lost their lives? What are we doing about those families? I think we should search for a solution and a way forward but not deepen the problem. 

Honourable minister, I do not know what you think about this. You have to say something about this. Is the Government going to compensate the 54 lives lost? I think that is very important. 

There are those you reported as either released or still on remand. Why do we doubt this? We are not sure whether they are on remand or have been released. Which one is the answer? This is because there is a no man’s zone in between? 

Madam Speaker, it seems like there are people yet to be arrested. Is that list ready? Somewhere in your statement, you said some people seem to be hiding in villages in fear of arrest. Who are the people yet to be arrested so that they know and prepare for court? I think that is important. 

There are those on remand. Which prisons are they in? Where are those that have not been brought to the courts of law? I think that is what distinguishes between a good Government and a Government that is not yet ready. I do not doubt the General there because he is a true General. Please, do what Generals do. 

I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, today I received the mother of one of those 54 that died. The other day she was here demonstrating because they have not been assisted in any way. She complained that they tried to approach all the agencies. They even had to exhume the body and carry out a post mortem at their expense. That is why she decided to demonstrate here at Parliament but I received her today. It seems that no one is actually taking interest in these victims.

The mother said that they have walked for almost six months. The mother says that they were walking home when the boy was shot and that they were not part of the riots. It seems the minister has not yet set up a taskforce to handle those people. You do not know where to go and nobody is interested in the matter but it is a serious issue.  

4.13 
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There are many people that have disappeared in this country and there are many that are still disappearing up to now.

Honourable minister, I would like to start from your concluding remark, where you said, “The intelligence reports indicate that out of 365 people, some of them could be hiding in the villages.” 

Honourable minister, you have intelligence apparatus; GISOs, PISOs, the offices of the RDC. All those intelligence bodies are there in the villages. Why don’t you ask them to find out where those people are hiding? This is because it is quite risky to come on the Floor of Parliament and say that they could be hiding somewhere. We have all the intelligence reports. 

I will borrow from H.E the President. He made a statement sometime back that he will not preside over a country where people disappear and no one knows where they are. However, right now, people are disappearing day and night but H.E is still presiding over this Government. I think it is high time that the President reflects on his words. Citizens of this country are disappearing and you cannot account for them. 

Secondly, honourable minister, many people are being arrested. There are those arrested on land issues and right now they are being charged in Court Martials. I have a very serious case in my constituency, where the LC1 and his executive were arrested from Amuru but are now in Kigo Prison and being tried in the Court Martial. These are people who have never held guns and do not know how to operate them. They have never been soldiers but are being tried in the Court Martial. There are people in this Government that think that the country is theirs and they can do anything; they can create charges on individuals. 

Honourable minister, let us try to be serious. Many Ugandans are missing and parents are crying for their children. Some missing people are breadwinners in their families. Please, let us be mindful of the children who are suffering and the wives crying for their husbands. Please produce those people. Let them come back and continue with their activities with their families. 

I beg to move. 

4.16
MR PP OKIN OJARA (Independent, Chua West County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me also thank the minister for giving this report. Whereas the report presented indicates that there are a lot of loopholes, at least he tried to present something in this House. I thank him for that. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from the minister. This is a Government and an institution, which has its own ways of doing things. I have not read your report but I do not know how you arrived at what you presented before in this Parliament. There must have been good parameters based on the list that Hon. Mpuuga presented previously, about the 400 missing people. Now you have indicated only 56 that can be identified; how about the rest of the people on the list that was actually presented before this Parliament?

We expected you to come and clarify on each and every member on the list of the missing persons who have been presented here, but not coming blindly and saying, we have now identified 56, we do not know where the rest are; that is not how a big institution or a Government in power works.

We would love to hear whether the rest have been completely eliminated; be frank and tell us that we did away with the others. We should not keep on ping-ponging on the same things and crying for you to produce a list of people who have been eliminated. 

We beg you to go and do research; identify the 400 numbers that have been submitted to this Parliament and do it case by case; that this one has been taken to Arua or Kitgum, this one is in Kalangala and this one is somewhere, so that we know exactly whether they are still alive or dead. This is the clarification I wish to seek. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS LUCY AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want clarification from the minister. When the minister was making his statement, he made reference to the many numbers of people arrested, whose cases are still under investigation.

Madam Speaker, the irony with this statement is that many of these people are being charged with cases related to breaking COVID-19 SOPs. I am assuming and I know that many of these people have contributed to the congestion in the prisons. 

I would like the Minister to assure me that you are also not breaking the COVID-19 SOP guidelines, and why you should not be arrested –(Laughter)– you are committing the same crime that you are arresting the people for- this is my issue. 

I beg and implore the Government of Uganda, on behalf of the women who are shading tears day and night, to have mercy and feel pity for them and release their children. If these children are dead, just inform them that their children are dead and, there is nothing you can do so that they cry once and for all, burry their loved ones and forget about it, instead of playing ping pong.

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there was a request from the Shadow Minister of Internal Affairs that they wanted to examine the list. We shall give them that opportunity so that they can study it and come back to us.

However, honourable minister, I really want to appeal to my Government to act with restraint in some of these issues. You know it is very painful when your country is cited in international bodies as violating human rights.

In the meetings I used to go to, I was very comfortable when they were mentioning other countries until they started talking about Uganda. I really want to appeal that we should act with restraint. I do not know whether the minister has any closing remarks. Do you have any closing remarks?

GEN. JEJE: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank colleagues who have responded and guided further on this subject matter.

First and foremost, I would like to point out that the exercise and conversation we are involved in is an attempt to find a solution to this particular problem. I would like to try to respond and answer your points of inquiry to your satisfaction. If in a way I have not answered it, as I earlier pointed out, I am available for you to say that we have this particular issue and I will investigate it and report back.

Last time, when I was here on 4th March, I did indicate so. Many of you indeed gave me names and they are included on the list I have presented today. Therefore, what I am attempting to do is to find a solution to this problem.

Madam Speaker, I take your guidance and advice on the matter of forming a taskforce to deal with those individuals who got hurt and do not know where to report. I will go and look at this matter and I will be reporting to you on how to proceed on it.

There are about four or five specific points I would like to respond to. One was the inquiry as to whether elections are still going on and whether we are still arresting people. The answer is no, elections are not going on. What I am reporting here are the people that were arrested, not who we are arresting.

The second specific point I would like to respond to is; “Why are civilians being tried in military courts”? Honourable colleagues, you are aware that our law is clear on the fact that if you involve yourself in activities ordinarily associated with the military, you lend yourself to be tried by the military. 

If you, for example, hold a gun - you are not supposed to have a gun as a civilian; it is only the military that are allowed to hold guns. Therefore, you lend yourself - and that is how a number of these people have ended there because they have acted in a manner lending themselves to military activity.

Hon. Fungaroo, I would also like to say that this is not a laughing matter. I feel the pain as you have indeed suggested. However, it is also my responsibility, however much pain I may feel, to ensure that the due processes are concluded. I should not use my emotions and pain and take unilateral actions without allowing the due process to continue.

It is true that some individual security officers have acted in excess and I would like to confirm that many of the officers who have been identified have been punished accordingly. We do not hide. We take specific action on those errant officers. 

Finally, I wanted to respond to Hon. Lucy Akello who said, “You are contributing to the spread of COVID-19 in prison through congestion.” I would like to tell you that we are very specific in the management of prisoners. Any new case never gets mixed with the older cases. We sort them out and as soon as they arrive, they are tested and they are kept separate from the old cases that we know are safe from COVID-19.

Therefore, there is no way we are contributing to the spread of COVID-19 in the prisons. If you recollect, as soon as there was an outbreak of the pandemic, we had an outbreak in Moroto Prison. We had to separate those who were found COVID-19 positive and we took them to Morukatipe Prison. So, we are very careful about this. We do not mix the prisoners.

Finally, this is a matter that I do not want us to become emotional about. I want us to deal with it because it is a problem of our country and together, we will find its solution. I am not going anywhere; I will work with you to find a final solution to this problem. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. When the Shadow Cabinet is ready, they will let us know and we shall invite the minister back. 

Let us go to Item No.4. 

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE ON THE PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Timuzigu, what is burning you? 

MR TIMUZIGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am happy you have allowed me to speak because I have a burning issue. 

Three weeks ago, you directed the Minister of Internal Affairs to bring a report to the House concerning how and when the students who were acting as Special Police Constables (SPCs) would be paid. 

At the moment, those from the districts of Ntungamo, Isingiro and Kazo have not been paid for the third month, and yet it is said the rest of the country have received their payment. Those SPCs who went back to school have not been paid. Unfortunately, their accounts have not yet been credited with money. There is a chance that this money might get stolen and we will lose Government funds. 

So, wouldn’t it be procedurally right, now that the Minister of Internal Affairs is here, that you remind him to bring the response so that the entire country can know how the SPCs will be paid and why some of them have not been paid when the rest of the SPCs have got their money? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Timuzigu. Indeed, you had raised that matter on two previous occasions and we have been waiting for an answer from the minister. 

GEN. ODONGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank my honourable colleague for raising this matter. 

Madam Speaker, it is true you raised this matter with me to respond in writing and I have done it. Unfortunately, there seems to be a mix-up as to why that response has not arrived. 

However, I can give you the facts before I even come back here. When we recruited SPCs, they were recruited to serve for three months and because they were going to be in service for a short time, it was difficult for us to use the usual electronic IFMIS system because some of the constables did not even have phones. So, we took a decision that all the SPCs would be paid in cash. We have the money because it was budgeted for. 

The procedure we used was to deliver the money to the Regional Police Commander (RPC) to pay off these officers under his command. We were able to disburse this money for the first month of January and many of the SPCs were paid. 

We also told the RPCs that before we give them subsequent payments to pay the remaining SPCs, they must account for the money we have already gave them. The reason some of the SPCs have not been paid is because the responsible RPCs have not yet accounted for the money which was disbursed to them. The money, however, is with us and as soon as we get that accountability, we will release it for the payment of subsequent individuals available. 

The money is available and we are waiting for accountability of the money already released to the RPCs. Once we receive that accountability, we will release the money to complete the cycle of payment of the balance for the month of March. I thank you, Madam Speaker. (Mr Timuzigu rose_)  

THE SPEAKER: Aren’t you satisfied? Do you have a supplementary question? 

MR TIMUZIGU: Madam Speaker, in the same question, there was an issue of whether the students who went back to school would be paid. It is because when the police recruited those youths, it was during lockdown when schools were not open. The schools have been reopened and some of the SPCs have gone back to school. 

That issue was part of the question and we would like to know whether those youth will get their money or if the money is not there. Thank you. 

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, mine is in line with the response that the minister gave. Every system has its unique way of doing things. The minister was clear that when they recruited those SPCs, they were supposed to work for three months. This is now April but the ministry is waiting for the RPCs to send accountabilities while the SPCs are suffering. In case these RPCs send accountability in December or they do not send accountability at all, what will happen?

Secondly, since other RPCs sent accountabilities while others have not, what have they done as a ministry? It is because if we have to wait for RPCs who could have even eaten some of the money, they will not send the accountabilities and they will be transferred. When they are transferred, different regions will suffer or they may stubbornly refuse to send the accountabilities or send them next year or wait for the new Government in 2026. 

GEN. ODONGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank colleagues for raising the supplementary questions. What happens to the students who have gone back to school when they have not yet been paid? We pay for service. If he or she served in the month, he or she will get his payment but if he or she left before he or she served the month, we will find it difficult to pay money for no services rendered. 

Two, we budgeted this money for this financial year. It will not go beyond this financial year. In fact, I have already sent a directive. Today morning, I was with the Undersecretary of Police on this particular subject. Luckily enough, you have now raised it. The point I did tell him was that we must be able to put the RPCs to task to account before we reach May 2021 so that we pay this money. So, it cannot go beyond May because I have given that instruction.

MR ANGURA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The further clarification I am seeking from the minister is that these Special Police Constables were recruited to serve for three months but it seems their service is continuing and some of them have told us that there is an assessment being done and those who will have conducted themselves well, maybe politely in terms of demanding for their pay, might be absorbed in other regular forces.

Could the minister further clarify on this? These people might be going beyond the three months they had been recruited to serve. What will happen?

GEN. ODONGO: Madam Speaker, I cannot speak for the other forces but I can certainly speak for the police. Whereas these individuals were recruited to serve for three months, when we assessed our needs, we found that we may need some of them and indeed some of them will be retained. They are now being screened, processed and we will determine the number on the basis of our requirement.

Instead of going to a new recruitment, we already have a catchment from whom we will pick the number we require. Some of them will be recruited and absorbed into the police force. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let me invite the chairperson of the Rules Committee, I think you had presented -

4.39
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Clement Ongalo Obote): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You had directed that any comments on the report be submitted through the Clerk’s office. I have since received submissions from the Office of the Prime Minister and from Hon. Elijah Okupa represented by Hon. Silas Aogon and I have also received submissions from Hon. Kibalya and Hon. Angura.

All of them can be discussed in the process of the amendments rather than separately. I suggest that we go straight to the proposed amendments and those Members should be on standby when we reach those areas where you have specific concerns,

THE SPEAKER: Is anyone representing Hon. Ali? You talked of Hon. Ali, Hon. Kibalya and Hon. Okupa -

MR OBOTE: Hon. Okupa is represented by Hon. Aogon. It was a joint submission but only Hon. Aogon is here and Hon. Kibalya and Hon. Angura.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us proceed.

MR OBOTE: Honourable members, I now beg to submit the proposed amendments to the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. The first proposed amendment is to rule No.3 Oath of a Member. (a) Sub rule (iii); substitute for the word “at” appearing in line 2 the words “prior to”

Justification: The kind of oaths referred to under subrule (i) are administered prior to the first sitting of Parliament, not at the first sitting of Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that rule (c) be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Have you read the proposal? Read us the proposals under rule No.3 entirely.

MR OBOTE: Substitute for sub rule No.4, the following new sub rules, “Where a Member has not taken oath prior to the first sitting of Parliament, the Member shall take the oath administered by the Clerk before the House.”

(5) Not withstanding sub-rule 4, a Member may take oath in any other manner determined by the Speaker where (a) Parliament is on recess or (b) the Member is unable to take oath within the precincts of Parliament due to circumstances beyond the control of the Member.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the proposal. I put the question that rule 3 be -

4.44
MR SILAS AOGON	(Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): I simply request the chairperson to cite an example of circumstances where a Member may not be able to take the oath right here so that we try to understand.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, supposing on 16th May a Member is listed to take oath but he is very sick and cannot speak, shouldn’t that person take oath as soon as they are able to?

4.45
MR MAURICE KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Madam Speaker, I want to give an example of the current MP for Nakawa. By the time we were sworn in he was in prison and of recent, we have a system of debating using Zoom; you can bring in your views when you are at home or in prison. 

Therefore, if a situation touching his constituency happened and he has not been sworn in yet because he is still in prison; maybe we need to find a way of having him swear in so that while Government still detains him, he can be in position to contribute and participate in the debate that is going on.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this happens sometimes; I encourage members to allow it.

4.46
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Madam Speaker, if someone is in prison, they are in prison and until they get out, they should not be able to swear in and participate in the affairs of Parliament. That person can be allowed to swear in later but not to swear in from wherever they are. This will cause problems.

THE SPEAKER: No one is talking about swearing in from wherever you are; they are talking about the oath being administered separately, within the precincts of Parliament.

MR OTHIENO: There is part (b) which states that a Member is unable to take oath within the precincts of Parliament due to circumstances beyond their control. I think that is where the problem is, Madam Speaker. Normally, I have observed that even when we sit elsewhere, the first thing is that the Speaker declares a place a precinct of Parliament.

However, we are saying here that this Member can take oath in a place which is not a precinct of Parliament. If I am in Nagongera and I am unable to be sworn in for reasons beyond my control, I can be sworn in from Nagongera, which is not a precinct of Parliament. Subsection (b) is not very clear.

THE SPEAKER: Can we ask the chairperson to elaborate on (b)?

MR ONGALO: Madam Speaker, I would like to allay the concerns of the Members by reminding them that any determination of what would constitute precincts of Parliament, for purposes of that activity, would be subject to the determination of the Speaker.

We are not simply saying that a Member will maybe write to the Speaker and say, “I want to be sworn in from Soroti”. What we are saying is that once the Speaker determines that these are circumstances beyond the control of that Member, then the Speaker can make that decision. It can only be on a case by case basis; we cannot list all the possible scenarios. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Jovah Kamateeka, are you still not satisfied?

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We love and trust the current Speakers that we have but we do not know what kind of Speaker we might get. We would not want to give the Speaker so much power.

Madam Speaker, if this person cannot swear in at the time when others are sworn in, let them be able to come and be sworn in later rather than say that the Speaker will determine that – I am going to use the word “wherever” again – wherever this person is can be designated as the precincts of Parliament.

I think we need checks and balances. This person should be sworn in within the precincts of Parliament, as we know it. I beg to submit.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I would like the chairman to clarify to me - if others have understood – what problems he has experienced with the current rules that we have. I think the Speakers that we have had in the last couple of years have not encountered any problems at all regarding a Member who probably is not around at the swearing in ceremony or Members who come in through by-elections or whatever it is. 

The Speaker has always arranged - because this is an administrative matter – within the jurisdiction of his powers to make sure that this Member is properly sworn in, in accordance with the law because the Speaker understands.

Madam Speaker, I must first be convinced of the problems that we have experienced with the current rules, then we can go to amendment. However, we cannot go to amendment when we have not cited any inconveniences caused by the current rule, as it is.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, what is the mischief you are trying to cure here?

MR ONGALO: Madam Speaker, the committee has thought of the many circumstances that we now face. We are actually thinking of the welfare of the Members. We have just been roasting the minister here over people who have been arrested. 

Now, what we should really be thinking about is that a Member who has won an election and is entitled to the benefits of a Member of Parliament may, by reason of an illness or otherwise, be unable to be sworn in. Until such a Member is sworn in, he will not be entitled to those benefits, yet these are circumstances beyond the control of the Member. Simply because it has not happened does not mean it will not happen.

Therefore, we are thinking about this in view of the COVID-19 pandemic, which has now led us to hold plenary using Zoom and all that. I do not think this is conjecture or farfetched, as some Members may wish to think.

THE SPEAKER: So, you are looking at a situation where, on 14 May, a Member-elect is arrested and is unable, therefore, to come for the oath and the oaths are concluded. 

MR MAKMOT: Madam Speaker, as my chairperson has stated, at the committee, we understand that without being sworn in, the Member would not be getting their pay. However, we also learnt something from what happened during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Somebody could have been caught up abroad when the travels were banned and they cannot come; there are no flights, among others. In that situation, we think that even though the Speaker has been able to previously handle this situation – maybe that is the reason why we may not have seen how big the problem is – it is important to formalise it, rather than putting the Speaker in a situation, in many cases -

Those were the considerations; there could be many other grounds but I think it is important that we create room for unforeseen circumstances and circumstances like COVID-19 to be catered for within the rules. Thank you.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, in fact that is my problem. If you are going to anchor that amendment on welfare then I do not deserve to be part of this House. Just because of welfare?

Madam Speaker, a situation can happen where you can say that after one year of your being elected and you were not there, something can be done where they say, “Once you are sworn in, then you can be paid in retrospect”. That is something which can be done around that.

However, for you to say that we put it in the law that to protect my welfare, you can, therefore, swear me in, in Dokolo or Mengo Hospital - Madam Speaker, I totally disagree with the spirit behind the amendment of this rule. We have been very comfortable over the years with the current rules and I think we should maintain it as it is, for the time being.

MR ONGALO: Madam Speaker, I would like the House to be clear on one thing. The Member asked the committee to give examples. This amendment is not pegged to that one issue of welfare; it is one example.

My vice chairperson has just given another example; supposing there is a lockdown and the Member cannot come for swearing in, for one reason or the other, yet the Member is a duly elected Member.

Perhaps, Madam Speaker, in the spirit of the concern of the Members, let me make a suggestion; suppose we redraft this rule to read, “Notwithstanding sub rule (4), a Member may take oath in any manner, as may be determined by the Speaker”.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let us stand over this matter. Let us go to the others, as you think about the structure.

4.57
The minister of state for energy and mineral development (Minerals) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the examples that have been given may not be the best. I do understand where the committee is coming from but when the committee proposes that rules should be amended to provide for administration of oaths before the Speaker when we are in recess and also in situations where the person cannot come here, that the Speaker can go and have an oath administered - the vice chairperson gave an example –

The Speaker: Where is that? What is in the amendment itself?

Ms opendi: I heard members talking about the comment by the vice chairperson that a Member may be caught up abroad or in prison. If the Member is abroad - that will be known that the person is abroad. We do not need to have that here. The person should wait until he or she is able to return and then he can take oath. Otherwise, to me the reasons given for this particular amendment are not strong enough to allow us to amend. Thank you. 

Mr kamusiime: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I need to seek clarification from the chairperson of the committee. My colleague had alluded to some examples in support of this amendment and I was equally not satisfied.

I thought that an oath means that a Member is starting to serve. If we say that a Member can hide or be celled somewhere due to certain reasons and he takes oath to start eating from the Government coffers while not serving, what are we doing?

As the honourable member suggested, we can put in place avenues where the Speaker, within his or her powers, can see how possible the Member can come to the precincts of Parliament to take oath and start to serve. Otherwise, if we opened this space, we might run into trouble. Thank you. 

5.00
Mr keefa kiwanuka (NRM, Kiboga East County, Kiboga): Madam Speaker, we are now learning to adapt to a new world, which is now referred to as the new normal. It is, therefore, unfortunate if we try to think that things will remain as they have always been in the past.

What is important here is how a Member can start participating in the proceedings of Parliament. According to what we have now, there are several things that may not enable the Member to come and be sworn in. There should be some mechanism of how that can be managed. I think that is what this new amendment is trying to achieve.

The Speaker: Honourable members, let me tell you from experience that when some of these issues happen, we get information that so and so is sick and will not be able to attend or one is out of the country and will return after a week. Normally, we are not taken by surprise.

Ms opendi: Madam Speaker, since we are now compliant with information technology, maybe we could provide that a Member can be sworn in on Zoom.

Ms ogwal: Would that mean that we can have our session when the Speaker is chairing the meeting on Zoom? If that can be done, why do we make the rules now? Why don’t we wait until we arrive there and say, “Right now we are conducting our Parliamentary sessions on Zoom; why don’t we have the Speaker presiding over the House while in the United States and we participate from Uganda?” We cannot start making the law now. What we have is adequate and well catered for. 

Madam Speaker, I remember that you swore in one of our Members who came through a by-election. We were in recess and you swore in the Member from your chambers. I was there as a commissioner then and it was done in accordance with the rules, within the precincts of Parliament and properly recorded and captured by the Office of the Clerk.

Why do we want to make a law when we can still manage our situation? I think this is redundant and unnecessary now. We have not reached that crisis level when we can have our Speaker in Kamuli and chairing a meeting when I am in Dokolo.

Ms kamateeka: Madam Speaker, in a situation where we are not able to allow our citizens in the diaspora to vote, how then can we allow for them to be sworn in there? I think we are not yet ready for this position. As Hon. Cecilia Ogwal rightly puts it, the law we have now is sufficient. We do not want to open it up for abuse. Thank you. 

5.03
Mr Abraham byandala (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Madam Speaker, we are here to serve the people of Uganda but not to think about our welfare as the No. 1 priority. You must be paid to facilitate you do the work. We cannot start paying people who are somewhere. Why are you in a hurry? Have you come here to make money or have you come to do service and improve this country?

What they are trying to amend is just going to bring a bad image to us; that we are here thinking about our welfare. If you have not sworn in, what is your problem? When you come, you will swear in and be paid. We are not going to be here thinking, “How much am I going to get?” In fact, time has come when we should start thinking about people who do not attend so that they are not paid the full salary. 

They will come on time and attend Parliament. We cannot be here and start saying – in anticipation. Suppose we start paying him and he dies, who will pay for that money? This amendment is unnecessary. We should not waste time and it should be rejected.

Ms mutonyi: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We do not want to encourage corruption here. Those of us who have worked in public service, even if you pass the interview and get an appointment, you will be told that you will start earning when you have reported to your work station. Why should it be different with members of Parliament?

Even when you are sent out of station - like when we used to work in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, if you got appointed and posted to that station outside, you would start earning when you reported.

Therefore, there is no way you would start earning a salary before you have reported. Honourable members, let us not be selfish and steal Government money for nothing. Let people report and then we will be sure they exist. What if it is just a voice somewhere? Thank you. 

The Speaker: Honourable chairperson, are you still on the same amendment?

Mr ongalo: Let me make some clarifications. If members so wished, we could concede to this. First, maybe it was in error of me to give the example I gave. What we are saying, stemming from what Hon. Byandala has just said, is that how do you expect a Member to begin serving this country if he is not sworn in? 

Once the Member is sworn in, the Member can begin participating through Zoom and that Member cannot do so if they have not been sworn in. Therefore, I do not see why the Member should be denied participating in Parliament just because he is unable to come here due to circumstances beyond his control. 

Secondly, Hon. Cecilia Ogwal talked about the Speaker swearing in members in the boardroom without the rules. May I call your attention to rule 8, which reads, “Any decision by the Speaker, under this rule, shall become part of our rules and the committee on rules shall be tasked to bring that as an amendment to this Floor?” 

This means a decision which is not in the rules – (Interruption)

MS OGWAL: I have not said that the Speaker has to swear in anybody in absentia. I believe the staff of the Hansard have captured my statement. I said there was one incident where the Speaker swore in a Member who came through by-elections. Parliament was in recess and this Member was sworn in in the Speaker’s Chambers strictly within the rules as prescribed. That was done within the precinct of Parliament publically. That is what I was referring to. I never said the Speaker swore in somebody that was absent. I did not say that. Is it in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to clarify that there is no lacuna in this area. I have sworn in a Member on the steps of Parliament because the House was on recess. I brought the Clerk and they witnessed this. I have sworn Members inside my Chambers and in my boardroom.

However, I do not believe that because you are away, we should allow you to swear on Zoom. No. You are elected to work in Uganda and the constituents are here in Uganda. The people you represent are here in Uganda. So, either you are there or you are out. Honourable chairperson, maybe you should abandon that proposal.

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Madam Speaker, first of all, I would like to allay Hon. Cecilia Ogwal’s point of order. The Hansard will not reflect that I said that you said the Speaker swore anybody in absentia.

Secondly, Part V of the amendment appears to be where the primary concern of members is. However, the amendment is in sub-rules 3(a) and 4(b) and 5. I think that fully conceding to this entire amendment would be wrong but I will concede to the proposed amendment to sub rule 5 and leave the proposed new sub rule 3, which is simply to substitute the word “at” appearing in line two, with the words “prior to.” It is just a drafting issue.   

In sub-rule 4, substitute the current sub rule 4 with the following: “Subsequent oaths of allegiance of Members of Parliament shall be administered by the Speaker before the House.”

The reason we are proposing this amendment is because these oaths are actually administered by the Clerk before the House. That is all we are doing. We just want it to be clear that it is administered by the Clerk and so it is not a radical amendment. I am trying to save the amendment to subrule (3) and (4) and I will concede on 5.

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, I think we can now move because the other was just a drafting issue where we are replacing “at” with the words “prior to.” Common sense will always prevail there. Before you become a fully-fledged Member of Parliament, you should be first sworn in. I do not see an issue with subrules (3) and (4).  We also concede to that. In my opinion, I think you are doing a good job. 

MS OGWAL: I would like to agree with the use of the words “prior to” but I do not agree with a Member being sworn in by the Clerk because that means everything we want the Clerk to do, we must now specify. It is understood that the work of Parliament is administered by the Clerk - swearing in ceremonies, our welfare and our payments. Even when you want to borrow money from Parliament, you do not write directly to the Director of Finance but the Clerk. You now want to put that in the rules? No. 
The Clerk is our chief administrator and she knows what to do. We are not going to bring administrative matters in the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

MR OBOTE-ONGALO: Madam Speaker, I think this has been misunderstood. In the current rules, if you have them before you, as we have them now, they say, “Subsequent oath of allegiance of Members of Parliament shall be administered by the Speaker.”  

All that the rules are doing is to say that the Speaker does not administer the oath but it is the Clerk. Why should we leave the word “Speaker” there, when it is the Clerk who does it? We are just removing this and – 

THE SPEAKER: The Clerk is doing the work on behalf of the Speaker. It is just making the Member read and you put it in the rules that the Clerk should hold the book. 

MRS OGWAL: Do you doubt the integrity of the Speaker? Whatever is to be done by the Speaker can always be delegated by the same Speaker. I would be more comfortable with putting the supreme authority, who in this case, is the Speaker in charge. If it so happened, the Clerk is the one to administer the oath and that is normal. 

It is the administrative work that the Clerk has to do but definitely it would be wrong for us to substitute the terminology of Clerk with that of the Speaker. I would not agree to that. Let us leave it as it is; the administration of the oath will continue as usual.

THE SPEAKER: Can I also advise that whenever they bring that oath, it is signed by the Speaker?  

MR AOGON: We would love to find out from the chairperson and the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline when they did discover that the use of the word “Speaker” was wrong?  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us focus on the words “prior to” - the first small amendment - and leave the rest. 

MS KAMATEEKA: You have ruled. Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to point out that usually, this oath is sworn before the Speaker. Otherwise, if it was the Clerk, you would find Members of Parliament swearing in, in the Clerk’s office, which does not take place. It is the Speaker and we must maintain that. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us just substitute the word “at” with the words “prior to.” Honourable members, I put the question that sub-rule (3) be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Sub rule (3), as amended, agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: With the record, the rest of the proposals are abandoned. 

MR ONGALO: Rule 5: Election of Speaker
(a) Sub rule (2) Substitute for sub rule (2) the following:
“(2) A person is not qualified to be elected as Speaker if he or she;
(a) Is a Vice President, Prime Minister or a Minister; or
b) Campaigns or causes campaigns for his or her election, save for the procedure provided for under sub rule (8).”

The justification is to disallow campaigns for the Office of Speaker since this is an honourable office of service.

(b) Sub-rule (7)
To substitute for “presiding officer”, the words, “person presiding”.

The justification is to ensure consistent usage of the phrase “person presiding” as defined under sub-rule (16) of Rule 5 and as used in sub-rules (12), (13)(b),(c),(f) and (g).

(c) New sub-rule
Insert a new sub-rule immediately after sub-rule (16) as follows;
“The Oath of the Speaker or Oath of Deputy Speaker shall be administered by the President or a person authorised by the President.”

The justification is to conform to section 2 of the Oaths Act, Cap. 19.

THE SPEAKER: Now I just want to check the issue of the presiding officers being the person presiding, because within the Commonwealth, a presiding officer is either a Speaker of the House or the Senate. I am trying to see where sub-rule (7) is. Okay, I understand. This is the person who will be chairing. I think this is okay; a person presiding who is normally the Chief Justice. Yes, it is the CG who presides over the election of the Speaker. Now you are talking as if you are in Dokolo. Please take the microphone (Laughter)

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I just wanted to understand whether we are taking the amendments together, or after you have read the amendments, you now bring them one by one. This is because they are about three that are lumped together.

THE SPEAKER: We are taking them one by one.

MS OGWAL: You are taking them one by one.

THE SPEAKER: Can you complete - you had not finished the third one. Complete your proposal under (5)

MR ONGALO: Madam Speaker, the first proposed amendment is to sub-rule (2), which is to substitute for sub-rule (2) with the following;
 
“(2) A person is not qualified to be elected as Speaker if he or she:
(a) Is a Vice President, Prime Minister or a Minister; or
b) Campaigns or causes campaigns for his or her election, save for the procedure provided for under sub-rule (8).”

The justification is to disallow campaigns for the Office of the Speaker since this is an honourable office of service

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I would like to have further clarification from the Chairperson as to why you would not want the Vice President or the Prime Minister to contest for the post of Speaker. I would want a stronger justification because I have not seen it coming here.

Secondly, when you are talking about rules as provided for under sub-rule (8), then you should have specifically mentioned that particular statement under sub-rule (8) which disqualifies a Member from campaigning before those procedures - 

I am seeking clarification, I hope you see my position. First, why disqualify; if today I were a Prime Minister but I would be more comfortable being Speaker. Why wouldn’t you want me to offer my candidature for being Speaker? Can you give me a strong argument for that?

THE SPEAKER: Isn’t that in the Constitution?

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like the chairperson to clarify to us why you would want to put it in the rules that a person who is presenting himself or herself for an office should not campaign. There are some things we do out of ethics. For example, we know that the American Constitution is not written but everyone knows what that constitution is.

Things like you are standing for Speakership and you should not campaign, those are things we want to espouse out of ethics. How am I going to canvass for support if I do not campaign? For example, we are getting about two thirds of new Members of Parliament, if I do not go out and talk to them, how then do they get to know me, so that they give me their vote? I think the person presenting himself or herself for the position of Speaker shall not campaign. This is Commonwealth Parliamentary practice but it is not written.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I just want to clarify on the issue of Vice President or Prime Minister, the Constitution bars them from contesting for that office.

MR ONGALO: Honourable members, Article 82(3) of the Constitution says, “A person shall not be qualified to be elected a Speaker or Deputy Speaker if he or she is a Vice President or a Minister”. That is where the committee gets that from –(Interjection)- Honourable member, unless you are requesting us to delete it because it is already in the rules as it stands now. 

In addition, sub-rule (8) of the rules that we refer to is the sub rule that is in your current Rules of Procedure. We refer to that part. We did not reproduce it because it is already in your Rules of Procedure.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I would like to find out from you, how you determine that somebody is campaigning. You know, it is very difficult to determine that somebody vying for Speakership is campaigning.

I really feel this is not necessary. Let the campaign part of it be deleted because we have so many ways of campaigning. Someone might keep quiet but send somebody to campaign on his behalf. How will you determine that that person is campaigning?

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, we have to be very careful. Let us not tie our hands. Somebody will use that thing of campaigning and give his own interpretation. We must get that thing out. If we are in the corridor talking and somebody taps me, and then you say he was campaigning. I think that one of not campaigning should be deleted.

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, before Dr Keefa comes to report, my concern is, where an appointment is supposed to be given to somebody, you will know that there is an appointing authority. In this case, we are talking about elections. There is no way you can call for elections where there are no voters. For you to bring voters to your side, you have to campaign.

I would like to remind this House that we have a Constitution which has the Bill of Rights in Chapter Four and we cannot ignore it. We shall be bordering on denying people their rights to campaign. Therefore, I urge everybody to think wisely and not step on people’s rights. People have a right to campaign.

Two, on the issue of the Vice President contesting for Office of the Speaker, there is already a mechanism. If you are a public servant for instance and you want to vie for a political office, you are supposed to resign. That is given in the Constitution. I do not know why we are labouring. 

MR KEEFA: Madam Speaker, whereas the committee has a point in somehow banning campaigns for the Office of the Speaker - because in the first place, the candidates for the position of Speaker must be dragged to seat against their will - there is a problem in the way it has been worded, which is tantamount to somebody being disqualified. I think that is the main point.

There is a good point that those aspiring for the position of Speaker should not campaign because that is the honourable way of approaching it. The challenge is in somebody being disqualified. I think this has a few problems.

First, what will be interpreted as campaigning? That is the starting point. The second point is, who will enforce it in the heat of the moment? The last point is, can we imagine the problems that will be caused by disqualifying somebody because he or she has been deemed to be campaigning?

I think the committee can come up with a better way of presenting the proposal against active campaign in a way that it upholds the integrity of that office, so that it does not tantamount to a punishment of being disallowed from the race. 

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This amendment arose from what has happened in the recent past. Since we concluded our elections, we have seen what has been happening. Even on TVs, we have seen discussions about our candidates for Speakership, by their supporters.

So, the point is good. I personally I think that we need to define what public campaigns are. Once we have defined that, then it will become easier. It is because merely a Member saying he or she has met Members in the corridors here cannot be called a public campaign. I am very sure that what we are looking at here – Members of Parliament can be found within Parliament. Members of Parliament have phones. If I send an SMS to a Member, that cannot be a public campaign. 

To me, the word “public” needs to be defined and in my understanding, “public” could mean using the media like we have seen people on TV and radios doing. My proposal is we define what a public campaign is.

5.31
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Madam Speaker, I agree with the committee when it comes to disallowing candidates contesting for the position of Speaker to participate in campaigns. My observation is very clear; I know that the scenario we are going through is going to divide this Parliament. If we have to see this in future, it will be very disappointing for the Parliament of Uganda.

I just want to give two examples. My Chief Whip and I are not on good terms but she is my Chief Whip. There are Members of Parliament that do not talk to each other and yet we are here for the next five years. The last example I would like to give – I know somebody wants to give information but let me just finish this point. Recently, we met the Deputy Speaker in the corridor and the words we exchanged were not friendly. This is my Deputy Speaker but none of us could bow down to the other. 

I am giving an example from my experience. It means that there are other Members out there who are going through the same. When you check our platforms, as campaigns are going on, the words that we exchange are not friendly. This, however, is the Parliament of Uganda. The unfortunate part of it is that some of the people on these platforms are not Members of Parliament. It means they also participate in what we go through. 

MR AOGON: Just a quick one. I would like Hon. Kibalya to tell me whether he managed to conduct his campaign in his constituency without people disagreeing with him and whether at the time of the campaigns in Kamuli, people were not using hard words against each other. Is it possible to conduct an election without such atmosphere? It may not be possible but it is unavoidable for people to disagree. It is just a normal thing. Campaigns are campaigns, unless we are saying we are going for appointments instead of elections.

As long as you talk about an election, you cannot delete campaigns. That is my mind and I feel that that is the truth and nothing but the truth. 

MR KIBALYA: Thank you. As the colleague was seeking clarification, I would like us to differentiate between our campaigns in our constituencies and the campaign for a Speaker of Parliament. 

I would like to request the committee to clarify on the campaign means and what it tantamounts to, if somebody campaigns. If we are to see what other people campaigning for this position are doing, that cannot be a campaign for being a Speaker of Parliament. It could be a campaign for something different. 

I do not want to mention it here. However, what other Members are going through as they campaign for the positions of Speaker and Deputy Speaker, if somebody has to be a presiding officer or Speaker of Parliament –(Interruption)

MS OGWAL: I am seeking clarification. I have been in the queue. Madam Speaker, we should be mindful about this. We are not going to go the route of anybody imagining that for the post of Speaker, somebody should be nominated. We are not going to imagine that two days or a day to the election of the Speaker, somebody just presents himself or herself with his or her CV and says, “now elect me.” 

I think we have to be mindful of our Constitution, which compels us to abide by the Bill of Rights; Freedom of Speech. Right now, we have opened up to social media. You cannot control these people. They are the ones who have actually inflamed the campaigns for the Speaker. When you hear the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker speaking, they both speak with a lot of respect for one another, even for the institution of Parliament. 

However, social media is what we need to check so that it does not inflame the campaign and make it appear as if it has become a tribal or criminal matter - as Hon. Kibalya said, that when you are associated with one candidate you cannot to the others that are on the other side.

Are you mindful of the bill of rights that I still have my freedom of speech and that I can stand in any platform and say, “If they are to do any election now, I would only want this category of people”?

For example, if I am a gender sensitive person and I say, Let the women be elected, are you going to arrest me or because I am gender sensitive, I am therefore campaigning for any woman who is contesting for the position of Speaker or Deputy Speaker?

We have to understand what we are trying to legislate for. We cannot legislate for something which is intriguing; by law and by nature and by our Constitution you cannot subject it to legislation.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I just want go to where Hon. Opendi said that the only problem here is that campaigning has been tagged to either qualification or disqualification.

The committee wanted to identify prohibited conduct in relation to elections but to say that a candidate is disqualified because of - it should be recast in a different way.

Identify the prohibited conduct that you want people to stop; insults, bribery and many others. I think that is what you should put.

MR OTHIENO: Madam Speaker, my concern is related to what you have just said. That is why I wanted clarification from my brother, Hon. Kibalya. By having this rule, you are creating ground for disqualifying somebody from the position of Speakership.

I see a situation where we elect the Speaker we want and then somebody runs to court and says, “The person was elected because he or she engaged in a public campaign” and that will be grounds for pulling the person out of the Speakership.

Public campaign is not part of this; they are just talking about campaigns. We need to look at this very carefully; this could be a situation whereby some people may use it as an avenue of pulling out a Speaker after he or she has been elected because they will say, “This person violated the rules and therefore cannot qualify to occupy this position.”

Sub rule (8) is about nomination where the person nominating the person for Speakership position introduces a person and says good things about them but I am worried of the consequence of this provision if it is allowed.

It may be bad but it is worse if we leave it as it is because it can be abused. Some powers can use it to pull down a Speaker from the position; so, we need to be very cautious. Somebody can run to court if they have been defeated in other ways - that becomes the last resort.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, but can you make proposals?

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, Hon. Othieno is talking about somebody running to court because of this provision. It is not enough for you to run to court; you must have evidence that I have campaigned.

My proposal is that let us define what this public campaign exactly means. I also want the committee chairperson to clarify because the report of the committee that I have talks about public campaigns and the amendment has left out the word public campaigns.

The report says that it therefore “recommends that Rule No.5 should be amended to bar candidates for the said position from public campaigns.” So can he clarify whether this word “public” that is in their report has been dropped but my position is that let us define what this is.

As you have said, maybe the committee could also handle this as it looks into what you have advised of prohibited conduct rather than the way it is; that would be a smarter way of handling the issue.

MR KAMUSIIME: Madam Speaker, my view is that we let the status quo remain and then administratively, the Parliamentary Commission can look at how to manage Members so that we keep the integrity of the institution during such situations.

This is a sensitive area and any form of leadership even at chairperson LCI level, there must be some form of mobilisation and it will always include campaigning, meeting people and you cannot easily control supporters as a candidate.

Within the institution, we can look at how best to handle the Members who are participating in the race of the Speaker and other positions so that we keep harmony.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I propose that we defer debate on this matter because even defining what a “public campaign” is - Suppose I just got to social media isn’t that a public campaign? I am communicating on social media; would I be sanctioned for that?

MR FREDRICK ANGURA: Madam Speaker, the challenge that we have and where this issue of campaign has degenerated into public concern is the civility. Here the chairperson is trying come up with a redraft of this and we can move on.

THE SPEAKER: That is why I am saying; can we defer debate so that we come back later when we have thought about it.

MR ANGURA: Most obliged.

THE SPEAKER: We stand over rule No.5

MS OGWAL: Can I make a proposal for a way forward. I am of the view that we are wasting our time. Let us maintain sub-clause 2 as it is because it is about subjecting the candidate to qualification.

Perimeters of campaigns cannot fall within that. Rather than standing over it in order to come back, let us dispose of it if the chairperson could agree that we leave it is. I beg to propose.

MR ONGALO: Madam Speaker, let me remind this august House that this matter came to this committee as a result of a debate that took place on this Floor regarding the conduct of Members who are campaigning for the position of the Speaker or who are campaigning for those they wish to be Speaker. Specifically, this matter was brought up by Hon. Kakooza of Members using the public fora such as televisions, Members’ campaigns are directed at people who are not even voters.

Not that this matter is not important but what we are trying to say is that the electorate for the positions of the Speaker are known; why would a person who wants to contest for Speakership run on television to start talking to the whole nation as if this is some kind of national election. 

Members should allow the committee to come up with something that will inform the Member who wishes to contest that there are voters who are known, find a way of approaching them because there are Members who were talking about Parliament now as it is, as if it is a place where we are only making deals and doing what. It is terrible.

Therefore, honourable members, we really need to save our institution and we should do so by finding a way to prevent this kind of behaviour from continuing, rather than throwing  this out completely. 

I am willing – as the Speaker has ruled – to stand over this so that the committee comes up with a new draft that would capture the spirit of what we are trying to protect.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, no doubt; there are things that we really need to curtail. As I said before, this is the first time you have seen printed T-shirts, books and papers. You know, these are different things.

Therefore, let us give the committee time to review what they wanted to prohibit and then come back to us. So, we stand over it for now. There is a proposal for a new rule. 

New Rule

MR ONGALO: Insert a new sub rule, immediately after sub rule (16) as follows:
“The oath of the Speaker or oath of Deputy Speaker shall be administered by the President or a person authorised by the President.”

The justification is to conform to Section 2 of the Oaths Act, Cap 19.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think that is something we have been missing. If you look at the Oaths Act, it is actually the President who is supposed to be present when we are taking the oath.

MR AOGON: Maybe we did not get it clearly. Madam Chairperson, you need to be clear on that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: There is an Act of Parliament called the Oaths Act and it lays out who is to take oath, who is to preside, et cetera. In the quest of the Speaker or Deputy Speaker, the Oaths Act prescribes the President as the person who should be there when the oath is being taken.

MR AOGON: I think that is straightforward.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the new sub-rule (c) be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New Rule

MR ONGALO: The committee proposes a new rule on resignation of a Speaker or Deputy Speaker. Insert a new rule, immediately after rule 7, as follows:

“(7) Resignation of Speaker or Deputy Speaker
    1. A Speaker or Deputy Speaker who intends to resign from his or her office shall submit a letter of resignation, addressed to the Clerk to Parliament.

    2. Upon receipt of a letter of resignation, the Clerk to Parliament shall, without delay:
    a. In the case of resignation by the Speaker, inform the Deputy Speaker or 
    b. In the case of resignation by the Deputy Speaker, inform the Speaker.

    3. The Speaker or Deputy Speaker, as the case may be, shall notify the House of the resignation within seven days.

    4. In accordance with Rule 5(3) and 6(4), the business of the next sitting of Parliament, after the resignation of the Speaker or Deputy Speaker, shall be the election of the Speaker or Deputy Speaker, as the case may be.

The justification is to provide for the procedure of resignation of a Speaker and Deputy Speaker, which the rules are silent about. The rules only provide for the impeachment of Speaker or Deputy Speaker under Rule 107.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, I think first of all, at the time of electing a Deputy Speaker, that activity is presided over by the Speaker. I think it is proper that if the Speaker is resigning, the Deputy Speaker rises to the position of the Speaker; the person who presided over his or her election.

For the case of the Speaker, it will be proper for the Speaker to do it through the Clerk. That is my personal suggestion. I think that is the right thing.

MR BYANDALA: Madam Chairperson, the Speaker and Deputy Speaker are very important people and they are put in those positions by a group of people. 

For somebody to resign, there must be reasons. I think we would be not careful enough to simply leave it. Somebody says, “I am resigning” and the other one comes and says he has resigned. That resignation could be a lesson to us. Why has he or she resigned?

When the letter of resignation is tendered in, we need the Commission to debate and find out why. We would maybe solve a problem. People resign because of problems or some reasons.

Therefore, I propose that for whoever resigns, it should not be a matter of the other one to come and say that after seven days, he has resigned and we leave it at that. We need to know why that action has been taken, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you looking at some kind of a tribunal?

MR BYANDALA: Madam Chairperson, it can be either a tribunal or the Parliamentary Commission, but we must find out the reasons and learn from them because someone cannot simply resign. 

MR KIWANUKA: Madam Chairperson, whereas I agree with the proposal, my only concern is with the haste with which the committee is providing for the replacement of the Speaker who has resigned.

I wonder whether the chairperson can justify why it should be at the next meeting and there is no provision that is being provided, probably for the dust to settle or even to allow Members to understand the reason why the person has resigned and maybe debate about it; before we actually do the election.

I wonder whether the chairperson can clarify on why it should be at the next meeting and without any proper consideration thereafter, before we get into the election?

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, I am definitely conscious of the fact that the Speaker is also the chairperson of the Parliamentary Commission and therefore, she cannot maybe write a letter of resignation and submit it to herself or to the Commission. The Commission, as it is constituted now, does not have a Deputy. I think that is one problem we will have. 

Secondly, the post of Speaker is very key to this country. We have only got three pillars of State. We have the Executive, the Judiciary and Legislature. For the Head of the institution to submit her resignation to the Clerk; I feel there is something missing somewhere. 

One would say, “Supposing the President is not feeling well or whatever and wants to resign, does he write his letter of resignation to the Head of Public Service?” 

That is a matter which we need to look at much more deeply than is seen on the surface, Madam Chairperson; by virtue of the status of the head of one of the three pillars of state.

Mr ongalo-obote: Madam Speaker, may I call the attention of the honourable members to Article 82(7)(c) of the Constitution, which specifically states that any such resignation shall be addressed to the Clerk. We are only aligning the rules to the Constitution. It is in the Constitution that any resignation by the Speaker or Deputy Speaker shall be by a letter addressed to the Clerk. 

Mr aogon: Madam Speaker, if that is the case, it is a constitutional matter so we cannot debate it. We just have to concede on this side.

Mr othieno: Madam Speaker, I have seen this provision in the Constitution that the Speaker can resign. However, this is the Tenth Parliament. We have been operating normally under this. What is it that has motivated the committee to now come up – I know it has been silent but this is the Tenth Parliament – and provide this?

Is it that we are trying to trigger resignation of Speakers? Somebody can be held incommunicado and told to write a resignation letter, it is sent to the Clerk and the person is kept where you do not see.

We should make it very difficult for somebody to resign. It should be a very rigorous process so that nobody takes advantage of such provisions, which we are trying to trigger in these rules. They can even kidnap somebody in his or her home, force them to write a resignation letter and bring it to Parliament. You may not know of the whereabouts of the person and within no time, during the next sitting of Parliament, the replacement process begins.

If we are to have this, then it should be a very rigorous process; we should make it difficult for somebody to resign. Why should it be just easy for somebody to just write a resignation letter? Suppose it is out of coercion where one is subjected to extreme conditions that make it difficult for them to resist the temptation of writing a resignation letter?

Mr byandala: Madam Speaker, I like what Hon. Cecilia Ogwal brought up about the Parliamentary Commission. That then brings up an idea that we can propose a body to look into this. 

The mere fact that the Constitution says you submit it to Clerk to Parliament does not mean that we cannot have a debate to know why that person is resigning. I think we would have abdicated our duties just to say the Clerk receives and the thing moves.

We should learn from every Act, which takes place. I still insist that we can add something; to have a body to discuss and call whoever is resigning to find out why. By telling us, we may be solving big problems within the institution. 

6.00
Mr emmanuEl ongiertho (FDC, Jonam County, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to give a suggestion starting with an example. When I was working with Plan International, for different levels of staff to resign, there would be a period of notice. A manager, for instance, would have to give a period of three months’ notice.

I would like to also suggest here that this office is very important. We cannot not accept that within a month or two weeks, a very important person is already going. Why don’t we say that the person gives us a notice of a certain period of time? 

For a Speaker or Deputy Speaker, we could still give a period of three months. Within that period, the Parliamentary Commission or whatever kind of body could be discussing and agreeing on what is happening. If eventually it is agreed that the person can resign, they can go thereafter and other processes of replacement can start.

However, if within the three months the other discussions or engagements have been made and probably the person has rescinded the decision of resigning, then the process stops. That would be my suggestion. Thank you. 

6.02
Ms betty nambooze (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is unfortunate that we are talking about these rules now. How I wish we had talked about this matter much earlier. 

It seems those who came before us, never at any one time thought that honourable members so gathered here to execute national duty and because of their assembling, they need somebody to chair the meeting – That they would descend so low and almost start fighting each other.

Yesterday, I was reading a newspaper and I got very sad that colleagues who are about to join us went to Kyankwanzi on a bus while feasting and drinking all sorts of beers and wines sponsored by somebody who wants to come back here and be a Deputy Speaker. 

The world is changing. Maybe we do not have much we can do regarding some of these things. With social media, you can even deal with one man who pretends to be a thousand people; changing names so that one may say, “This matter is very popular on social media,” when in fact you are dealing with a single person.

Madam Speaker, I have just been thinking and allow me to do that thinking on the microphone here. In which other political office do we have a deputy and a senior elected by the same voters? The President appoints his Vice President. In the Judiciary, the appointing authority appoints the Chief Justice and his Deputy on the advice of a forum under the Judicial Service Commission.

Thinking about that matter today, I was trying to understand why we should elect the Speaker and his deputy. If they are going into one election, are we going to have running mates or somebody who wanted to be Speaker and eventually settled for the position of the Deputy Speaker? Are we going to have someone who prayed to God that he or she will stay alive and one day become the Speaker? This might be the source of the insubordination we have witnessed in this office this time. 

Madam Speaker, I had just joined the Ninth Parliament but I was still following what was taking place here. You were a Deputy Speaker but I did not hear you - even once – attack your senior; never. I did not hear about it. 

I used to follow you, Madam Speaker. There is one thing – I am writing my book and I have put it there – that “Speaker Rebecca Kadaga does not want Members of Parliament who tease new comers.” That is the only way I was able to speak in this Parliament and maybe gather some courage. It was because when you were a deputy, I would make sure to be in Parliament because I found you to be kind; I am very grateful for that. 

This is probably not the right time but I would like Parliament to think about this; either we get a system which will make the Speaker and her Deputy cut a deal and campaign together so that we vote for both of them at once or we shall have to give the Speaker power. Leading an arm of Government is not an easy thing but you are elected to lead an arm of Government. Then, with our politics of manipulation, a deputy is put up alongside you and he refuses to cooperate - he will say that he was also elected. 

I understand each Parliament is supposed to make its own rules but now that we are talking for ourselves and for Parliaments to come, we need to revisit this issue of the deputy speakership. We are supposed to learn from experience; the experience we have had in the Tenth Parliament has been bad. We cannot continue legislating while setting up people to fight others. For example, if today I am the Deputy Speaker, I must undermine the Speaker so that I become the Speaker next time. 

When people were setting up our country, they thought that this office is at the same level with the President. The President leading the Executive appoints his deputy. The Judicial Service Commission assists the President to appoint both the Chief Justice and the deputy. 

In Parliament, people buy beer; waragi, mwenge bigere, kwete and start boozing around while abusing other candidates. This is not acceptable. We shall continue in this confusion when we continue voting for these two people at the same time; where one can really work to fail the other. Will we have a time when the Speaker will appoint his deputy and then he knows that the boss can suck him if he does not work well? 

We, the people of the Opposition seat here but I do not campaign to be the Leader of the Opposition. If there is any form of campaign, it is very silent. Somebody just wakes up and appoints me but this time, this matter has become too much and I noticed it in this final phase – it started when we were given the Shs 10 billion during the COVID period. The Speaker defended her Parliament which had been attacked and then one of our speakers joined those attacking us. We found ministers requesting to be asked about that money. We have undermined ourselves, Madam – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, let us go to the proposals.

MS NAMBOOZE: My proposal is at the right time, we should empower the office of the Speaker to make sure that it is not undermined by the office of a person who is supposed to assist her. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I think there were still areas not yet completed as to what happens when the letter of resignation is written. Is there a tribunal? Is there a hearing? I think we are still in the grey area. Chairperson, what do you have to say? 

MR ONGALO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. A number of issues have been raised by members. First of all, I would like to address this issue of why now? There seems to be some kind of suspicion that we are making rules for the next Parliament whereas Rule 172 of our Rules of Procedure mandates this committee to do this kind of work from time to time. 

The committee worked on these amendments before the State-of-the-Nation-Address but we had to shelve this and extract part of the amendments that dealt with Zoom participation just to enable His Excellency to address Parliament by Zoom. 

Therefore, we delayed the rest of these amendments and as you are aware, immediately after the State-of-the-Nation-Address and budget reading, we went for campaigns and we did not have time to consider these proposed amendments. 

I think Article 96 of the Constitution is very clear about the expiration of a term of Parliament. I do not know whether Members are trying to force my committee into oblivion, before our term expires, but this committee is mandated to work until Parliament is dissolved. We are simply doing our work and I do not see why Members should have that suspicion that we are working for the next Parliament. These are our Rules of Procedure. 

The honourable member also asked why it is at the very next business we have to do no other business but to elect the Speaker. Again, this is simply just to stick to the constitutional provision which states so. We cannot do otherwise because the Constitution says anytime these offices fall vacant, the next business of Parliament shall be the election of a person to fill that office. 

Hon. Betty Nambooze talked about the issue of the committee looking into the possibility of aligning how the Speaker and Deputy Speaker get appointed. I would request and I will support that we move an amendment to Article 82 of the Constitution so that we do it the way you want it done. However, it is not possible through this committee as long Article 82 of the Constitution says what it says.

Honourable members, the decision to be stand for Speakership is a personal one. I am sure that for the Speaker or Deputy Speaker, to submit their resignation would not be something that is just done out of the blue. It would be done after very serious considerations.

In addition, keeping in mind that Rule 107 of our Rules of Procedure provides a timeline for the forceful removal of the Speaker. Therefore, if we now introduce the issue of a tribunal and so on, then we possibly have to amend Rule 107 as well because this rule has a week within which the Clerk is notified in 24 hours and within which a publication is made and so on. Therefore, we have to keep that timeline in mind even when we provide for the voluntary resignation by the Speaker.

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, that is why I usually tell people that the Chairperson of the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges is a bright man –(Injection)- yes, I have noticed that several times. He takes time to think and he thinks properly.

Madam Speaker, I think it is only in order for us to realise that matters of resignation are not issues that begin with Parliament; People resign all over the country. I have also seen football players retire; I do not know whether that is resignation. However, for us to regulate resignation, it means we have to regulate people’s attitude as well because there might be a problem.

Therefore, in my opinion, resignation is person to holder and it is a right. Why would we say that when somebody wants to resign, that must be debated? We will be taking away somebody’s right. Madam Speaker, this chairperson is bright. That is the information I wanted to give. Let us maintain the position of the committee.

THE SPEAKER: In addition to what Hon. Aogon has said, if I resign and then you establish a tribunal, do they say that we do not agree? Ultimately, what does the tribunal say?

MR OTHIENO: Madam Speaker, the reason Members are bringing the innuendo of a tribunal or an inquiry of sorts is because we know resignation can be triggered by so many factors. 

It could be voluntary or forced. We have fears about the forced one resignation. It may not be in the right sense that the Speaker wants to resign but some forces may bear on the Speaker and say look, you must resign. 

They may even draft for you this thing; I mean the resignation letter can be drafted by somebody else and at a gun point –(Interjection) - yes, those are the fears we have, Madam Speaker. Somebody who is not happy can cause a resignation. That is what we are trying to avoid.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, think about what I asked you; what will be the final position? Will the tribunal rescind a resignation? I think we need to think around it.

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, people put a lot of faith and confidence in electing a Speaker. I think it is good manners for you to open up and say yes, “you had confidence in me. I have tried to work but this is the situation.” The tribunal, whatever you call it, is not going to force you to stay or go. However, sharing the situation or what is taking place may change your mind; two heads are better than one.

Therefore, you will sit down with those people, discuss and say, it is this; maybe you could even be wrong. However, if you discuss with that group, you might realise that you made a mistake and we move as a group, as people who put confidence in you. 

6.02
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (Independent, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Madam Speaker, I have been listening to my colleagues. When you follow the genesis of why a Speaker is dragged to the Chair by the Members, it is because they trust that person, the person is competent and is going to serve their interests.

However, the members themselves make it worse when after they trusted the Speaker to later start to undermine that office; that is what we should restrain from. 

If a Speaker is dragged to serve the Members in the Chair but the Members start undermining that office, that is what we should legislate on and restrain ourselves. The moment you trust a person, please given him or her benefit of doubt that he or she can serve the interests of the institution and is very competent.

Why they originally did that in the Commonwealth practice was because people sat and generated census and had no problem with the person; the Speaker always served the interest of members. 

When you look at the rules, you realise that the Speaker does not debate; they only listen and guide properly. The problem is the Members who cause that problem. You go start abusing the Speaker, without any courtesy. Where do you get the moral authority to abuse the person of the high institution? By the way, when you make it personal and abuse the Speaker of the institution, you are not abusing the Speaker but the whole institution of Parliament. You are ridiculing it.

I remember, the best example when I came across someone abusing Members of parliament saying they are like pigs, when she came for a vote, you know what happened. We should restrain from such language and have courtesy; those are our rules. We have a code of conduct. Respect whoever comes in the chambers; these are the things we have to consider.

When you elect your Speaker, you have entrusted him or her with that mandate. Do not go back and undermine him or her. I think what we have to work on is the Members. We should restrain the behaviour of the Members because that is what is causing all these problems.

Otherwise, we are undermining our own institution. This is why this is happening. I do not expect any Member of Parliament to start abusing the head of the institution yet they are going to be in that institution. When you go there, you will be abused the same way; suppose you also become a Speaker one day?

I think the best way is to follow the Commonwealth practice; how it was, or why we drag a Speaker. I think we shall find the best way to have our heads of institution serve us generously. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I have just been reminded that today is the third day of the Ramadan. Therefore, we are inconveniencing our Muslim colleagues. I really apologise to them. We got carried away. 

I would like to adjourn the House to next Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. You can use the weekend to reflect on what we have discussed. 

(The House rose at 6.25 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 20 April 2021 at 2.00 p.m.) 

