Tuesday, 12 April 2005

Parliament met at 2.40 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you back from the weekend and I want to congratulate our colleague, hon. Godfrey Kiwanda, for creating a family unit -(Applause)- a unit over which we build the nation. I wish him a successful life in that capacity. 

2.41
MAJ. BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (Isingiro County North, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a clarification point of national importance that may impact on our economy if necessary care is not observed. We have a problem in our energy sector because we do not have enough power to satisfy the needs of our infrastructure. The Government has thought it wise that we step up our power capacity to supply electricity to this country. As a medium term measure government thought of stepping up our power with thermo generation. 

Unverified reports indicate that government has again selected a very inefficient system and it is going to affect the power tariffs by making them rise up. We know we cannot build a dam in five years’ time. Instead of government buying the equipment, we are told they are going to lease. The impact of this is that power for the industrial sector is going to be very expensive and in our liberalized economy, it will render the products of this country very uncompetitive.

Secondly and most important, contrary to the policy of our government to lure investors, the power tariff is going to go up. I would like the minister concerned, or the Prime Minister, to make a statement to clarify on these issues. The way things are moving, it appears we have again selected a very expensive method of generating power contrary to the alternative where we would save US $50 million in three years. That means if we take this method they are adopting, government will be losing US $50 million every three years. Mr Speaker, I beg that we get a statement from the minister to clarify these issues. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, honourable members, your appeal is that a comprehensive statement should be made by the minister to explain what is being done. Your issues of expense and the others, we can take up these issues after getting the information from the minister. Since the Prime Minister is here and he has heard, we do not expect a statement from him but we expect a statement from the minister concerned. I do not know whether you want to say something about that?

2.44
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. These matters are intricate. I want to suggest that they should be discussed by the Committee of Natural Resources so that we get a comprehensive answer to the problem instead of a statement. There will be answers, questions and so on. It would help if it were probed a little more deeply. I so suggest.

THE SPEAKER: Well, the Prime Minister is suggesting that a decision has been taken, according to him. If a decision has been taken without the committee, why do you involve the committee in him making the statement? Let the minister make a statement. It may be satisfactory. If it is not, then Parliament may send it to the committee to dig up more details. The minister concerned should do that and I do not know how long it should take. Is it a week’s time?

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, we also need to bear in mind that if we give the minister unlimited time, they may use this time to sign the agreement. The figures I am privy to indicate that actually we are going to loose a lot of money and it is going to affect our industry and it is going to affect all power consumers. So, it should be within this week that the minister should clarify because if this information we have heard is contrary to the facts, then we should be informed so that we can take a decision from an informed position. If it is not clarified then we can refer it to the Committee of Natural Resources to investigate.

THE SPEAKER: Well, the sector minister is here. Would you like to indicate to us how long you want to take dealing with this urgent matter?

2.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE, ENERGY (Mr Michael Werikhe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to request that you give us one week. We will be able to present a comprehensive report after that.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Next Tuesday we expect a statement from you -(Interjection)- well, they have been put on notice that it is very expensive. There is a cheaper one, I think they will take it into account.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. What hon. Rwamirama has pointed out is a very serious issue and really the agreement they are going to sign is already on the table and the minister has it. So, how should it take him a week to bring this thing to Parliament? Why can he not produce it tomorrow?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Rwamirama has said that according to his information this is very expensive. It is on record now. We can trust that the minister has taken into account the statement and a statement is coming here next week. Let us give him time. Next week on Tuesday we expect a statement from him. (Interjection)- is it about this issue?

2.48
MR DANIEL OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): Mr Speaker, a month ago the Minister of Defence made his statement on the security situation in the country particularly in the North and Northeast and as a result of that I followed it up with a motion. It is now one month and I can see that the motion  - it even used to be in the middle now it is going further and further down. 

Noting that this is a matter of national importance and really it is deep in our hearts, some of us find it extremely difficult to operate in this House without peace being realized in our home areas. I really would beg the Speaker to find time to bring this matter forward so that we dispose it because it is related to the statement of the minister. The more we allow it to delay for very long the more we forget to relate it to what the minister said. Hence it will possibly affect the reactions of the honorable members in the House.  

I can see questions on VCCU, there were questions on Tsetse flies and a few other things, I do not know whether this one on lives of people –(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Yes, I quite appreciate that this motion has been on for quite some time. Actually last week it was at the top and now you say it is shifting downwards. The position is that last Friday when we met here, the Minister of Defence who has to handle it, hon. Amama Mbabazi, stood up and explained that this week he would not be here. He has got an assignment outside the country and he wants to be present to answer some of the queries on that particular motion. So he formally requested that this matter be kept pending until he comes back. That is why it shifted and I guarantee, as soon as the minister comes here, it will be No. 3 or No. 4 on the Order Paper.

2.51
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a comment similar to the one hon. Omara Atubo has raised. This issue affects us so much because these problems have come –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Which issue?

MR OKUPA: The cattle rustling. This relates to the motion the honourable member has raised here. That is why we feel that during this time as we are preparing for the budget process, we should be able to handle it urgently. We need help with this issue.

Two, there was a report here from the National Economy Committee and this was at the time we were discussing the Budget. There were very pertinent issues that were raised by the committee and we thought the Ministry of Finance would give response and beef us up during the budget debate. We hear that there was an answer that was communicated to either the committee or the members. Could we hear from Capt. Guma whether now they are satisfied with this, because we thought it would help us to beef up the budget debate? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: What was it? We have not started the debate; what is your problem with the Order Paper?

MR OKUPA: The problem with the Order Paper is that the issue has disappeared from it. It is not even on the notice of business to follow.

THE SPEAKER:  Okay, the point is taken.

2.53
PROF. OGENGA LATIGO (Agago County, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. If you would permit, on behalf of my people let me register our appreciation to you and to the American Ambassador for the photo exhibition that is going on in the Members’ lounge. We consider it a very important event because the crisis in our place was fully owned by Parliament and we think that it should be kept in the limelight so that solutions are brought up. That is why I thought I should get up and register our appreciation.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Ssentongo, you asked a question about the strike at Uganda Railways. Unfortunately, the minister came to answer it when you were not here, and now you are here but he is not. What I can say is that tomorrow the answers will be given to hon. Ssentongo’s question on the strike at Uganda Railways.

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am also raising a matter of national importance. It appeared today in New Vision with the heading that, “Hon. Otafiire, Minister of Lands, lamented that –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: If it is a matter of national importance and an urgent one, the established practice is that you see the Speaker before you raise it on the Floor. You will see me and maybe tomorrow I will accommodate you.

2.55
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (Kakuuto County, Rakai): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also rise on a point that requires special attention. Last Friday there was a crisis in Kibanda sub-county in a village called Nakalinzi, which happens border Mbarara District. There is a landlord from the constituency of my brother, hon. Nathan Byanyima, who came around and he is trying to evict bona fide occupants. 

In the process of trying to evict them, there has been loss of life. One of the cattle keepers died and the landlord himself has been beaten up thoroughly by the bona fide occupants. The Police came in, it surrounded the entire village, the chairman LC I, with his executive and a number of village people who participated in the process, have been taken to police in Kalisizo. Land crisis has become a major crisis in my constituency because of the very many people who are coming up with established firms evicting occupants without any compensation. This has created a lot of crisis in this area and a lot of people are very insecure. 

I do not know how we are going to do it. The Ministry of Lands has not responded by coming up with the land tribunal supporting the people to be compensated before they are evicted. I am appealing to the Prime Minister’s Office and Leader of Government Business to ensure that at least this crisis is handled. Otherwise, people are getting up in arms to ensure that whoever is coming up as a landlord - these are mailo land people who have come up as absentee landlords and they are evicting these people. So, I appeal to the Prime Minister’s office and minister in charge to ensure that at least a thorough report is carried out to ensure that justice is delivered to the people, if compensation is to be given. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I am just allowing him because I imagine he is a neighbour of hon. Kasamba. But as you realize honourable members, this is a matter, which is coming up often. Last week we were talking about evictions in land matters and this is another one. There is need to seriously address this issue not only for the local area but also for the entire country.

2.57
CAPT. DAVID MATOVU (Kooki County, Rakai): Mr Speaker, I thank you. On Friday the 8th the Chief Magistrate of Masaka, Her Worship Lady Mudasi Cissy, the Regional Police Commander, the regional CID director, the Resident District Commissioner, the DPC, CID actually the whole security apparatus was in Kyalurangira, my sub-county, which borders that place he is talking about, Kibanda. I think it is a project under the Ministry of Constitutional Affairs. We were all shocked. Actually the chief magistrate was overwhelmed by the number of people that had turned up, and the issues that were raised.

Halfway through our meeting the people that were cut came. It was too bad! They were all covered in blood and I think the matter is being handled by the Police. But in that meeting we found out that there is a problem in the implementation of the Land Act. There is provision for district land tribunals; we have one that is in charge of Masaka, Rakai, Kalangala and Sembabule. For Rakai it sits once in a week, on Thursday. So the officer says he is overstretched and he cannot handle the cases.

And there is no money to facilitate him and his members so disposing of cases is a problem. Mr Speaker, I request the Government that they should really look into that aspect very urgently and facilitate the implementation of the Land Act.  

Then the other problem is lack of co-ordination between the Police and prosecution in handling land case related matters. The Police are wasting a lot of energy like charging these people with criminal trespass, threatening violence, yet these are symptoms but fundamentally the problem is land. So you find that they also complicate some of these issues because of lack of that co-ordination. Mr Speaker, in Rakai we are badly off. People have now started taking the law in their hands and very soon we shall get a problem.

The last one is about illegal land settlers. Rakai borders several counties and there are people who now use relatives who settled in these places some time back, to come and assess some of this land. Of course people are poor. It is like this story of a camel: somebody had a camel and the owner was in a tent so when it rained, this camel asked the owner, “Can I put my head in the tent?” So he allowed the camel to put the head in the tent and eventually the whole camel entered the tent and evicted the owner. So we are worried. Very many people in my constituency are going to get evicted by some land grabbers and legal settlers. We need assistance and perhaps an investigation from the concerned ministry.

THE SPEAKER: Well, honorable members, this is a big issue but I want to inform you that this issue of tribunals is not a matter of the Land Act. It is something in the Constitution itself. Look at Article 243. It is the Constituent Assembly that decided that we have land tribunals and we gave them jurisdiction but even before that there were disputes and they were normal court systems that were dealing with these disputes. 

The question you may have to ask is whether these tribunals are giving us what we expect of them. It could also be that tribunals are not effective and maybe at the time of reviewing the Constitution this is one of the matters you should bring up. I am not saying you should but this is one of the matters you should address and see whether we go back to the normal court systems or we go with the land tribunals. So, it is wider than that and it is something, which we have to think about. We cannot exhaust finding remedies in this kind of debate but the concern has been expressed and those concerned should take it up and guide us on what to do. That is the end of the. Let us go to the business on the Order Paper.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE, TRANSPORT (Mr Andruale Awuzu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. A few minutes ago when you were replying hon. Teopista Nabulya you asked me to make that statement tomorrow. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.  

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.03
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Geraldine Bitamazire): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand here this afternoon to make a few clarifications about the implementation of the science policy at university level. I apologise that copies of the statement are not yet here, but I expect about 150 copies to get here in about half an hour’s time.

THE SPEAKER: Honorable members, what do we do now? Do you want copies or do you want the statement to be read –(Interjections)- okay, you can proceed with the statement.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to assure the members that the copies will be coming soon. 

Mr Speaker, the Government currently sponsors 4,000 students at all public universities, that is, Makerere University, Mbarara University of Science and Technology, Gulu University, Kyambogo University and Makerere University Business School. Those are the public universities in which the Government is sponsoring 4,000 students. 

The current selection of students sponsored by government is based on academic merit and is open to all fields of study at undergraduate and postgraduate levels. 

Mr Speaker, the awards from these public institutions include certificates, diplomas and degrees at undergraduate and postgraduate levels. 

Following consultations with the stakeholders a case has been made to recast the selection system so that admission under government sponsorship reflects the diversity of the economic and social composition of the people of Uganda. 

Many observations have been made by stakeholders that the current sponsorship system favoured students from rich families who go to high fee paying schools, staffed with competent and better-supervised teachers and endowed with better facilities. Such students, it is argued, perform better and on the basis of merit alone they take up virtually all government bursaries. Since such schools are not evenly distributed in the country, the existing selection system has led to lack of equity in access to university education between social economic groupings, classes and districts.  

Furthermore, many Ugandans from different walks of life have observed that sponsoring students to pursue courses in any field of study, without taking into account the country’s human resource and social economic needs critical for national development and social transformation, was inappropriate. They have urged government to make reforms to address that issue.  

Particular reference was made to perpetuation of the colonial and post-independence bias towards arts and humanities. Two examples are hereby cited. The first is that by June 2004 enrolment figures in public universities were 54,040 and that accounts for 84.7 percent pursuing courses in arts and humanities while only 9,771, that is, 15.3 percent of the students pursued courses in various fields of science and technology.

The second argument is that in the entire tertiary education sub-sector, for every five students registered in tertiary institutions - and I beg to make a correction there - only one is registered for science and technology. As a result, the gross tertiary science enrolment for Uganda is 13 percent compared to the Sub-Saharan Africa rate, which is at an average of 36 percent. 

It is also significant to note, Mr Speaker, that out of 14 private universities only two are offering sciences and technology.  

Mr Speaker and dear colleagues, Uganda needs a critical mass of Science and technology graduates and technicians. Enrolment for science and technology needs to move up to at least 50 percent within the medium and long-term plan. Similar action needs to be taken to increase the number of graduates in professional disciplines.  

It is against that background that the Government, with effect from this academic year 2005/2006, has taken a firm decision to recast government sponsorship in public universities. This policy will be: 

1. In favor of courses and programs critical for national development and social transformation with emphasis on sciences and technology disciplines.

2. The policy will be to introduce a quota system for students sponsored by the Government admitted to public universities every year. The quota will cover three components:

i. District quota,
ii. Sportsmen and women; and
iii. People with disabilities.

Those are the quotas set for a number of candidates who will be admitted according to those three categories.

Mr Speaker, what were the key features of the recast sponsorship system?

One, the present system of government admissions based on merit will be retained - I want to emphasise - for the 75 percent places, as it promotes international and national competitiveness of our universities. So, the merit system will continue. 

Two, 75 percent, which translates into 3,000 places at public universities, will go to courses critical to the national development and social transformation. The policy will be reviewed and courses will be determined by the Government from time to time, depending on the shifts in the national manpower and social and economic needs.

Three, for the academic year 2005/2006, Cabinet approved the study areas indicated in appendix 1. I am really sorry that the papers are not here but I will continue to explain. The breakdown of the study areas will also be indicated in appendix 1, point 1. I will go through that, Mr Speaker, after this statement.  

The 25 percent, which translates into 1,000 places, will be allocated as follows:

1. To district quotas and for districts 896 places will be covering arts and humanities so that students from those areas can get admitted to universities.

2. Under the 25 percent we shall have the sportsperson’s quota, which is 40 places. This will also include sciences and arts as the students may have applied.

3. People with disabilities’ quota, with 64 places to include sciences and arts according the wishes and qualifications of criteria in place. The 896 places for the district quota will translates into an equal share of 16 places per district per academic year, starting this academic year. We are basing these allocations on 56 existing districts.

Mr Speaker, the Government sponsorship of students pursuing courses in arts and humanities, this is where a lot of comments have been received and made. This statement, therefore, serves to clarify that government will not sponsor only science students at public universities but it will also sponsor arts and humanities students. 

The 3,000 scholarships for critical areas also include humanities, particularly those offered at Makerere University Business School, which will admit 430 students in those areas usually handled by that school. Makerere University’s Faculty of Economics and Management will be offering places amounting to 170. 

The Faculty of Law will have 90 slots. So, we are looking at 430 normally commercially based and entrepreneurship courses. The faculties of arts in public universities will have government-sponsored students in Arts and Industrial Design, Guidance and Counseling, Community and Industrial Organization Psychology, and Music and Drama. The remaining 1,000 slots are open for all study areas, which might include a lot of arts students. It is most likely that they will be taken up by students of arts or humanities depending on their pass marks and choices of subjects. The admission list will indicate clearly the distribution of slots between arts and sciences at each public university.  

Mr Speaker, what is the likely effect of this shift and bias towards sciences and arts, in other words, 75 percent versus 25 percent? There are two basic points of impact here.

One, the system of recasting government sponsorship based on the district quotas enhanced equitable access among districts and promotes social justice. As a system it will give an opportunity to each district to send students to universities on government sponsorship.  

Two, further analysis of the recast admissions indicate that starting with the 2005/2006 academic year, science and technology courses will take up 53 percent and arts and humanities will take 47 percent respectively.  

These two effects are very important to note and here we have analysed them. That is why it took me long to come with this statement because we wanted to analyse the ground realities. Having looked at all the realities, it seems that the translation into percentages will be 53 for sciences and technology and 47 percent for arts.

Having looked at all the ingredients involved, a lot of concern has been expressed about the selection guidelines and criteria for the students at the university following this government policy. I would like to go through the guidelines and criteria here. 

One, a candidate must be eligible for university admission and must have applied for admission to pursue a course in the identified critical area. The student must also be an eligible secondary school candidate. 

They must be citizens of Uganda. All candidates have to present for admission certified documents to verify their citizenship. Mr Speaker, at one time a Member of Parliament was wondering why students are being asked to produce these papers. This will illustrate why those papers are very necessary. How do we tell student A from student B? How can we tell their citizenship if we do not trace it down to where they were born, when they were born and by whom they were born and so on? So, those papers are now going to be very critical in deciding who meets the criteria of being a citizen of Uganda.  

Three, selections will be based purely on merit and places will be competed for nationally. Candidates must have the selection cut off points for a particular course they have applied, and must be eligible for admission to that course. I want to explain, Mr Speaker, that the fact that we have quotas does not mean people will walk up to the admission room with 9 points or 5 and think that they will be admitted, no. They must have met the minimum requirements and they must have applied for a particular course. Some students think they can now come in but they must have passed and they must have applied. That is the criteria and guidelines for the selection for the 75 percent bursaries reserved for sciences and critical areas of study in public universities.  

I now go to the selection guidelines and criteria for the 25 percent, which includes quotas for districts, people with disabilities and sportsmen and women. Mr Speaker, many people have come to me and some have telephoned to comment that they are wondering how LCs are going to sit down in their respective areas and start allocating places at universities. Some of them are saying that LCs will not have the capacities or the skills to do that job, and these guidelines will clarify that point. 

The 896 places, which fall into the quota for districts, will be open to all courses and programmes including those not identified as critical. So after picking all the eligible candidates for sciences these places or slots will be competed for regardless of what area of study. And that goes on to explain that the arts or humanities students will not really be closed out. 

Two, a candidate must also be eligible for university admission with the existing minimum requirements of two principal passes, and must have applied for university admission. Many students wait until the results have come out, depending on the marks that they have got then they come to say, “Madam Minister, can I not be admitted to the university?” That is too late because this process starts with the registration for examinations. So we are saying, the minimum of two principal passes and the application to the university, are a criteria.  

Three, a candidate must be a citizen of Uganda, as I have explained above.

Four, a candidate must compete for a place against a particular district quota. Mr Speaker, the district must be a candidate’s district of origin and the candidate should have studied or completed A’ Level in one of the schools in that district -(Interjections)- this particular -(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: Order, order, please!

MRS BITAMAZIRE: This particular guideline is very important because the idea of a quota system was to make sure that every district has a share of the admission. And if we do not go into those details probably the quota system will not have the same effect, which we want to achieve. So the universities are under instruction to go into all those details and try to make sure that no district is deprived of its chance of sending a student to the university. 

For those with papers, I would like to make an amendment to paragraph 6.4. The amendment I want to make is that districts without A’ Level schools - what do they do? We are amending these guidelines with the input from Members of Parliament and other stakeholders that if a district - and we have about three or four I will soon get the list of them – has no A’ Level schools, we will cater for them. That they do not have A’ Level schools does not mean that they do not have their candidates who qualify for university admission. They must have their students, their young people in other schools. Therefore, we are going to fish them out. 

If you have a district without an A’ Level school and your children are in Kumi and the student studies in Kumi or Soroti, provided their origin is Nakapiripirit, we are going to look them up and if they qualify they must get their slot allocated to that district. (Applause)

So, Mr Speaker, as I said I am amending this paragraph but I will probably send a typed text to amend it.  But that is an input which will help us to achieve the objectives of the quota system.

Then point No.2, what about districts which have been allocated 16 slots and they have only ten?  The original idea was that they return the slots which they cannot absorb.  On further consultations, it was suggested that if they have ten who studied in that districts, they might have the six in the Diaspora.  So, if a student from Nakapiripirit which has only ten slots and they cannot fill the 16, but they have their children in Rakai or Kanungu, provided their background and documents show that they are Nakapiripirit, they will be picked from those districts and make the 16 slots -(Applause)

Mr Speaker, as Members would remember, the third point which I am putting here as an amendment is about the girls, the female students.  I just want to remind the Members that the affirmative action policy is still going on.  So, the girls will not be jeopardized in any way by this recasting of sponsorship at universities.  I have made those amendments to add the districts without ‘A’ level, districts, which cannot meet all the 16 and then the girls whose affirmative action is already going on.

Criteria or guideline five: Uganda National Examinations Board will compile the top 16 eligible candidates per district in order of district merit.  So, the LCs and Chairman will not come in.  Now UNEB is going to say, from Kisoro, these are the candidates and where the 16 line closes, those 16 people will be taken from Kisoro without taking the list back to Kisoro, or LC I II, III, IV, V and then other people to deal with, UNEB is going to do this.  

UNEB will produce the list of students who performed best in each district, drawn from candidates who sat for their ‘A’ level in schools in that district.  But as I have said, later on, this will be amended.  The list will then be forwarded to Public Universities Joint Admissions Board, who will then select students in accordance with available places and students’ choice.  So, we think this will be the fairest way and the best way to do it whereby UNEB will give the list and then the board will select according to merit and choice of subjects.

What about the criteria to admit the talented sportsmen and women to universities?  Mr Speaker, allow me to say that Uganda does not have professional sportsmen and women and probably this contributes to our problem when we go out to compete with others. Government is very conscious of this need and inadequacy and about a year or two ago, the talented sportsmen and women were given slot at the university.  So how do we pick them?  

1.A candidate should be eligible for admission with the minimum requirement, that is consistent, the two Principal Passes.

2.A candidate has had outstanding performance at national or international level in a given sport or game with records or documents to verify his or her levels of performance.  It is not just to come and say, “I am a sportsman”.  Where are your documents to show your national or international levels?  So that will be one of the criteria.

3.A successful candidate under the sports scheme shall receive four points as a bonus.  This is another affirmative action.  If our young girl or boy has been out, representing Uganda and probably for his or her admission he only requires four points, that bonus will be put on top of her scores so that she makes it up for the time which she spent in Australia, Hungary and so forth.

4.This year, the number of slots for sportsmen and women has been increased to 40 from the 20 of last year. We need to slot in more sportsmen and women and this will be regardless of the sports discipline.  If they are footballers, runners, golfers, as long as they are nationally and internationally recognized, they will be given chance and 20 slots will be for girls and 20 for boys.  So the girls and boys will have equal opportunities in this scheme.

Finally, Mr Speaker, this is very important, only the current and future senior six leavers shall be eligible for admission under this scheme.  Those who sat ‘A’ level long time back, should not come to say, “Now that you have increased the slots, here I am”, no.  We are saying that those current senior six leavers and the future will qualify.

So, Mr Speaker, that paragraph is explaining how this talented sportsmen and women will be picked.  

What about the criteria and guidelines for admission of people with disabilities or with special needs?  Mr Speaker, a candidate must meet the minimum requirement, that is a criteria which is constant for all the admission.

Two, a candidate must show evidence of disability by attaching a certified medical report from a Medical Officer employed by Government or any other authenticated medical hospital.  Mr Speaker, that sounded very exciting, but there are people who came to me and said, their disabilities cannot easily be recognized –(Laughter)- and when I went on to ask, I could not go any further.  So, Mr Speaker, a medical document is required to certify the disabilities.

Criteria 3, in paragraph 8.3, we are listing the areas of physical disabilities:  Persons with visual impairment, persons with hearing impairment, persons with physical disability, persons with chronic illnesses, the sicklers, the asthmatics and the epileptics.  So, people with disabilities will be slotted according to the criteria as given above.

Mr Speaker, probably I need to go over the process of these sportsmen and women. Their identification does not start when the results come out. I would like to ask through you that members should note that nominations for these sports women and men must start before they join the University.  They should be watched and monitored at their schools.  

Secondly, the National Sports Associations should submit to the National Council of Sports names of those persons.  We are bring in the National Council of Sports, Mr Speaker, these are the people who are running our sports in the country and if there is any outstanding sports woman or man the National Council of Sports should have known him or identified him.  So, we are making a reference to that National Council of Sports to identify these men and women.  We do not want younger men and women to come and say they participated in the Commonwealth, but how did you get there when your National sports Council does not know about you?

Three, the National Council for Sports then will compile this lists starting with those who have represented Uganda at international and national levels.  For the national level they must have ranked first, second or third in their respective sports or disciplines.  Subsequently, the list is forwarded to the Ministry of Education or on ward submission to the Public Universities Admissions Board.  The nomination process, therefore, must be started well before Senior six for students who will compete for the sportsmen and women slots at the universities. 

Mr Speaker, as I come to the conclusion the question is and I want to emphasize, who will admit the 75 per cent that is the 3000 places of the students to be sponsored by Government and who will be the admitting authority?  

Mr Speaker, allow me here to say that the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act No.7 of 2001, gives the University the sole mandate to admit students in Universities to different programmes and courses taking into account their choices.  

The Public Universities Joint Admissions Board will, therefore, be the admitting authority. As they have been doing and as prescribed in the Act they will carry on with the above guidelines and criteria, which I have clarified.  Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Now, honourable members –(Interruption)

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Mr Speaker, I see my officers here. I wish they can run home and bring the papers.  I have two appendixes: I have appendix 1, which illustrates or gives the list of the subjects, which are critical to our development.  Appendix 2 gives the Arts and Humanities. As soon as I get them, Mr Speaker, I will distribute them for easy reference by the Members of Parliament.  I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.  Honourable members, this is a very important statement, which has just been read to you.  You are entitled to debate the statement by the Minister. My question to you, are you ready or we need time to study this and contribute effectively? I personally think you need time to study it and be able to come and debate it.  Do you need one day so that –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, you see honourable Aggrey Awori, we agreed on how to proceed.  

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I appreciate your guidance on the fact that we actually need to study this report.  I want to ask further, Mr speaker, noticing that the ministerial statement seems to have very far-reaching policy issues with it and it is so detailed.  Would it not be prudent to send it to the committee, have a committee report and have the participation –(Interjection)- yes, please, bear with me. Mr Speaker, will you please, protect me –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I am protecting you.  Well, my assessment is, the committee is aware of it and the Chairperson has indicated we will contribute. My concern was not about the Chairperson contributing, my concern was about you. I thought you need time to read it so that when you come, you are effective in your contribution.  I would be ready to give you the other Thursday or tomorrow depending on what you think is convenient to you. 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, the reason I make that argument is, even as we listen to the presentation there seem to be certain things that even the Minister is making to us and still subject to amendment.  What if we and other stakeholders looked in detail at this and then come back to this House? Besides anyway, what is our procedure with ministerial statements, after listening to a ministerial statement, do we come up with serious recommendation that is biding, Mr Speaker? This is why I proposed that way.

THE SPEAKER: No, it is a question of internalising the statements, after internalising then you are in position to make meaningfully contribution.  That is why I thought if you want time I give you one, we come back on Thursday and concentrate on debate on this particular statement. It appears there is consensus. Therefore, the debate will take place on Thursday. 

MR OMARA ATUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I fully agree with your ruling and with the proposal of hon. Alaso. But I also note that the policy statement has got some inter-ministerial implications. So that possibly when the Minister of Education is coming to answer on Thursday as you have ruled, there are certain things, which will definitely be asked by Members of Parliament. 

For example, the bases of the districts, whether the Government for that matter- I am not talking about the Ministry of Local Government- intend in the near future to satisfy requests for the new districts and how it is going to affect this new policy. So, these are things, which I believe that when they do come up in the debate the Prime Minister should ensure that the Ministers who are going to be affected are present on that day.  Thank you -(Interruption)- the Minister should be present to respond. This is what I mean.

MR AMURIAT:  Thank you very much. Mr Speaker. I tend to agree with my colleague hon. Omara Atubo. The Minister’s statement was not complete. We are talking about University Education and I am aware that there are scholarships that come out of State House that we need to discuss. Yes, the criteria that is used to give out these scholarships need to be known by this House. I thought just like hon. Omara Atubo said, it would be necessary for some of our Ministers to compare notes so that when it comes to the time of debate such questions can be answered instantly. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Is Minister of Education answerable to State House matter?

MR AMURIAT: Well, Mr Speaker, I know we have a Minister in charge of the Presidency and since this is cross cutting and it could be considered inter-ministerial, may be the Minister in charge of Presidency may consider to come to this House and respond to some of these concerns.

THE SPEAKER: We dealt with this matter of State House scholarships?  Any way -(Interruption)

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Mr Speaker, We appreciate that we shall require a number of Ministers to be around to discuss this statement. There are issues concerning with policy shifts which we have to know. We have to know the manpower planning requirements of this country to discuss this. We need to know the nature of planning of Government whether they are using the bottom up or the top up planning which has to be answered by various Ministries including the Minister of Finance. 

We need to know the policies in the Ministry like where she uses sports, they have to come up and tell us the sports policy they will use. So, there are very many cross cutting issues which have to accompany this statement which I think the Minister should get prepared to answer and other Ministers particularly in terms of manpower planning, because this is serious adhocism in public policy management, and it has to be answered by a combination of officers led by the technocratic Prime Minister.

MR KIWANDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When the Minister was reading the statement, I saw that it was cross cutting many ministries. So, as somebody has requested, we shall require many Ministers to be around on that day. Is it not prudent that we give this report – you know, it is a statement but I do not know the difference between a statement and a report? We have never received such a big statement. 
	
I would propose, since we have the Social Services to look into all these matters and bring something well - when they have consulted all the Ministers. At the end of the day we shall be having something out of it. 

Mr Speaker –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: You see, hon. Member, what may happen is this- may be the Minister contacted the Committee. I will ask the chairperson. But what may happen is this, this is a Ministerial Statement of which you are competent to debate and as a result of our debate here, you may come to a conclusion that we need our Committee to study it. But that does not prevent you to debate it. I have decided to give you time so that you study it, internalise it, you come here, debate it, the Sessional Committee if it wants it can pick from there. But let us separate the two, the Committee may come in. Let me hear from the chair, yes, you want to complete  –(Interruption) 

MR KIWANDA: Yes. Mr Speaker, if it is like that then the copies need to be availed to all Members of Parliament because most of us here have not received any copy –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you give the copies.

MR KIWANDA: So that by time we debate it, everyone has a copy. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MRS HYUHA: Mr Speaker, it appears that many honourable members have forgotten that the Minister is responding to an issue, which we thoroughly debated here on 16 May 2003.  The issue of quota, Mr Speaker, is not something new. Every year we have been raising this issue demanding that Government should respond. 

The issue of teaching sciences, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, Chairperson, as far as I know members have not started debating the statement. We are just finding how are we going to handle it. When it comes to debate, you can refer the Members to previous debates. We are on the modalities of handling the statement.

MRS HYUHA: Mr Speaker, what I was trying to clarify is that this issue was tabled before the Committee. We brought a report, debated, referred to Cabinet to make consultations and come back. So, I feel that Government should report back. I also appreciate your ruling that let us give time to honourable members to read. I wanted to remind the honourable members that it is not something new, but Government is responding back to public concern, which we already raised. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have agreed that we need time to study – you go and study the statement, on Thursday you will be given sufficient time to make your contribution- (Interjection) 

MR ALINTUMA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was just seeking guidance. When we begin debating this statement on Thursday, will we be able to take into consideration that after the review of the Constitution, assuming that we introduce the duo citizenship in this statement, the Minister will not have included –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: No, it is a question of fact. If you become a duo citizen, well, it will be catered for.

MR ALINTUMA: So, that is why, Mr Speaker, I would request the honourable Minister to ensure that by the time we debate, we have already a slot for our children who may want to study here in future. It is not included anywhere. We could have a district for our returning citizens to take advantage with Uganda’s education system.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, let us do things as they are. When there are changes, we shall be able to address those changes. 

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I have raised on a point of procedure.  When the Minister was actually reading the statement, he actually apologised to this House that she has submitted less than 100 copies. All along we had agreed that we are going to debate the report on Thursday. I am at a loss because the few copies, which are submitted, nobody is even willing to lend you a copy to photocopy.  So, I want your guidance, how are we accessing the copies?  Secondly, there are annexes, which were not even attached to the copies circulated to members.

THE SPEAKER:  Okay, when you talk about a report, annexes are part of it.

MRS BITAMAZIRE:  Mr Speaker, I apologise that the copies might come in a little bit late.  But I want to inform members that my order was that we make 310 copies of this statement covering all of us, including all the Annextures.  So, even if they come during this session, Mr Speaker, I will ask for permission to distribute them.  Every Member of Parliament present and not present will get a copy.  I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable Members, since we have agreed this matter is coming on Thursday, let us handle another business.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER 

QUESTION NO. 16/07. TO THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENVIRONMENT.

3.56
MR RICHARD MUTUMBA (Kawempe Division South, Kampala):  I thank you, Mr Speaker. “In my constituency so many timber dealers/traders are faced with an increasing threat to their economic livelihood by unscrupulous persons to wit: VCCU operative, UPDF officers and security Personnel purporting to act on behalf of the NFA to apprehend them and further confiscate their timber.

i) What policy is being implemented in having people engaging in a legitimate trade of carpentry and timber sawing randomly arrested and have their merchandise arbitrary confiscated or used as blackmail to solicit bribes from them?

ii) Why the Minister targets the carpentry and traders and is more lenient to the charcoal and firewood traders and with what impact is such preferential treatment accorded to the different traders?

iii) Why the Minister and the NFA instead of using it’s officials or Police officer to effect arrests in the extension of it’s duties they employ the services of the Military Police, VCCU, LDU and UPDF Personnel who have been and continue to be accused of continuous harassment of and extortion of money from the civilian population?

iv) What procedure is followed to ensure that innocent persons dealing in legitimate timber business do not suffer at the hands of the people employed to execute the orders of the Ministry and NFA?

v) What policy is in place to sensitise and educate the general public on the best practices in ensuring a sustainable utilization of our National Forestry Resources?

3.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENVIRONMENT (Lt Gen. Jeje Odongo):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  First of all, let me begin by thanking hon. Sebuliba for asking this question.  The fact that he has asked the question is a clear manifestation of the fact that he is interested in what happens in as far as the forest sector is concerned.  

May I also add that in the course of next week, I will be making a statement in relation to the forest sector in particular in relation to the encroachment and the eviction surrounding the 506 Central Forest Reserves in this country. But today let me confine myself to the questions asked by honourable Sebuliba. 
 
The first question – maybe before I say that, indeed in the preamble to this question, honourable Sebuliba, himself seems to acknowledge the fact that the bad act he is referring to are actually being carried out by impostors.  

Let me take the opportunity to inform the House that sometime in November last year, I issued a public notice, which was published in the New Vision of 12 February 2005. In that public notice, I explained a number of issues on 12 November 2004.  It was a Friday that is when that public notice was published.  In that public notice, as I mentioned, I explained a number of issues.  

But what is important to note, is that the letter and spirit of that notice does not in anyway imply victimization of legitimate timber dealers.  In fact, anybody arbitrarily confiscating timber from such dealers or soliciting bribes should be apprehended. 

 In the course of June/July last year, I did commission an internal investigation by the timber-monitoring unit of the National Forest Authority.  Now, this investigation was able to identify a number of individuals and organizations, who have been operating as imposters.  Some of these individuals include a gentleman by the names of Sam Mwanje, another gentleman by the names of Mukwaya, another one by the names of Buwembo and another one by the name of Sekalala.  Now, these are the impostors who operate in the Bwaise-Kawempe harassing the genuine timber dealers.  

We were able to identify that they often moved in a vehicle Reg. No. UAD 390T and that they were claiming to be coming from either Kalangala Action Plan or the VCCU.  Now, I have taken note of this, we followed it up and we handed this matter to the police.  We hope that the police dealt with it, because we did not get a report of any other incidence beyond that.

It is also important to note that on our part, we are extremely conscious about what we do in our dealings with the general public, because we are worried of the costly litigation that we might be involved if we mishandle the public.  So, in our part, we are extremely conscious and very, very courteous indeed.  So, this act as I have mentioned, are not really by members and staff of the National Forest Authority, they are carried out by impostors whom we have identified and reported to the police to handle.

The second question, which my colleague did ask was: “Why the Ministry targets the carpentry and timber trailers and is more lenient to the charcoal and firewood traders and with what impact is such preferential treatment accorded to the different traders?  

I want to categorically state that there is no question whatsoever by the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment targeting carpentry and timber traders and being lenient to charcoal and firewood traders and illegal forest produce offences are treated in the same way without fear or favour.  

Indeed, we do have a record of what has been done in as far as illegal timber produce is concerned.  For example, in the month of October, November, December last year, we were able to arrest eight lorry loads of illegal sand abstracted from the forest reserves, we were able to arrest 26 lorry loads of charcoal and we were able to arrest 12 lorry loads of firewood and billets. This shows you that we do not target only timber; we handle illegal acts as and when they occur.  

In the month of January, February and March this year alone, we have arrested so far ten lorry loads of illegal sand abstracted from the forests, 18 lorry loads of charcoal, -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, I do not want to interrupt you, actually, the way you have gone is very good in that you have been very brief.  I think it is only when anybody disputes you that you would resort to giving those details.

LT GEN. ODONGO: I thank you for your guidance, Mr Speaker.  So what I was trying to say is that we actually try to handle all illegal acts when and as they occur.  

The third question the honourable member did ask is, Why the Minister and National Forest Authority (NFA) instead of using its officials or officers to effect arrest are resorting to employ military police, Violent Crack Crime Unit, Local Defence Units and Uganda People’s Defence Forces Personnel.  

As I have already hinted earlier, we do not employ these personnel. NFA has its own Timber Monitoring Unit and indeed, if you look at the National Forestry Authority and Tree Planting Act, there are officers recognized as the authorized persons to handle these kinds of things.  

However, sometime in 2003, we indeed employ armed personnel to escort these authorized persons after finding out that some of the culprits are actually armed and violent, we needed to protect our personnel but since then we have ceased to utilize Local Defence Units or military personnel.  

The honourable member also did raise a question: “What procedure is being followed to ensure that innocent persons dealing in illegitimate timber business do not suffer at the hands of the people employed to execute the orders of the ministry as a national forestry authority. 

Early this year, we organized a workshop for timber dealers and that workshop was held in Lugogo.  Now, in the course of that workshop, I did make an address, indeed I cautioned the timber dealers against impersonators.  

I directed the National Forestry Authority to publish the names as well as the telephone numbers of the authorized persons.  So the timber dealers know who the authorized persons are and outside this those are impersonators. 

Now, through that interaction, we were able to demonstrate that indeed there are impersonators. I would like also at the same time to point out that we recognize the timber dealers as our partners. It would, therefore, be self-defeating for us to harass our own partners. We do not do that, if anything, we require every body’s contribution in order to be able to bring this sector into sanity and get rid of all these impersonators.

Finally, the colleague did ask, what policy is in place to sensitise and educate the general public on the best practices on ensuring sustainable utilization of our forest resources?  Colleagues, let me point out that we do have a very, very elaborate policy in place to sensitise and educate the general public on sustainable utilization of our forest resources.  This policy includes, among others, quarterly timber dealers meetings like the one I have just mentioned.  

We also hold ad hoc meetings over and above the quarterly one. There are also meetings at district level with district leaders and timber dealers.  

Within the National Forestry Authority which are country wide we do have an open public relations section which accepts persons of all categories to come and interact with them and raise any questions that they may wish to raise. 

In Conclusion, Mr Speaker, colleagues, I would like to say that the National Forestry Authority and Tree Planting Act and indeed the National Planting Authority, which you put in place is an organization founded on three basic principles: The principle of integrity, the principle of transparency and the principle of excellence.  These values guide and are strictly observed in all our operations.  

May I as I conclude, urge all of us to come together and get rid of the impersonators so that the bona fide and genuine traders are saved the headache?  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  I must thank you for having a very clear and brief- you have given brief answers to clear questions. I think this should be emulated. 

Now, hon. Sebuliba, any supplementary questions? But without prejudice, I am expecting questions not debate.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Mr Speaker, let me thank the hon. Minister for having attempted to answer the questions and putting my spirits at bay.  I refer him to answer number 1, where he referred to some of the persons involved in this illegal acts being impostors.  He left it hanging, I do not know what happened to them, what were the findings of the police and how can we identify the real law enforcement officers of NFA from the impostors?  

Lastly, the confiscated timber, how do we reclaim it, is there a fine, do we pay, are we supposed to go to court? What are the remedial actions that can be taken when my timber is confiscated such that I know I am in the wrong and I can pay a fine and then retrieve that timber?  Thank you.

4.00
MR SITENDA-SEBALU (Kyadondo East, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Mr Speaker, mine is a short question. The Minister has said that some of these people who were nabbed were either claiming to be for Kalangala Action Plan or VCCU.  

It is important, Mr Speaker, first to establish where these people are so that we get to know who these people are, what are their names and what are their true identities so that the name of Kalangala is no longer tarnished. We should know when they are caught, who they are and what are their identities. This is very important because some of us are sympathizers of Kalangala Action Plan.  I thank you.

4.05
MS NAKADAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I would like to refer to question number three. The Minister said that they do not employ these people to do this work, but in Mayuge District NFA is the manager.  It has hired these people to harass my people. Right now there are cases of defilement and rape. Those people who have been hired to go and evict people from the forest reserve have caused death. 

Last week, over 20 women were raped.  They have caused death because of the brutal harassments. One woman was beaten, she got a miscarriage and she died - Mr Speaker, I am coming to the question – another one was burnt in the house, she is now at death point in Buluba Hospital. They have destroyed property, that is malicious damage of property. They have cut all the crops down using those people they are hiring.  All this is done under the influence of that sector manager. 

I think the RDC’s office is aware of this. These people who are hired they say they are armed and get uniforms from his office.  One of them testified before the police officer that he got this uniform because he was a veteran from the DISO’s office.  

So, I would like to ask the Minister, what immediate action can be done, because right now people are continuing to be raped and police is not taking any statement from these people because they are intimidated. I do not know what can be done, because Government has kept a deaf ear.  This is something, which has been coming on and on, but up to now nothing has been done.  Maybe the hon. Minister should tell us what action could be done immediately to stop these harassments.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, are you aware that your agents in Mayuge district apart from enforcing this, are committing other crimes, and what are you going to do to them?

4.10
MR PETER MUTULUUZA (Mawokota County North, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In fact, when I rose at first this is one of the main issues I wanted to point out.  I was in my constituency, last week and –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, ask a supplementary question.  Honourable members, please bear with me, I tend to insist that question time is question time. Therefore, if you have a question, it is a question rather than a statement.

MR MUTULUUZA: Now, my question, Mr speaker is. I understand power saws were banned around Central area. How come that they are still being used?  Timber that is always transported from our area they use power saws.  

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I wonder whether there also permits for charcoal dealers because, a lot of our trees have been destroyed by charcoal burners.

Thirdly, I am asking the Minister whether there are plans to plant trees, because people are destroying trees but they are not planting.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.15
MS MARY ORIOKOT (Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.   I would also like to ask the hon. Minister in these forests where NFA acts is operational are ordinary local people not allowed to go and water their animals in these areas or to collect medicinal plants or to collect mushrooms?  In other words, are the local people completely barred from these forest areas?  I am saying this because last week I was in Kaberamaido and this was the outcry. I was instructed, hon. Minister, to come and bring these complaints to you.  Thank you.

4.18
MRS IDAH MEHANGYE(Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you very much, hon. Minister.  I would like to ask the Minister and my question stems from question five of your policy about sensitising the public.  

In your policy, hon. Minister, there should be a tree planting day in this country so that we do not only cut down trees but we also plant. As far as I am aware, I have not heard such a day declared that we are going to plant trees in this country. We would all be sensitised about how we plant these trees.  When do you hope to come up with such a day that this nation plants trees?

Lastly, I would like to ask about the charcoal burning.  Honourable Minister, in my opinion charcoal burning is doing a lot of havoc in depleting our natural trees and forests. I do not know what you have in plan to regulate the charcoal burning.  Thank you.

4.20
MR DAVID WAKIKONA (Manjiya county Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Mine is just a brief question. Hon. Minister how many people have you taken to court who have been involved in this illegal trade?  

Secondly, just last Saturday I was witnessing at Plot 21/22, just near your house in Mbale, your people were loading timber- somebody called Muswahili; he is common trader in Mbale town- on lorries. They went to the shop and loaded on the lorry and disappeared with it.  

Do you have official lorries registered with Government numbers like those of UEB so that people know where the timber is taken?  

Secondly, do you make people acknowledge that their timber has been confiscated for this and that and, therefore, if they want, this is the procedure? In other words, do you have any forms where people agree that they were involved in this so the timber has been confiscated, because it appears timber once taken you will never trace it?

4.27
MRS AANIMU ANGUPALE (Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask the honourable minister some questions. In his answer to question one, where he stated that he had issued a public notice on apprehending any person who arbitrarily confiscates timber or any timber dealer, I wanted to ask him whether he got information from Arua last year where timber was confiscated from the dealers and this time in the stores not on the lorries. With your notice, did the officer in charge of forestry or in charge in the district communicate to your department that such people had come to the district to confiscate timber? So, if the officer in charge did so, what steps did your department take?

Then secondly honourable minister, I wanted to ask you, how frequent do you have the district meetings because there are people who put on red caps, they always tell the timber dealers that they are sent from the centre to go and confiscate timber in stores and sometime they claim that they have been sent to claim timber which enter from DRC. I wanted to know from you whether you have some mechanism of identifying timber, which enter across the border with the timber, which is within the district so that timber dealers are saved from that harassment.

Mr Speaker, I wanted to ask the minister, what measures do you have to help the timber dealers in trying to recover their timber because, some of them lost almost 50 to 100 million that time when people with red caps went in the district to confiscate their timber in the stores?

Before I take my seat, honourable minister, I wanted you to inform us particularly me I am interested because in my district, I have very many big businessmen who deal in timber. I wanted you to inform us, who is in charge in the district when such people go into peoples’ stores claiming that they have been sent from the centre? Is it the forest officer or the DPC police? Who is the person in charge so that we can inform our people accordingly because when these people go they normally disturb us, they call us that “they have come, they are taking our timber” and what have you. So, it is today that you should inform us so that we can also inform our people of the office to go to for rescue. I thank you very much.

4.29
MR NELSON	GAGAWALA WAMBUZI (Bulamogi County, Kamuli): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The question I want to ask the minister in Charge of the Forestry is, what is the rate of destroying forests in the country at the moment? Because recently you published that we have got only, is it 9,000 acres of forest? But at what rate are we losing the forests and at what rate are we planting the forests both as government and as private sector? I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it not really time to allow the minister answer because, we cannot exhaust everything; these were merely supplementary and must be limited. Okay, let us do this; Butamira, then –(Mr Lukyamuzi rose_) - there are no forests in Ndeeba - hon. Banyenzaki and Kooki. I think that is representative and then we take Moyo, Yumbe and the islands. But please, be brief. 

4.30
DR FRANK NABWISO (Kagoma County, Jinja):  Yes, Mr Speaker, I will be brief. My first question to the minister is whether he is aware that even Jinja timber dealers have had problems with KAP and VCCU. Mr Nkayi, the chairperson of the timber dealers in Jinja, has been writing to your ministry complaining about these people.  

My second question is whether you have received any communication from the President because, when he visited Kagoma we proposed that in order to sensitise and educate the public about the importance of forests, actually forests should be grown by cooperatives instead of these individual planters and so on. I do not know whether you have received any word from the President on this matter?  

4.31
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (Rubanda County West, Kabale):  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Hon minister, are you aware that actually your so-called enforcement officers are not in charge and the people who are in charge – there are some people who, I do not know whether they purport or what, but there is, for example, a person called Rwabwogo who says that he comes from President’s Office and he has overwhelming powers and your officers do not have control over this gentleman. Are you aware that when this timber is confiscated, the timber cutters are not issued with anything to acknowledge that they have confiscated their timber? They never get it at all and it is auctioned within that week. Honourable minister, when that timber is sold, where does the proceeds go because every week you are selling timber?

The hammering policy: Your enforcement officers are always confiscating timber that has not been hammered. They even go to the extent of going in the shades and they confiscate the timber that has not been hammered, but the people never get to know where it goes. It is like a spree; they have some days when they go and confiscate timber. And once they confiscate your timber, however much it is - people who deal in this timber, specifically the Bakiga, have lost a lot.

Why are you not giving uniforms to the enforcement officers? KCC have a uniform, LDUs have a uniform, whoever is talking has a uniform, why do you not issue uniforms to the enforcement officers instead of saying that you are cautioning timber dealers against impersonators? How will they know an impersonator and an official? How can they differentiate between the two?

Lastly, are you aware that National Forest Authority is now a competitor in timber dealing because, they have established their own cutting zones and they cut timber and ferry it to the real timber dealers themselves? So as a result, National Forest Authority is using its own arm on failing these timber dealers so that they only buy from them, and even their selling is not clear and transparent. What are you doing? Has government changed the policy of divesting itself from business? 

When we approve loans here, like National Forest Authority, you turn it out into a business and you start cutting timber and selling it and as a result you become competitors of the people who are dealing in timber and you start terrorizing and harassing them. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: But please, be very brief with your supplementary questions.

4.33
CAPT. DAVID MATOVU (Kooki County, Rakai): I thank you, Mr Speaker. One, I wanted to learn from the minister what policy they have for sustainable use of the forest resources, because controlling and running up and down people may not help? There is a case in Sango Bay; people are harmoniously relating to the forest out of that UNDP project. People can collect trees, people can harvest a few items there cautious of the fact that it is their resource. So, do you have a policy on sustainable use of forestry resources?

Number two is about private sector promotion. I am worried protecting alone the natural forest may not help us. Do you have plans like to promote and bring on board the private sector to participate in tree planting?

Three, there was this project called, “Sow log tree planting project” in your ministry. Does it still exist, Sir?

Then, I wanted to find out if there is coordination between NFA and the land officers; because I have a case where forest land has been allocated to people by the very institution of government. So, I wanted to find out if there is really coordination. Why should, like land office, allocate forest land to people?

Then my last one is about NGO-government collaboration –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question was basically about people dealing illegally with forestry products. It was not a question for general policy on forest and forestation. So, the question should really be concentrating on how to treat these people illegally dealing with forest products. Otherwise, it appears the thing is widening to forestry policy by the ministry. But anyway, finish your – (Interruption) 

CAPT. MATOVU: Lastly, Mr Speaker, I want the minister to tell us about these people, the impostors, this Mwanje, Sekalala. We would want to know their address back home, because these are dangerous people to the community. I would really feel relieved if I get to know who these people are? I thank you.

4.35
MR JOHN KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker; very brief this time. I have a testimony here to the effect that a number of timber dealers based in Ndeeba have already reported to me that they are miserably harassed by NFA. My first question, Mr Minister, is on this notorious VCCU. Is it not a shame for you to use the services of such a notorious organization to monitor timber?

Secondly, Mr Speaker, is the minister aware that much as NFA is lenient to charcoal traders, massive charcoal burning is environmentally unfriendly?  What steps have you taken to ensure that you educate the masses about modern cooking stoves, which economize energy in this energy crisis we are in?

Lastly, is the minister aware that poor awareness on sustainable use of forestry resources in Uganda is due to the ministry’s failure to educate the masses about the contents of the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, 2003? A good number of people do not know the contents and yet the taxpayer from year to year pays for your staff in NEMA. What are they doing? We need a serious answer.

4.36
MS NUSURA	TIPERU (Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The minister in his answer talked about the monitoring unit; that was very good.  I just wanted him to clarify to the House, there are allegations that the timber-monitoring unit has got conflict of interest, that they harass other traders and then they let free those associated to them. Can you clarify so that we can know that their credibility is not questioned? I thank you.

4.37
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to also raise a supplementary question from the conclusion of the minister, where he said that NFA is found on integrity, transparency and excellency. I would like to raise a question whether the minister with NFA, they have plans to resurvey the forest reserves especially in Buvuma Island. 

I raise this question because last month on 20th, NFA visited one of the forest reserve and they burnt down houses of about 25 people, and the landlord neighbouring the forest reserve is actually also claiming ownership and is actually responsible for the settlement on the forest reserve. When you actually look at the map, most of the forest reserves in Buvuma Island have been depleted. So, do you have plans of resurveying the forest reserves in Buvuma Island and the country at large? Otherwise, the depletion of forest reserves in Buvuma Island has impacted on the water levels of Lake Victoria. I thank you.

4.38
MRS EUGENIA JOYO MINDRA (Woman representative, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like the minister to answer this question. Is he aware that three quarters of the population in Pechakiri parish in Metu sub-county are displaced and now they are in part of Yumbe and they are causing land problems? There are now quarrels there. Almost three quarters of Metu area is now marked as a forest reserve and yet the people have been living there for the last 20 years, let me say since 1985. 

Now, will those people who have lived there for so long and are displaced, their houses are burnt, their crops are slashed down be compensated? They are now a disaster in the district. What is the ministry going to do about them because it may cause even fights between the people of Yumbe where they have run to the border to settle there? They are asking me, I was there last week, is the forest just to be a forest without people, would the people disappear and the forest grow? That is the simple question of the local people. Thank you.

4.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE (ENVIRONMENT) (Lt Gen. Jeje Odongo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and colleagues. I must really acknowledge the interest colleagues have shown in this subject matter, because in the short period of asking supplementary questions, a total of 15 colleagues have asked questions. I must say I really admire the interest. 

Hon. Sebuliba did want to find out what happened.  As I said, the matter was handed to the Police, we indicated these names, unfortunately they have not yet come back. So, I do not know for sure what has happened. But, we did report the names, the times and the vehicle but we have not yet got a feedback from the Police. So, I cannot say for certain. 

You did want to know how the bona fide NFA people could be identified. I did indicate to you that during the meeting we held in January, all the names of the enforcement officers were indicated and their telephone numbers. So, all the timber dealers who did attend this meeting and who represented various associations did get these lists and they should have given them to their friends to be able to ring to find out, “This guy is here, is he one of you?” And it would have been easy unfortunately it seems many people do not use this. 

What happened to the confiscated timber? First and foremost, you know, NFA is supposed to be a self-sustaining organization. Two, you know that this is illegal timber; so what happens when it is confiscated, it is auctioned by public auction and the proceeds go to NFA coffers.  

Now, hon. Nakadama Lukia did raised the question about Mayuge and what is happening. As I did indicate from the very beginning, in the course of next week I will be making a statement on the question of encroachment and eviction. So, what she is talking about is the eviction and the encroachment of south Busoga forest reserve, which we are trying to resolve now. All these are issues surrounding that and I will be explaining this in detail next week in that statement. 

MS NAKADAMA: Thank you, honourable minister.  Honourable minister, you are talking about next week, but I have told you that right now people are being raped. These people are causing death, people who are being beaten do not have treatment, they are starving because they do not have food and they are not allowed to go and collect their food.  They do not have treatment because they do not have money; the little money they had had been taken by those people. So, if you talk of next week, I do not know what these people would be on. How are we saving these people if we are talking of next week? I thought this is something, which needs some immediate action so that we can save the lives of those who are still there. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I really sympathize with the situation in your area, but these are cross cutting issues. When you talk about rape, there must be an agent of government to deal with this issue. You do not have to ask the Minister for Environment to deal with this one. Although he should punish his people, but the Police should take immediate action; because when you rely on his answer then the Police apparently is not doing anything. The Police should deal with these issues of rape, murders and whatever you call it. I thought you need that clarification so that you do not rely on him alone. You do not have to wait for a week for action to be taken against these criminals; they are criminals if they are doing this.

LT GEN. ODONGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that clarification. The point I was trying to make is, the issues surrounding south Busoga forest reserve are complex and they are on going. When I said I would make a comprehensive statement next week, I am not saying I am doing nothing. In fact, even before I came here I was meeting people from Mayuge itself. So, I am on continuous contact and interaction with the situation in south Busoga forest. But, I would be able to summarize all these actions in that statement next week.  

Yes, power saws are illegal and part of the timber, which we confiscate are that which is cut using a power saw.

Yes, we do license some but not many charcoal dealers. Yes, there are plans to plant trees some of these plans are what are already indicated in the Farm Enhancement and Tree Planting project, which is due here. Others are on going, the Sew Log project is one such, the Clean Development Mechanism is another, and the private individuals and organisations are going on. This is a continuous exercise and it is going on.  

Hon. Amajo wanted to know whether local people are allowed to utilize the forest at all. Yes, they are allowed. 

There was a question for a need for tree planting and I said certainly, there is need for tree planting. In the 30 years before now, we have actually lost a total of 52 per cent of our forest cover. So, there is need to plant trees. 

Hon. Wakikona said there were officials near my house in Mbale. I do not own a house in Mbale, so I do not know what he is talking about. However, the question of official transport, you know, because the operations of the National Forest Authority are various and National Forest Authority was only instituted in April last year, it is not yet mature enough to own all the transport it requires so it does hire vehicles. 

There is a mechanism to acknowledge and for you to have something in writing to indicate that your timber has been confiscated. However, if people are not getting that, that is a mistake. But there is a mechanism.  

My colleague did raise a question about Arua, I am certainly aware, yes. Last year, a team from National Forest Authority did go to Arua. Yes, they did confiscate some timber and indeed in the process it was discovered that there was a lacuna in information. When I consulted with the LC V chairman, we said we will allow this error after a meeting and education. So, yes, I was aware of that incident, I did have an interaction with the LC.V Chairman of Arua about that particular incident. 

“How often are district meetings held?” I cannot be very specific, I do not know for certain, but I will check that and I will be able to tell you. 

“Do we have a mechanism for identifying timber coming from across the country?” Yes, we do. Because timber originating from within the country is supposed to bear numbers, a hammer number one to nine and something else. So, yes, there is a mechanism. At any rate as it enters through the customs it is identified. So, there is a mechanism for identifying timber coming from outside the country.

MRS ANGUPALE: Honourable minister, in this incident really, the timber which were collected in timber stores were already cut into specific sizes where there is no labelling. When timber is already labelled either 6 by 12, 6 by 4, that label may not be there. I want us to save a situation, which is a little bit critical in the district because I believe it may happen again. If timber is confiscated on lorries by the roadside, that one can be really justice. But timber which is in stores is very difficult to identify. I wanted a situation where we can rescue those timber dealers particularly those who are licensed with their stores in the district.  Thank you.

LT GEN. ODONGO: I thank you, honourable colleague. When timber is in the shade it does not necessarily mean that it is legal. So, of it actually may be illegal. For example, it may have been cut using a power saw. So, they need to visit and identify the problem. 

There was a question as to the rate of forest depletion. I will have to check my data and be specific on this.  

The rate of re-planting again yes, we are planting but I cannot right now be able to say this is the rate at which we are progressing. I can tell you roughly the acreage not by everybody but by NFA.

There was the question of timber dealers in Jinja. Yes, I do remember last year there was a problem and indeed the honourable colleague from Jinja had invited me to go and meet the timber dealers. Unfortunately, I have not had the opportunity to go and talk to them. Yes, there was a problem, but I do not think it is continuing. 

No, I have not yet received communication from His Excellency, the President I am sure it is still on the way. I will get it and I will deal with it accordingly. 

There was a question as to whether I am aware of an enforcement officer called Rwabwogo. Yes, he is a stall of NFA and he works in the operations department, which deals with these questions. I am aware of him. 

There was a question, which I have already dealt with, the question of acknowledgement. There should be acknowledgement. Unfortunately, if it is not happening that is an error, which the timber dealers should insist on. 

“Where do the proceeds go?” As I said, once the timber is confiscated and it is auctioned, the proceeds go to the NFA coffers. They are the ones dealing with that.

Yes, there are plans for identifying the enforcement officers of NFA by uniforming them. As I mentioned, NFA is still a small organization, the enforcement unit is still small, it is growing, they are perfecting it, they will be uniformed for easy identification.

“Are you aware that NFA is a timber dealer?” No, I am not aware. I do know that NFA owns the forests, authorizes timber lumbers to go and cut the timber into timber and logs. I am not really aware that they have also become timber dealers, but I will check your information and I will be able to confirm whether they have become or not. I will check that information and if it is true, thank you for raising it to my attention, I will handle it.

The policy on sustainable use of forests: I am not very sure that this has been clearly expounded. 

Yes, the private sector is participating in tree planting, as we speak of now. Indeed, the 506 central forest reserves, which I did allude to, are not all forested. So, what is happening is that NFA allocates land to individuals who applied and these individuals do plant trees. 

Yes, there is a “Saw Log Scheme” an EU project and it is through this that individuals can benefit when they participate in tree planting. What happens is, you register as a tree planter and when you have reached a minimum of 100 acres of trees, you report to the project manager, they come and inspect your forest and on examination of your books and they are certified you are doing a good job, you recover 50 percent of your investment. That is the Saw Log project.

Yes, there had been incidences in which government institutions, the land department have issued land titles within forest reserves. It is true, this is a mistake and we are working to correct those errors wherever we have identified them. You must also know that institutions had basically kind of fallen by the way side and as a result they were not coordinating and effective. But we are beginning to identify incidences where indeed individuals have been granted land titles within forest reserves and we are rectifying them. 

I did indicate from the very beginning that we are not employing VCCU. So, for us to continue to insist whether I am, I fail to understand. If people are acting contrary, that does not mean we, the authority, are using them. 

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, thank you honourable minister forgiving way. There is a very serious problem and honourable minister, I am sorry to interrupt you. In your opening statement, you acknowledged that you have impersonators in the name of Kalangala Action Plan and VCCU and that you have reported to Police and up to now, you do not know. 

For a minister of Government of Uganda, a former Army Commander of the mighty UPDF, a General, to be aware of impersonators who have guns and are terrorizing citizens and you say, you have reported to Police and you do not know what is taking place, it is dangerous and it is a problem. This House is a representative of the people so that their human rights are not trampled over. I need your guidance, Mr Speaker, as to how the population is going to be protected if the minister comes here and says he does not know.

THE SPEAKER: My guidance is that, in asking these questions, making statements, you should avoid personalizing the questions and statements. You ask the minister the question, you do not go beyond that and if he has made a report and it has not been followed, then we might as well ask the police. But let us minimize personalizing statements we make here, unless it is inevitable. Maybe we allow the minister to finish his answers.

LT GEN. ODONGO:  Mr Speaker, I thank you for your guidance. I always like to be very humble and I will remain humble. (Applause)

Hon. Lukyamuzi did indicate that charcoal burning is bad for the environment; certainly it is. That is why I say, that it is only very, very limited.  In fact, we are encouraging moving away. Indeed, we are trying to educate the people to use more economical charcoal stoves, I agree.  

You also did raise the question of tree planting, which I have already explained that yes, it is happening. But really I am not satisfied at the rate at which it is happening, we need to put in a little bit more effort.  

My sister hon. Tiperu did indicate that the timber-monitoring unit might have a conflict of interest.  I will want to investigate that a little more before I can really say it is the matter. But it is interesting that you have raised it and certainly, I will look at that. Is there a conflict of interest, are they doing something they are not supposed to be doing and we will deal with that if we find that it is so.

Mr Speaker, yes, NFA as we speak now is trying to establish the integrity of the 506 central forest reserves under its control. So, the exercise of opening boundaries to determine the extent of these forest reserves is going on. That is actually partly what is going on in south Busoga now, because we are trying to establish, what is the extent of these forest reserve so that we are able to determine who is in, who is out and what should we do. So, yes, there is the exercise of establishing the extent of the central forest reserves.

And there was a question, finally, about Metu. I may say yes, I am aware, indeed hon. Agard Didi has written to me about what is happening there and I have promised him on the 24th of this month, I will be there to look at the situation and see what we will do about it. I thank you colleagues and Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I thank you, Mr Minister, for the answers and the members who have put the questions.  Honourable members, there is one observation I want to make. Many times I have observed Members crossing the Floor unnecessarily; this is not permitted in a number of parliaments including the Parliament of Uganda. You are not supposed to walk from here, you go there, you walk from there you go there. If there is a Member you want to approach, what you do, you take your side, you find a way, come here and that is the exit. That is how it should be, you may not know it, but I could rule you out of order when it is done.  But since this is the first warning, I hope it will be heeded to and it will not be repeated.

MR RUHINDI: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I do not know how careful I should be in the observation I am about to make, but I am of the opinion that given the constraint of time, we have to deal with other urgent and very important matters. We survey a possibility in our Rules of Procedure of delegating some work to our sessional committees like questions for instance that are put on the Floor of the House and take substantial time. I have a feeling that if they are delegated to the responsible sessional committees where the responsible minister can interact with those responsible sessional committees, we could save a lot of time by way of attending to serious matters like passing of Bills and other urgent important work. I do not know, Mr Speaker, but this is a matter we can survey and discuss a bit further.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, I think it is a good suggestion, but the problem as I see, the question should not take more than an hour. The time is an hour, but what I have observed is that what Members consider to be supplementary questions are not really supplementary questions, they are independent questions of their own. I always try to remind you that please ask supplementary, because supplementary should arise from what the minister has given as an answer rather than a substantive question. We are learning slowly, slowly. 

But the question of delegating them to the committee – you know, there is a personal agenda for the person asking the question. If it is finalized in the committee, well, you see the point?  But I think your idea is a good one, which should be taken up and see how best we can utilize that wisdom of yours. I quite appreciate, but let us know what are supplementary questions. 

Also, I must say, I have seen written answers, which are essays. This should be just a direct answer. I mean, somebody has asked you, you answer. If he is challenging your answer, then it should come by way of a supplementary to challenge you. As the minister was saying he pulls up his and then he gives the answer. But these answers definitely, which have been given today were very brief, I must say and were direct to the questions asked. Slowly, I think we may go on editing the answers and the questions.

As I told you, I witnessed a session in Edinburgh where in 50 minutes 15 questions were answered including supplementaries from different persons. So if we can also do that, I think we shall be economizing on the time, but I appreciate your suggestion hon. Ruhindi.

MR PATRICK MWONDHA:  Mr Speaker, I was only adding that the import of questions for oral answers really comes from concerns of the public.  Some of these questions are asked because the public is either suffering or losing out in a certain way. Sending them to the committee would not realize what is required of these questions. This is what I wanted to add.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us study the proposal and see how best to utilize part of it. I thank you honourable members.

MR WAKIKONA: Thank you Mr Speaker. Mine is to put the record right, because in the reply of the Minister, hon. Jeje Odongo, he implied that I am a liar; I have never lied. It is true that there is Plot 21/22 in Mbale of Mr Muswahili on Bunyole Road. It is also true that the house I always see him at is near Plot 21/22 on Bunyole Road. 

Mr Speaker, I want to put the record right and anybody is free to check on me. It is also true that on Saturday, a lorry came and took timber from this plot; it is near my hotel, Mr Speaker. So I cannot make a mistake and I am not a liar. They loaded the timber and off they went with it. I thought I should put that record right, and Parliament is free to investigate.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we shall verify the information.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ACCESS TO INFORMATION 
BILL, 2004

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, my information record is that we completed the general debate arising from a motion for the Second Reading of the Bill, the access to the Information Bill 2004.  What remained was to put the question to dispose of the motion. I now put the question that the Bill entitled “The Access to Information Bill 2004”, be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ACCESS TO INFORMATION
 BILL, 2004

5.10
Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AND FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mrs Margaret Zziwa): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that we insert the following sentence after Clause 1(2): “The Minister shall in any case ensure that the whole of this Act comes into force within the current financial year”.

Justification: There is need for a deadline as to when the entire act should be in force.  

The MINISTER OF STATE FOR INFORMATION (Dr Nsaba Buturo): Mr Chairman, I oblige.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Chairman, in sub-clause (1) I beg to insert the words “Local Government” between the word “departments” and “statutory corporations”. The justification is that in the formulation, the Bill leaves out the local Government yet there is a vital part of the Government from which information maybe accessed or maybe thought to be accessed.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Chairman, I also beg to move that clause 2(c) be deleted, because this is appropriately covered under clauses 21 and 24.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4
 
MRS ZZIWA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that in clause 4, which is the interpretation section, we replace the definition of information officer with the following sentence. “Information officer means the Chief Executive of any public body”. 

The justification is that the committee observed that in all Government bodies, the respective Chief Executives are answerable to all that transpires in their organisations. It is the prerogative of these officers to assign duties to their subordinates.

Secondly, it is against the Public Service mode of operation to open up other channels through which the public may access the Government body other than through the Chief Executive. So I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Chairman, I also beg to move that immediately after the definition of prescribed, we insert the following: “Privacy means the right of a person to keep his or her matters and relationships secret”.  

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Chairman, I also beg to move that immediately after the definition of Rules Committee insert the word “security” and “security means the protection of Uganda against threats such as crime, criminals and attacks by foreign countries”.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Chairman, immediately after the word, “security”, I beg to move that we insert the word, “sovereignty”, and “sovereignty means the supremacy of the state”. 

The justification is that the above words are used in the Bill but they are not defined yet they are subject to various interpretations and it is important for them to have definite interpretations with regard to this Bill.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 5

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that we insert immediately after clause 5, the following sub-clause: “For avoidance of doubt, information and records to which a person is entitled to have access under this Act shall be accurate and up-to-date so far as is practicable”. 

The justification is to ensure that information that is accessible to the public is relevant to their needs. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Is it my understanding that this is a different clause?

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Chairman, it is a new sub-clause which is part of clause 5. So the right of access will be there, which is 5 under 1 and then 2, insert.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that clause 6(1) and (2) be transferred to the part of the Bill that deals with restrictions. So in this particular respect we shall not have those two parts as being part of clause 6. So this is just because that they are misplaced; they deal with restrictions yet the clause here deals with access to information and records. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, you are saying that Clause 6 should only have only 1 not 3 sub-clause? Okay, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to

Clause 8, agreed to

Clause 9, agreed to

Clause 10

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that we replace the words “information officer” that appear in Clause 10 with the words “chief executive” and for purposes of this clause, it will read as follows: “For the purpose of this Act, the chief executive of each public body shall be responsible for ensuring that records of the public body are accessible under this Act”. 

The justification, Mr Chairman, is that it is a consequential amendment. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 11

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that clause 11(2)(f) be deleted. The justification is that the request fee is prohibitive and unfair to the public. However, a fee for retrieval and reproduction of information could be charged, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to

Clause 12

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that we replace the word “Deputy” appearing in the head note with the word, “duty”. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, as amended, agreed to

Clause 13

MRS. ZZIWA: Mr Chairman, in clause 13 I beg that you replace the word “fourteen” appearing in 13(b) with the words “twenty one”. The justification is that 14 days is too short given the volume of work before chief executives, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Chairman, I beg that in Clause 15, we replace the word, “thirty”, appearing in 15(2)(a) with the words, “twenty one’. The justification is mainly for uniformity throughout the Bill. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, as amended, agreed to

Clause 16

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that in clause 16(1) we replace the word “thirty” appearing in the last line with the words “twenty one”. The justification is that 30 days is too long a period for access to information and after such a long period of time, the information may have lost its use but at least 21 days is quite ideal and not too long a time for at least getting this information.  I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 17

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Chairman Sir, I beg to move that clause 17(1) we replace the word “thirty” appearing in the second line with the word “twenty one”. This is a consequential amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 17 as amended - any amendment?

MRS ZZIWA: Yes, there is 17(2). Mr Chairman, 17(2) we replace the word “thirty” appearing in the second line with the word “twenty one”. It is also a consequential amendment, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 17, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 18 agreed to.

Clause 19

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that in clause 19 we substitute sub-clause 1 with the following: “Where a request for access is made for a record containing information which is required or authorized to be refused under part 3, then every part of the record which does not contain any such information shall be disclosed not withstanding any other provisions of this Act.”  This is mainly for clarity.  

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that in clause 19(2)(b), we introduce the word “sub” before each of the words “section” appearing in the last line to read as follows: 
“(2) Where a request for access to –
(a) a part of a record is granted; and 
(b) the other part of the record is refused, in accordance with sub-section (1), section 16(2), applies to paragraph (a) of this sub-section and sub-section 16(3) to paragraph (b) of this sub-section.” 
These were really typographical errors, Mr Chairman. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 20 agreed to.

Clause 21

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that we delete the word “personnel” and substitute the words “health records” with the words “physical, mental, health medical files”. This is for clarity, Mr Chairman. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 22 agreed to.

Clause 23 agreed to.

Clause 24

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that we insert a new clause immediately after clause 23 to read as follows: 
“Cabinet minutes and those of its committees – 
(1) subject to sub-section (2), Cabinet minutes shall not be accessible to any person other than an authorised public officer  
(2) Notwithstanding sub-section (1), the minister may, from time to time by regulations made under section 40, prescribe the categories of the records –(Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Thank you very, Mr Chairman. I think the chairperson, instead of first dealing with clause 23, has started with this one, which is supposed to come after 23.

THE CHAIRMAN: I have already dealt with 23. 

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Chairman, we are inserting after clause 23 which we have already pronounced ourselves on. So I want to go on the new insertion, the new sub clause 2. “(2) Notwithstanding sub-section (1), the minister may, from time to time by regulations made under section 40, prescribe the categories of the records which shall or may be released after the expiration of 7 years, 14 years and 21 years respectively after the record came into existence.” 

The justification is that for the proper functioning of Government, Cabinet minutes must be given specific protection. The amendment also allows the public to access Cabinet minutes after a period of less than 30 years which is currently the situation and which the committee considered to be too long.  

DR NDUHUURA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I thought we were already through with 23. But according to the chairperson she is now dealing with clause 21, new clause. So I am seeking clarification as to how we are proceeding, Mr Chairman.  

THE CHAIRMAN: As far as I am concerned, this clause should come after clause 23 which we have already dealt with. If it has an amendment, the amendment was not brought out.  

DR NDUHUURA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, what the chairperson of the committee is reading to us appears on page 19 and we are already on page 20.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, for me I am not already on page 20. I will go with this one. So, as far as I am concerned, I have dealt with 23. But if somebody thinks that we should go back to 23, there is a process, which we shall take. But let us deal with this one, and then we see how we proceed.  

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I am seeking clarification on the new clause that is being inserted, in respect of sub-clause (2). You see, here we are dealing with Cabinet minutes and those of its committees. I am wondering whether sub-clause (2) specifically deals with Cabinet minutes or whether it is a provision of general application in the Act.

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Chairman, under the fear of not being quoted out of context, when we are dealing with clause (2) and we asked to move the issues of Cabinet, that is former 2(a) Cabinet records and those of its committees. We said let it be deleted from there because we wanted to transfer it to the area of exemptions. This is because we were not dealing with exemption in clause 2(a). That is why we are now introducing it here, because this is an area of exemptions. 

THE CHAIRMAN: So I put the question to the new clause read by the chairperson. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that Clause 24 stand part of the bill.

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Chairman, in clause 24(1), I beg to move that we replace the word “shall” with the word “may” and this is mainly for clarity.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS ZZIWA: I want to move that in 24(2), we replace the word “may” with the word “shall” and this is again for clarity.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 25

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that in clause 25(1)(a), we insert the words “as defined in section 4” to read as follows: 
“(a) Proprietary information as defined in section 4”.  The justification is that this is for clarity.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 25, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 26 agreed to.

Clause 27 agreed to.

Clause 28 agreed to.

Clause 29 agreed to.

Clause 30 agreed to.

Clause 31

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that in clause 31 we substitute the word “twenty” with “ten”. The justification is that the twenty years is too long and by then the particular information could have lost relevance to the situation. The Committee thought that ten years is more appropriate.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 31 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 32, agreed to.

Clause 33

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that clause 33(1), we replace the word “thirty” with the words “twenty-one”. The justification, Mr Chairman, this is a consequential amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Chairman, I have another amendment on 33(3)(c). We replace the word “twenty” with the words “twenty one” and this is also a consequential amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 33, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 34

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that we substitute the word “twenty one” appearing in clause 34(1) with the words “thirty” and replace the word “go” appearing in the last line with the with the word “two”. This is a consequential amendment, and there is also a typographical error, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 34, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 35

MR KAWANGA: Mr Chairman, I have a problem with clause 35 and all subsequent clauses, which will deal with the Inspector General of Government (IGG). I notice that this Bill intends to ascribe some functions to the IGG, but the office of the IGG was created by the Constitution, which also specified the functions of the IGG and eventually these functions were set out in another Act of Parliament. Is it legitimate for this Bill to give functions to the IGG, which may be at variance with what is actually set out in the Constitution? I do not know whether the committee looked at this aspect and found it appropriate. This goes through 35, 36, 37 and 38.

DR NSABA BUTURO: Mr Chairman, hon. Kawanga is absolutely right. But I think it is the duty of this august House to do what is right. These are simply proposals and if they can come up with something better, we will oblige.

MRS ZZIWA: In addition to the honourable Minister’s clarification, that part deals with complaints and appeals. When we were looking at in the committee, definitely there were concerns that if a Ugandan citizen is aggrieved and he cannot either access this information quickly or there is some dilly-dallying, he should have where to go. 

So, in here this is being put, not necessarily to ignore the fact that the IGG exists and with all these powers and the institution, which put him in place. This is a comprehensive law on access to information just to facilitate anybody who will feel aggrieved to seek re-redress, anybody who may have a complaint to go to the IGG. But when it is a matter of an appeal then we go to the courts of law. That is how the committee looked at it, and we thought that that was in order.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think the essence of the observation is; should we add more responsibility to IGG than those given to him by the Constitution or the parent Act? The idea is that we must create somewhere where somebody should go, but the question is; did you address yourself to this issue, that you are actually giving IGG more powers than he has under the Constitution and the parent Act? If you didn’t, you may take time to consider it and then advise her appropriately. 

So, if this is the case, then maybe we resume or we take other – But they are consequential, because from that one you go to clause 36; they are all hinged on the IGG. If he is being questioned, can we proceed with those - What do we do?

MRS ZZIWA:  Mr Chairman, I would appreciate if the concern is about giving more work to the IGG. I think that for all purposes we would just think of the way of equipping the office of the IGG with more staff and more resources to deal with this problem if it exists. But if you think that maybe it should not be within this IGG, I do not even know now where else because the question of the courts of law was also thought about very comprehensively. 

The cost of the courts were also thought about and the procedures which normally are restrictive or at times defined where many of our people may not be able to really appreciate. Also maybe, the courts of the Legal Counsels and so on and so forth, this is why this arrangement was put in place, to give people who may think that they cannot access the courts of law but they are feeling unfairly treated. We thought that this kind of obligation is given to the IGG within the Article of the Constitution which establishes the IGG. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, I think it is a legal issue, which we cannot dispose of readily here. But, of course, the case has been made up that we need a certain structure to hear complaints of this nature. You may have to borrow from other jurisdiction; there are materials on what is being done in United Kingdom, I have the materials if you want, you may have to look at them and see. But his was not that the idea is good, his was the legality of it.  

So, maybe, you will be given some time to look at it again; we may not really solve this problem here. I see it is an entrenched issue, which you should give time. Whoever wants to contribute to the debate in the committee or with the Minister so that you come back when you can answer the queries raised by hon. Kawanga, but at the same time, give us or give the public a solution where access has been refused. 

So, can you move a motion for resuming the House?

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I appreciate the concern raised by hon. Kawanga, but I do not see any contradiction or conflict whatsoever, because the function detailed for the IGG under clause 35, if you look at Article 225 of the Constitution, it says: 
“The functions of the Inspectorate General of Government shall be prescribed by Parliament and shall include the following – ” and they are many of those functions, but I wanted to take this one under 1(c), which says, 
“to promote fair, efficient and good governance in public offices”. 
To me, that falls squarely within that and really to postpone this matter is, in my opinion, not prudent.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I think take the provision, which hon. Ruhindi has read, come and advice us after you have considered this, not here but somewhere else, taking also into account that –(Interruption)

MR MUZOORA KABAREEBE: Mr Chairman, I want to supplement to hon. Ruhindi on the functions of the Inspector of Government the Ombudsman 225(e) where he is authorized “to investigate any act, omission, advice, decision or recommendation by a public officer or any other authority to which article applies, taken, made, given or done in exercise of administrative functions; and 
(f) to stimulate public awareness about the values of constitutionalism in general and activities of its office, in particular, through any media and any other means it considers appropriate.” 
So, I think we shall not have gone out; this is the responsibility of the Ombudsman. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I think you go and deliberate on this and come back and equip us with your findings then we shall proceed.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE, INFORMATION (Dr Nsaba Buturo): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE, INFORMATION (Dr Nsaba Buturo): I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Access to Information Bill, 2004” and passed up to Clause 34.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE, INFORMATION (Dr Nsaba Buturo): I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much honourable members. We have stopped at the issue of IGG being the office to which the complaints can be raised and we have been assisted by hon. Ruhindi and hon. Kabareebe Muzoora. But in considering it, you have also to address the issue of, if the functions are to be held by this office, what would happen if that office is the one, which has declined to give information? So, you may have to find another independent that would even encompass the refusal by the IGG. (Interruption)

MRS ZZIWA: Considering these developments, I request that at 12.30 tomorrow, hon. Kawanga and others who could assist us in this matter meet in the Training Suite so that we can be ready to come back to the shop tomorrow. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: So, with this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.55 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 13 April 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)


