
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Tuesday, 19 April 2022

Parliament met at 1.58 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. Hopefully, you had a good Easter. I know most of you stayed behind to work on the ministerial policy statements. I, sincerely, would like to thank you, Members who stayed behind. That is the sacrifice that we can make, as leaders, for the good of our people.

Honourable members, as you all know that we have specific timelines within which to consider the budget, I urge all the committees, which have not completed the reports to do so. We will receive the last reports by Thursday this week so that we are able to present them in the House and forward them to the Budget Committee for reconciliation and appropriation.

All sectoral committees should present their reports in the House, as required, before the 20th – which is tomorrow – in accordance with rule 149(1) of the Rules of Procedure. The reports should be considered by this House and referred to the Budget Committee in accordance with rule 149(2) of the Rules of Procedure.

I also wish to remind the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to finalise the tax and revenue Bills so that this House considers them before we go to Committee on Supply.

Honourable members, I will amend the Order Paper and include the Committee on Presidential Affairs to present their report since they have other engagements. So, the Committee on Presidential Affairs will also present their report today.

That is the end of my communication. We have some matters of national importance. Hon. Luttamaguzi? Hon. Lutaaya? Hon. Kwizera?

In the absence of these Members, we will go to the next item.

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL ENTITLED “THE PARLIAMENTARY PENSIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL”

THE SPEAKER: Is Hon. Rwakajara in the House?

MOTION THAT THE HOUSE RESOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

B. SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2022/2023:

I) THE COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS

THE SPEAKER: But why don’t Members keep time? Can we have Item no.4 A?

A. THE REVISED EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2022/ 2023

2.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Speaker, I have the honour to present a statement on the budget proposals for the estimates of revenue and expenditure for the fiscal year 2022/2023.

I have prepared this statement to provide a summary of the budget proposals for the revenue and expenditure for Financial Year 2022/2023 as conveying:

    1.  The budget and growth strategy for Financial Year 2022/2023. 

    2. The resource envelope and expenditure allocations for the next financial year. 

    3. The list of documents that I laid in Parliament along with the Financial Year 2022/2023 budget, in accordance with sections 13(3-11), 23, 39(4), 42, 44(5) and 76 (1-2) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. 

Background

Madam Speaker, as required under Article 155(1) of the Constitution and Section 13(3) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, I, on behalf of His Excellency the President, presented the proposed annual budget for Financial Year 2022/2023 in Parliament on Thursday, 31 March 2021.

It was informed by the National Budget Framework Paper and ministerial policy statements for Financial Year 2022/2023 as earlier approved by Parliament.

The theme of the next financial year’s budget is: “Full monetisation of the Ugandan economy through commercial agriculture, industrialisation, expanding and broadening services and digital transformation and market access.” This is derived from the third national development plan’s (NDP III) overall theme of increased household incomes and improved quality of life of Ugandans, which is in consonance with the NRM manifesto for this term.

Main focus of this statement 

The budget and economic growth strategy for Financial Year 2022/ 2023 

Madam Speaker, both the economic growth and budget strategy for Financial Year 2022/2023 focus on three broad objectives, namely;

    1. Addressing the health and economic challenges presented by COVID-19 for the economy to fully recover back to pre-pandemic levels.

2. 	Maintaining the investments in the fundamentals of security, economic infrastructure and the provision of reliable and affordable social services for building the resilience of households and economy to future shocks and ensuring sustained long term growth; and

3. 	Fostering faster socio-economic transformation, targeting lifting of the 39 per cent of the households stuck in the subsistence economy, to the money economy. 

Madam Speaker, the fiscal environment in which we prepared the budget for the Financial Year 2022/2023 did not enable us to accommodate all our resource needs. Consequently, we repurpose the budget to finance key priorities of Government; that is, the Parish Development Model, enhancement of pay for scientists and operationalisation of new administrative units, among others.

The economic growth in the Financial Year 2022/2023 is projected at six per cent. The key economic growth and recovery drivers in the next year's budget are the Parish Development Model and other Government programmes, including Emyooga; the small business recovery fund and financing under Uganda Development Bank, Uganda Development Corporation, among others.

Therefore, other factors constant, Uganda's total GDP is projected to expand to $47.18 billion, an equivalent of Shs 173.96 trillion, which is equivalent to $137.3 billion in purchasing power parity terms. This translates into the GDP per capita of $1,049. 

The details of the budget priorities and economic growth strategy are provided for in the National Budget Framework Paper and the respective ministerial policy statements for the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

The resource envelope and expenditure allocations for the Financial Year 2022/2023 

Madam Speaker, the estimated total budget for the Financial Year 2022/2023 amounts to Shs 47,250,950,438,911 of which Shs 28,668,318,992,740 is due for appropriation while Shs 18,582,631,446,171 is for statutory expenditure charged directly on the Consolidated Fund. 

Details of the resource envelope and programme allocations for the Financial Year 2022/2023 are provided for in Annexes I and II of the statement. 

Madam Speaker, as we deliberate on the budget for next financial year, I beg the Committee on Budget to take into consideration the economic environment in which this budget has been prepared.  That is:


    1. Our inability to borrow over 53.9 per cent, which is in itself above the maximum requirement of 53.1 per cent provided for in the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility. However, we expect this to be restored to 47.8 per cent of GDP in the medium term;

    2. Our inability to impose new taxes or raise the existing taxes due to the need for the economy to recover from the COVID-19 pandemic impact;

    3. Increasing commitments of interest payments and the rising statutory obligations;

    4. Tight fiscal space resulting from the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, which delayed the implementation of some key projects; and

    5. Reduced budget support by developing partners – (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nambeshe, leave the minister to finish presenting. You have an option to respond as the Leader of the Opposition but you have come when he is even finishing. Please, allow him finish.

MR NAMBESHE: Yes but procedurally, this statement should be submitted -

THE SPEAKER: Okay, first resume your seat.
 
MR MUSASIZI: Thank you for the wise guidance, Madam Speaker. 

    6. The inadequate funds to finance all our budget needs;

    7. Emerging critical funding needs required to transform the economy and meet more statutory obligations; and

    8. Commitment to end the fiscal indiscipline of supplementary budgets beginning the next Financial Year 2022/2023 by limiting them to three per cent of the total approved budget as provided for in the law. 

Madam Speaker, as I conclude, I wish to report that the following documents were laid before the House to accompany the estimates for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

The budget estimates for the revenue and expenditure for next financial year, along with the legal requirements, as required under Section 13(7-11), 23, 39(5), 42, 44(5) and 76 (1) and (2) of the Public Finance Management Act - the lists of the documents are provided for under Annex III. 

Madam Speaker, to allay hon. Nambeshe’s concerns, I want to believe that uploading was in transit and by now, we can confirm whether we have it on the intranet -

THE SPEAKER: It is not about allaying his concerns. You cannot smuggle the document at the last minute. You ought to have sent us the document so that it is uploaded for the all Members to follow when you are reading it.

MR MUSASIZI: Can I lay it on the Table? 

MR NAMBESHE: Madam Speaker, therefore, I am of the view - because it is detailed - this is a very detailed statement - I would seek your indulgence that debate on this statement be deferred to tomorrow. 

THE SPEAKER: That is a very important document, which guides us through the budgeting process. When you talk about our key priorities like the Parish Development Model - the House has asked for the guidelines for that model but they have never been brought. It has also asked for a policy but it has never been brought. I hope tomorrow, when we are discussing the document, we will also have those documents laid on Table.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are working around the clock to provide all the necessary tools and information that Parliament and the country require in order to appreciate, support and back our initiative of implementing the Parish Development Model. 

I wish to report to you, Madam Speaker, that we have been invited tomorrow at 9 O’clock to appear before the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to present our status report as far as the preparedness for the implementation of the Parish Development Model is concerned. I want to believe that the output of our engagement with the committee will eventually come to the House for debate. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, presenting the status report is not the policy. The policy is a guideline that helps you in operation. Then, we also need the guidelines, which we do not have.

2.19
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Justine Lumumba):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The policy and the guidelines are ready and I want to pledge that we shall present them here as the first item if you accord us the time. We shall lay them on Table. Thank you.
    
THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Tomorrow, they should present the Parish Development Model's guidelines and policy. Remember, most of our money is going to the Parish Development Model. Therefore, we need to know how it is going to operate. Shadow minister, do you have anything to say?

2.20
MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI (NUP, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I say anything, permit me to use this opportunity with your indulgence; the last time I was here, I made a statement that did not go down well with Hon. Bahati, the former Minister of State for Economic Planning. In the statement, I indicated to the effect that the current lot is far better than him. Afterwards, he approached me and said it was a very unfortunate statement. He was fairly hurt and I promised him to correct the Hansard. I am here to say it was an easy joke. If you are hurt, I apologise. I did not intend to hurt you in any way. You were an equally very effective Minister of Finance in this country, and together, we did a lot of good things. (Applause) I beg to tender in my apology. Madam Speaker, I hope you take that at heart, through your Office. 

Madam Speaker, there are other things that the minister needs to address before we meet tomorrow because they concern the dictates of the law. There are four inconsistencies that he needs to address. The rate that the laid National Budget Framework Paper estimates is inconsistent with the approved Charter for Fiscal Responsibility, which violates section 13(b) of the Public Finance Management Act. The law requires him - wherever there is a deviation, to come to Parliament with a motion for approval of a deviation.

It is a simple thing he has to do - we have just passed the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility. He knows that they have deviated from it to the extent of the debt to GDP ratio. You need to come tomorrow to be consistent with what the law demands. 

Regarding the charter, inconsistencies have been observed on the following - because I want you, when you come here, to be very systematic: 

    a. Domestic interest payments of Shs 4.69 trillion translates to 15 per cent of the total revenue excluding grants exceeding the target of 14.6 per cent. 

    b. Contingent liabilities of Shs 160 trillion translate to 99 per cent of GDP, far exceeding the target of maintaining them below 5 per cent. That is a big issue of contingent liabilities. The Government is approving all manners of borrowings by individuals; they have now amounted to Shs 160 trillion. They need to come here and explain why they are at 99 per cent of our GDP instead of the targeted 5 per cent. That is why we have issues like Lubowa and others but the Prime Minister was emotional on that issue. 

    c. Government has failed to pay back - this is a big issue - to Bank of Uganda advances amounting to Shs 3.33 trillion violating sections 56(5)(a) and (b) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, as amended, and section 33 of the Bank of Uganda Act. For the uninitiated – I do not want to explain them because the minister knows the details.
 
    d. Growth in revenue to GDP ratio is projected to be 4.8 per cent against the annual target of 0.5. The minister needs to come and explain because the inconsistencies with the approved National Budget Framework Paper have been noted in the following:
 
    i) The resource envelope for the laid budget of 47.25 trillion is inconsistent with what we approved of Shs 43 trillion. 

    ii) The National Budget Framework Paper was approved with amendments but the majority are not traceable in the laid estimates. For instance, Government committed to clear tax arrears by reducing them from each of the ministries, departments and agencies in the coming Financial Year 2022. The Government had earmarked a mere Shs 396.13 billion. However, that was not undertaken. 

    iii) The inconsistency in the annual National Budget Framework Paper - the minister here laid the certificate, which he called, “the Certificate of Reliability and the Completeness of Figures.” As he presented today, he has violated that section. He said here that the figures he laid at the Table included a certificate of reliability and consistency. I have observed that even the sectoral committees; some of the budgets they are recommending and they are in the Bill laid before Parliament are inconsistent. 

To that extent, I would beg that tomorrow - if the minister is not ready - when he comes and appears here, he cleans up this act. I beg to move, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, I take note of the concerns raised by the shadow minister and I will bring a response in writing.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Can we have those inconsistencies corrected in accordance with the Constitution and the Public Finance Management Act? If you can, reconcile it before you come to the House and then, you just report to the House. 

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the shadow minister for the spirit in which he started his submission of apologising to hon. Bahati. I am here to applaud that spirit and I want to say thank you as well as say, please, let us carry that spirit in this House. We come to this House to serve the country but we also remain as individuals, heads of families and people who are friends. Whatever we do here goes on record and our actions affect many. They affect the communities but also you, the individuals, and the families. I am here to say thank you. Let us carry on that spirit.

THE SPEAKER: Hajji, thank you very much for that spirit. This is a time of fasting and forgiveness. We thank you for that. 

2.27
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo North County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I take this opportunity, first of all, to congratulate you; since you ascended to that office, I have not had time to be on record. Knowing your background and history, the country is very proud that you have ascended to the second highest position on the land. (Applause) For us in Najjanankumbi, we are very proud and happy. I wish this was a structured arrangement, Madam Speaker – 

THE SPEAKER: I wish to correct you. The second highest position is of the Vice-President of this country.

MR EKANYA: No, Madam Speaker, I know you are the third highest but in reality we have the Legislature, Executive and Judiciary. So, within the Executive, of course, we have the President and Vice-President in protocol, but institutionally, this is the second institution. 

Nonetheless, I respect protocol. I stood up because we have a record in Parliament and we had agreed in the last sitting, which was chaired by the Deputy Speaker that the Parish Development Model requires a legislation because it will have a very wide parameter in terms of audit queries - how we are going to audit the Parish Development Model and other institutions that are going to work. 

The directive was given by the Deputy Speaker to the Prime Minister to ensure that before implementation, we should have a Bill and we legislate the details and how the Parish Development Model will be implemented. 

Therefore, I would like to know from the Prime Minister when we are going to have the Bill because I heard her just talking about the policy. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: How do you have a Bill on the Parish Development Model? Did we have a Bill on Emyooga? Did we have a Bill on all the other projects? Hon. Ekanya, we have policies and guidelines - not Bills - and that is what we expect tomorrow. And it is that policy that will help us on how to operationalise them.

2.30
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the wise guidance. I had intended to inform the House that we do not have a Bill. However, it is good that you have already clarified; it is just a policy. Thank you very much. 

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, like all of us may recall about NAADS; we had the NAADS Act. If we do not have a Bill on implementation, we are going to face a challenge during the course of implementation. 

We are creating an institution at the lowest unit. Just look at the capacity of the Auditor-General and other Government institutions like police and all these organs like Judiciary that will supervise this institution and programme called the Parish Development Model. How are we going to have the relationship and coherence?

2.32
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Justine Lumumba): Madam Speaker, I thank you. I  thank Hon. Ekanya, who has raised this.

The Parish Development Model like I have said before - we shall present the policy and guidelines tomorrow. However, the Parish Development Model is not creating anything new: It is saying instead of having planning and implementation at the district or subcounty level, we are now moving to the lower level, which is the parish level. And the parish is an administrative unit in the structures of this country. These are elected leaders and that is why we hold elections both at the village and the parish levels. So, we are not creating anything new. We are only saying let us go at a lower level to be sure that we can account for every household. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: And this is under the local government administrative units. And it is just a financial intervention that Government is trying to reach people at the parish level - no longer at a higher level. That is what the intervention is meant to do. Hon. Patrick, if it is on the same, we will discuss tomorrow when they bring the policies. 

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL ENTITLED “THE PARLIAMENTARY PENSIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL”

2.32
MR ARINAITWE RWAKAJARA (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I move under Article 94 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, and Rule 122 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. It reads: 

“WHEREAS Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda empowers Parliament to make laws on any matter of peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda;

AND WHEREAS Article 94 of the Constitution and Rule 122 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament grant a Member of Parliament the right to move a Private Member’s Bill;

AWARE THAT the Parliamentary Pension’s Act, 2007 establishes a retirement benefit scheme for Members of Parliament and staff of Parliamentary Commission, and establishes Parliamentary Pensions Fund for the payment of retirement benefits to its members;

NOTING, however, that the Act does not take into consideration new developments in the retirement benefit industry and the implementation of some of the provisions of the Act has posed challenges to the operations of the scheme, as well as hampering the effective operations of the schemes. For example:

    a. The process of obtaining a recommendation from the Uganda Medical Board is quite lengthy and cumbersome. Thereby, delaying access to funds for medical treatment and retirement on medical grounds. 

    b.  The Act does not provide for voluntary contribution for additional benefits. For example, healthcare. 

    c. The rate of contribution made by Members needs to be reviewed. 

    d. The distribution of survivors’ benefits as recognised by the law on succession, in most cases conflicts with the Member’s nomination, especially in cases where a nominee is neither a spouse nor a dependent.

    e.  The Act penalises early retirement through forfeiture of the Government contribution assigned to a member.

    f. The position of the Clerk on the board creates a fusion of the governing body with management of the scheme, which poses governance conflicts and has attracted audit queries. 

    g. The Act does not explicitly provide for the administration of the scheme. 

    h.  The scheme faces challenges dealing with the benefits of untraceable members. 

    i.  Pensioners are increasingly facing difficulties accessing affordable and adequate health care: The Act has no mechanism to address this challenge. 

    j. The Act does not give a member who does not qualify for pension the option of receiving a pension instead of lump sum payment. 

Madam Speaker, convinced that the amendment of the Parliamentary Pensions Act, 2007 is a requisite to promote good governance and efficiency in operations of the scheme;

NOW THEREFORE, be resolved that this House grants me leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill for an Act entitled “The Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment) Bill.”

Madam Speaker, the draft of the Bill is attached herewith. I do order for the publication of the said Bill in preparation for the first reading. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Is the motion seconded? (Members rose_) It is seconded by Hon. Akol, Hon. Ekanya, Hon. Mwijukye, Hon. Musila, Hon. Prossy Akampulira, Hon. Hellen and Hon. Ogwang. The whole House has seconded the motion. Hon. Rwakajara, would you like to speak to your motion?

MR RWAKAJARA: Madam Speaker, I have already mentioned the challenges that are facing the Act. I just beg this House to allow me to take leave for the publication of the Bill.

THE SPEAKER: Can we have two seconders? Hon. Akol. Hon. Prossy.

2.39
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, I take this opportunity to congratulate you since I did not get time to congratulate you, when you were elected. 

I rise to second the motion seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Member’s Bill entitled “The Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment) Bill.” There has been a lot of oversight at the process when this Parliamentary Pensions Act was processed. I would like to thank the mover of the motion for pointing out the many challenges and loopholes that we need to work on.

At the time we lost the late, Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, we realised that there were many loopholes in the Act. You will recall that in the Constitution, we talked about elections. When we lost Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, we realised that the Parliamentary Pension Act is not fair to Members, the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker. Therefore, I rise to second the motion and urge Members to support these amendments because they touch us and our family.

We serve this nation but when we leave – many former Members of this House are suffering and languishing in poverty. You meet Members but you cannot believe that they served in this House. I know that this amendment will go a long way to improve on the Parliamentary Pension Act and this is why I second the motion. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Prossy. Honourable minister, would you like to say something? [Minister: “Yes”.] You will speak after Hon. Prossy. 

2.41
Ms AKAMPURIRA PROSSY (NRM, Mbabazi Woman Representative Rubanda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion for leave to be granted to Hon. Rwakajara to introduce in Parliament, a Bill entitled “The Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment) Bill” The Bill Hon. Rwakajara is going to present –(Interjections) – Madam Speaker, I beg for protection. The Bill seeks to cure some of the major challenges faced by members in the administration and operation of the scheme.

Allow me to just mention a few. One of the main challenges faced by Members is the utilisation of the scheme credit by a member to obtain medical treatment abroad. Currently, section 7B of the Act allows a member, on the recommendation of a medical practitioner to utilise the benefits in the scheme to pay for medical treatment for a member or a pensioner.

Honourable members, you are aware of the challenges and tedious processes we go through. This has led to delay in the provision of medical care to a member, who intends to utilise his or her benefits in the scheme, to obtain urgent medical care. The Bill now proposes to make the process simple for a member to acquire medical treatment recommended by a medical practitioner.

The other problem faced by members is the application of the law of succession on the distribution of the benefits of a member in the scheme, like Hon. Rwakajara stated. At the time of becoming a member of the scheme, a member elects the manner of sharing his or her scheme benefits and appoints members - at this point, allow me to request all Members who have not filled the pension form to fill them. Otherwise, we do not know God’s timing.

The law of succession has been used to defeat member’s choices. Yet, the benefits of a member in the scheme are distributed in accordance with the law of succession. This, not only unreasonably fetters the description of a member to distribute all his or her benefits in the scheme as he or she wishes but may open the challenge of infringing the protection granted to a member over his or her property under Article 26 of the Constitution.

Madam Speaker, the Bill now proposes to exempt the application of the law of succession on a member’s benefits under the scheme so that a members’ wish and aspiration on sharing his or her benefits is protected from any interference. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Members, we are not debating this. The mover of the motion is only seeking leave and we have not yet granted him that leave. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I think the request of the Private Member’s Bill is very clear; it came through the Parliamentary Commission because the Parliamentary Commission takes care of the pension for Members and staff of Parliament. 

I believe nobody in this House will speak against that request. I, therefore, seek guidance whether it is necessary for us to debate a matter, which is obvious. Probably, we should give permission to the private Member and when it comes to second reading, we can bring our objections.  For now, there is not much we can add, apart from granting the leave so that the Member can go and get details that we shall discuss at the second reading.
    
My position is just to inquire whether it is necessary for us to discuss the substance of the Bill before the permission is granted. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Cecilia, that is exactly what we were doing. The motion was moved and it has to be seconded. That is what the seconders were trying to do. You said that you do not think anybody will say “no” – that is debating in anticipation. Anyway, can I hear from the minister?

2.48
THE MINISTER FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Wilson Muruli Mukasa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Before I make a comment on this motion, allow me to congratulate you upon your ascension to that very high post of Speaker. Congratulations indeed. (Applause) Let me also use this opportunity to congratulate the Deputy Speaker – who may not be in this House, but for record purposes. Accept my sympathies over the loss of our dear colleague, the former Speaker, Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. I thank you for the high mark of leadership you exhibited as you handled this tragic moment in our history. Thank you very much. (Applause)

Regarding the Private Member’s Bill, in principle, I really agree with it. There are a lot of contradictions, which need to be ironed out. The Ministry of Public Service also noted them and has been with the intention to come to the House to make sure that a Bill of similar nature is moved. 

However, the private Member has taken the initiative. I beg that we sit down together with Member and harmonise all these contradictions – and even look at the other Bills regarding, let us say, the emoluments and entitlements of Speakers, former Speakers as well as their deputies and spouses, which at the moment are in contradiction so that we come up with a Bill, which is harmonised, up to date and takes into account the wishes and aspirations of all the Members of Parliament, the Speakers and everybody that has served in this august House. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. I now put the question that Hon. Rwakajara be granted leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Parliamentary Pension (Amendment) Bill, 2020” by this House. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: So, you work with the Clerk and ensure that the Bill is drafted and they help you in the whole process. Thank you. 

MOTION THAT THE HOUSE RESOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

B. THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2022/2023

    I.  COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS

2.51
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS (MS Jesca Ababiku): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity to present our report. As a committee, we also congratulate you and our brother upon the enthronement. 

Allow me, first, to lay a copy of our report and the minutes attached to it. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Please, lay.

MS ABABIKU: Madam Speaker, we have uploaded our report on the intranet. 

Madam Speaker, Article 155(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Section 13(13) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 as well as rules 148 and 189 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament provide for the mandate of sectoral committees. In particular, the functions of the Committee on Presidential Affairs include the following to:

    i) Examine and comment on policy matters affecting ministries, departments and agencies under their jurisdictions, and; 

    ii) Critically examine Government’s recurrent and development budget estimates and make recommendations for general debate in the House. 

In line with this mandate, the Committee on Presidential Affairs presents for your consideration and adoption the report in respect of the ministerial policy statements for Financial Year 2022/2023. 

Madam Speaker, I request that we leave out the methodology for Members to go through. We request that we go to page two. 

The ministries, departments and agencies under the Committee on Presidential Affairs are domiciled in different programmes, ranging from governance and security, human capital development, community mobilisation and mindset change, regional development, development plan implementation and innovations, technological development and transfer, among others. 

The report has three parts. Part one covers the presidency, part two relates to the Kampala Capital City Authority and part three covers Office of the Prime Minister. (Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Chairperson, Committee on Presidential Affairs. Much as she said the report has been uploaded, the report is nowhere to be seen. (Interjection) We are very eager to follow her presentation but the report is not there.

THE SPEAKER: You know, Amuru is not near. Hon. Olanya comes all the way from Amuru. Please, give the other people to help you check. The problem may be that you do not know how to check because I have seen it. It is uploaded. 

Hon. Ababiku, please, give us an executive summary. And, one thing that we need to appreciate is that under the presidency, we have the President’s office, Office of the Prime Minister, State House and the security organs. So, give us the executive summary.

MS ABABIKU: Okay. Thank you, Madam Speaker. Under the presidency – Vote 001: Office of the President – we have the following observations, on page four.

Budgetary provisions to the minister of security 

We have observed a high funding gap, which is a big concern to the committee in relation to the looming threats in terms of hacking our financial systems, cyberspace and oil and gas, among others. We are proposing an additional funding of Shs 10 billion to support that area. 

On page five, there is facilitation for Resident District Commissioners (RDCs). Madam Speaker, the Head of State has appointed RDCs and paying their salaries without enabling them to do their work will not help this country. So, for facilitation, we are requesting for additional funding of Shs 7.5 billion. 

For recruitment of administrative assistants, we are recommending an additional appropriation of Shs 4.5 billion. 

Provision of adequate office accommodation for RDCs
Madam Speaker, the number of RDCS has gone to 146 and only 17 have been housed in local governments offices, leaving many without offices. Government is spending a lot of money on rent. 

Therefore, we are proposing that annually, we should be constructing 10 blocks and requesting for additional funding of Shs 6.3 billion.

Facilitation to the Secretariat

Often times, many issues have been raised about the performance of RDCs. Therefore, we are requesting for facilitation to the Secretariat for it to keep managing issues that the office may receive to handle demonstratively. In relation to that, we are proposing for additional funding of Shs 1.5 billion.

Facilitation to presidential advisors

Madam Speaker, 139 presidential advisors have been appointed but they have a funding gap of Shs 5.1. We are recommending for the provision of Shs 5.1 billion to enhance the facilitation of presidential advisors.

The Apex platform is a monitoring economic unit that is housed in the OPM but has a funding gap of Shs 29.415 billion. So, we are requesting for an appropriation to meet this gap. 

Monitoring and mainstreaming of manifesto commitments

Madam Speaker, here we have a funding gap of Shs 1.85 billion. We are requesting for enhancement of this money to facilitate them.

Construction of the Afro-Arab Youth Council headquarters

The Head of State has committed the country to ensure that Uganda has headquarters located in Wakiso. However, the funding gap for the purchase of land is Shs 15 billion. Therefore, we are requesting for that provision.

Implementation of the intelligent transport monitoring system

As we are faced with a lot of insecurity challenges, the Office of the Prime Minister will wish to monitor this exercise closely but there is a funding gap of Shs 1.5 billion. That is what we are requesting for.

Vote 002 - State House

Under our observations and recommendations on page 10, we observe that there are presidential donations coming in, year in year out and daily - the Office of the President is receiving many requests and pledges are being made. However, there is a funding gap of Shs 30 billion and that is what our committee is advocating for.

Poverty alleviation initiative

The President's office, under State House, has initiated a learning unit in relation to poverty alleviation. However, they have a funding gap of Shs 14.2 billion. We are requesting for that support.

Retooling State House

Madam Speaker, this entity has a funding gap of Shs 27.02 billion. We are requesting for that funding.

Science, Technology and Innovation

We can go to page 14 and under STI, we are recommending for a retention of Shs 12.50 billion for Kiira Motors because they got their money upfront. From our savings, we are going to recommend them for other activities under STI because they got money upfront through a supplementary.

Madam Speaker, there is need for us to have a one-stop state-of-the-art scientific laboratory. So, we recommend Shs 19.7 billion, from the savings of Kiira Motors, to be reallocated to that. 

Apart from that, we are requesting for Shs 38 billion from the savings to be reallocated to Innovation Fund. We know that we have many innovators across the country who need to be supported. 

Under Shea Butter and sweet potato innovation, we are proposing retention of Shs 2 billion, which was provided for in the running financial year. 

Support to research and development projects

Under this entity - that is now on page 20 - we are requesting for Shs 19.305 billion to be provided for to enable the construction of the Garment Hub and the procurement of the requisite equipment to facilitate the nurturing of science innovators in the country. 

Under the leather, innovation and design hub, we are recommending for Shs 14.75 billion to be additionally provided to support it. 

Technical Services Centre

We are recommending that Shs 8.41 billion to be provided to them. 

Management of Mulberry and construction of rearing houses for sericulture project.

We are recommending that Shs 11.408 billion be provided for the sericulture project to facilitate the commercialisation works that have already started at early stages. 

Acquisition of land for factory establishment and production of raw materials

Under this, we request for additional Shs 99.862 billion.

Clearance or payments for procured machines
We that recommend for Shs 8.3 billion to be provided for sericulture to facilitate complete procurement of machines.

Building technical and infrastructure capacity for silkworm egg production and supply in Uganda

Under this, we recommend for Shs 1.735 billion to support egg production for silk production in our country. 

Page 24, Ministry of KCCA and Metropolitan Affairs
The summary is on page 25.

Observations and recommendations - policy planning and budgetary services

Madam Speaker, under the enhancement of staff capacity for high quality performance, we recommend that Shs 6.78 billion be provided to KCCA and Metropolitan Affairs towards the enhancement of staff capacity to conduct high quality and impact-driven performance. 

Strengthening of expenditure tracking, inspection and accountability on green growth

Madam Speaker, that is a policy matter that we are recommending. For the budgetary purposes, we are requesting for Shs 35.7 billion for conducting critical feasibility studies within the greater Kampala metropolitan area. 
Slum upgrading detailed studies, detailed studies in greater Kampala and metropolitan areas

Under this, we recommend that Shs 11.6 billion be allocated towards undertaking critical feasibility studies on slum upgrading in the coming financial year.

Under integrated transport and infrastructure services, we recommend for Shs 32.8 billion to be provided as counter funding to enhance this objective.

Retooling of Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs

Madam Speaker, under this, we recommend that enhancement of Shs 1.2 billion to be provided to the Ministry for Kampala and Metropolitan Affairs.

Uganda Aids Commission 

We are recommending additional funding of Shs 4.5 billion, aware that there is an increase in the rate of infection in the country as one of the big impacts of COVID-19. 

Uganda Industrial Research Institute 

On page 32, we have specific summaries. What we have recommended is a policy matter.

On ethics and integrity, our observations and recommendations are on page 35.

Coordinating inter-agency forum activities 

To enable this activity, we are proposing Shs 1.15 billion. 

Dissemination of anti-corruption laws 

We are recommending Shs 2.85 billion

Internal Security Organisation 

Our summaries are on page 37.
    
Lack of transport equipment at ISO 

We recommend Shs 55 billion as part of the development budget to enhance the operations through availing them with relevant equipment.

Recruitment and training 

More districts have been created. Therefore, we are requesting more deployment. They have a funding gap of 5.04 billion and so, we are requesting for the provision of that money. 

Facilitation of internal intelligence collection by ISO 

They have a funding gap of 48.5 billion. We are requesting for the provision of that money. 

Inadequate technical equipment for ISO 

We are requesting Shs 47.3 billion. Security is a key and pivotal matter that we should all get concerned about and ensure that our country is safe. 

External Security Organisation right 

That begins on page 40. Our summaries begin on page 41. 

Foreign intelligence collection 

We have a funding gap of Shs 23.32 billion. We are providing for that enhancement. We are requesting for it. 

Retooling of External Security Organisation 

We have a gap of Shs 29.047 billion. We are requesting for that enhancement. 

Budgetary enhancement to administration and finance
 
We have a gap of Shs 16.67 1 billion. We are requesting for additional appropriation for that line activity. 

Construction of the ESO Headquarters 

We are requesting for Shs 12.30 billion to ensure that we have a safe, convenient structure to house our sensitive sectors, especially in ESO.

Kampala Capital City Authority 

Our summary begins on page 44.

The shortfall in MTF allocation for KCCA political leaders’ remuneration 

The membership of the leaders has increased and they have a funding gap of Shs 17.1 billion but also the KCCA Act provided for speakers and deputy speakers. Therefore, we have a funding gap of Shs 17.1 billion. That is what we are requesting for additionally to be provided to KCCA.

Implementation of the Presidential Directive on city markets

We have a funding gap of Shs 50 billion. That is what we are requesting for, under this item. 

Maintenance of drainage infrastructure in the city 

We have a funding gap of Shs 134 billion and we all know that when it rains, our city floods and we experience a lot of inconveniences. We have this budget gap of Shs 134 billion. 

Solid waste management 

We are requesting for Shs 60 billion to be provided to enable them to manage the waste through procurement of more trucks and work on the old side of Dundu but also on the new site of Kitezi. Therefore, we need a minimum of 10 trucks.

Road infrastructure development and maintenance 

We are requesting an additional Shs 30 billion. We all know how our city is connected. Our city is not befitting because we have a lot of roads which are not worked on. 

Street children in Kampala

We have provided a policy proposal. 

Office of the Prime Minister – (Interruption)

MR MAYANJA: The statement on our iPads stops at page 43 but the chairperson is continuing to read. 

THE SPEAKER: Please, finish.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker -  

THE SPEAKER: Can you summarise? 

MS ABABIKU: Okay, thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, this report is being laid on Table. We are going to capture it. It is going to the Committee on Budget and it will come to this House for a debate. All we want now is for them to lay it on Table; the report. They should bring the challenges and their suggestions. Then, it will go for harmonisation in the Committee on Budget. After that, it will come to the Committee of the whole House for supply. You have actually spent a lot of our time. Every chairperson must take only 20 minutes.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you very much, Madam speaker. 

Office of the Prime Minister

Under budget enhancement for strengthening wide coordination, monitoring and evaluation, we have a budget gap of Shs 15 billion. We are requesting an additional appropriation. 

Strengthening the capacity of the Office of the Prime Minister; we are requesting an additional Shs 10 billion. 

Commitment to affirmative action programmes; we request that the various programmes, under affirmative action programmes, be enhanced. The gap is at Shs 32 billion. 

Resettlement of the landslide persons in Bugisu Subregion:

For procurement of more land, we need Shs 7.5 billion additional funding and that is what we are requesting. 

Strengthening existing community-level disaster risk management capacities; we are requesting for an additional Shs 12.553 billion. 

Strengthening of refugees’ response; we are requesting for Shs 4.7 billion.

Security concerns in any Karamoja Subregion; we have provided policy proposals. 

Street children in Karamoja and in Kampala; we have provided a policy proposal. 

Fast-tracking the realisation of Government commitment towards the Sustainable Development Goals; we are requesting an additional Shs 1 billion. 

Madam Speaker and colleagues, that is the summary. I would like to thank you and colleagues for giving us this opportunity to give our summaries. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Hon. Ababiku. (Applause) Clerk to Parliament you need to ensure that the report is captured in totality because what has been read is basically the executive summary. You need to capture the whole report.

(The Report shall appear as an appendix in the Hansard monthly bound volume of April 2022)

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification. I know that the Ministry of Science and Technology was dissolved, but I want to know how the activities that used to be carried out by the ministry are being handled because our hope now is how we can make the best of technology and innovation. 

Therefore, I am interested to know how that sector is doing under the presidency, which you have just presented. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, this is for the minister. What I know is that science, technology and innovations was given a vote under the Office of the Presidency. Honourable minister -

3.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (ECONOMIC MONITORING) (Mr Peter Ogwang): Madam Speaker, thank you very much.

It is true like you have correctly guided. First, it is not true that science, technology and innovation was dissolved; it was transferred to the Office of the President, and within the Office of the President, it is now under State House. All the budget for science, technology and innovations is under State House. I thank you very much.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I am surprised that the minister is saying that the ministry is still alive. Where is it? Because officially, in our records, the ministry was dissolved and the activities were transferred to the Office of the Presidency and Parliament was concerned about the staff working in that ministry. Today, you are telling Parliament that the ministry actually resurrected. Are you taking advantage of the Lent period to resurrect a ministry? (Laughter) Is the minister in order, Madam Speaker, to resurrect a ministry, which was dissolved in this Parliament?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ogwal, we resolved as a House that this ministry be transferred to the Office of the President as a vote and not State House. That is what we resolved.

3.19
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bukimbiri County, Kisoro):  Madam Speaker, I wish to be guided because in this Parliament, we have a Committee on Presidential Affairs and we also have a Committee on Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance (ICT). 

I would like to be guided if the relevant committee in charge of Science, Technology and Innovation did its work.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is one of the issues we referred to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. We were supposed to receive a report from the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline last week and you suspended the debate and said we should debate after two weeks. That will come but there was a vote that was given to this ministry.

MR OGWANG: For the record - like you have correctly guided, Madam Speaker - as of this financial year, Science, Technology and Innovation is under the Office of the President. However, with effect from next financial year, Science, Technology and Innovation is going to be under Vote 002, which is State House. For that matter, I want to beg Honourable Members that the appropriation we are going to have will be entirely under State House. I thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have heard. Chairperson, do you have what to say? Prime Minister, do you have something to say?

Members, you have heard the challenges that the Presidency has and that is under KCCA; State House; Science, Technology and Innovation, Security and the budget will come now that you know the challenges. 

We shall look at the figures that will be put in the budget when it comes for supply. Honourable chair and the committee, I want to thank you very much for the good work and meeting the deadlines.(Applause) As usual, you are very efficient. 

I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Presidential Affairs be adopted by this House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before tourism comes in, the biometric fingerprint login at the entrance will start working tomorrow. We want to monitor attendance.

3.22
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr Mwine Mpaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As a Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry, we join the rest of the House to congratulate you upon your victory. 

The report is from the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on the ministerial policy statements and budget estimates for the year 2022/2023. In the interest of time, I will refer to the pages but try to summarise because our committee has two programmes and it might be lengthy for me to present everything. 

Introduction 

Madam Speaker, in accordance with Article 155(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Section 12, one of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, rule 148(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry scrutinised the ministerial policy statements and budget estimates for Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities and the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives for the Financial Year 2022/2023. I beg to report.

The scope is on page 4. The Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife on Antiquities has entities with vote status as follows:

    1. Vote 022 - Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities.
    2. Vote 117 - Uganda Tourism Board.

Entities without vote status: 

    1. Uganda Wildlife Authority. 
    2. Uganda Wildlife Conservation Education Centre. 
    3. Uganda Hotel and Tourism Training Institute, Jinja. 
    4. Uganda Wildlife Research and Training Institute, Kasese. 

The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives has entities with votes as follows:

    i) Vote 015 - Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. 
    ii) Vote 154 - Uganda National Bureau of Standards. 
    iii) Vote 306 - Uganda Export Promotions Board. 

It also has entities without vote status 

    i) Uganda Development Corporation. 
    ii) Uganda Warehouse Receipt Systems Authority.
    iii) Management Training and Advisory Centre.

The highlights and order of the report are as follows:

    1. Sectoral mandates 
    2. Budget performance for the first half of the Financial Year 2021/2022. 
    3. Physical performance for the first half of the Financial Year 2021/2022.
    4. Selected planned activities for the Financial Year 2022/2023.
    5. Budget for the planned activities for the Financial Year 2022/2023.
    6. Challenges encountered during the Financial Year 2021/2022.

Committee observations and recommendations

Madam Speaker, allow me to take you straight to page 7: 

The Tourism Development Programme comprises the following votes and affiliated institutions - I have already read to you all these: The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, UWA, Uganda Wildlife Conservation Centre, Uganda Wildlife Research and Training Institute, Uganda Hotel Management and Training.

On page 8 at the bottom – Tourism Development Programme Budget Allocation. 

Change in approved and proposed budget sector for the Financial Year 2022/2023. According to table 3 on page 9, the Tourism Development Programme is proposed to reduce by Shs 4.31 billion from the approved Shs 188.09 billion to Shs 192.40 billion although government allocated additional Shs 30 billion to revive the tourism sector. The total budget is still low and below the NDP III recommended funding levels of Shs 562.3 billion.

Source of funds identified for reallocation 

The committee identified Shs 19.6 billion within the Tourism Development Programme and reallocated it with programme key priority areas. The table is below on page 9.

Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities

Excess provision for wage – Shs 2 billion. We have also reduced the government subvention allocated during COVID-19 lockdown when UWA could hardly collect any revenue and we have deducted Shs 12 billion. 

Uganda Tourism Board 

Internal reallocation from non-wage recurrent, we have deducted Shs 2.6 billion. The total is Shs 19.607 billion, which we believe we have identified for reallocation.

On page 11, there is a table - and the total budget for the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities and its subventions is proposed at Shs 166.119 billion. Compared to the approved budget, there is a net increment of Shs 4.861 billion, resulting from additional Shs 30 billion shared amongst sector agencies. 

Nonwage and wage are expected to increase by Shs 0.22 billion and Shs 10.76 billion respectively. The sector agencies are also expected to benefit from a number of external funding sources and these include: 

(a) 	Competitiveness and Enterprise Development Project - Additional Financing (CEDP-AF)

The Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities and its subvention will continue to benefit from the two-year World Bank CEDP-AF under Component 2, Tourism Product and Competitive Development worth $43.1 million. CEDP-AF is a two-year project aimed at implementation of tourism development interventions for the Financial Year 2022/2023. The breakdown of the $43.1 million is on page 14. 

Honourable members, off budget funding for UWA under FACE the Future is Shs 1.1 billion and World Bank IFPA-CD Project is Shs 42.140 billion.

In the Financial Year 2022/2023, Uganda Wildlife Authority plans to collect revenue worth Shs 68 billion and Government subvention will be Shs 50.6 billion. The total budget including off-budget support will be Shs 162 billion and it will be available to Uganda Wildlife Authority.

Key planned activities for the Financial Year 2022/2023

    a. Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities

    i)  Mugaba Palace - Mbarara Amphitheatre and four sculptures to be constructed.
    ii) Tourism facilities established at the Elena Camp. These are lengthy but you can read all of them. I will now go straight to the observations on page 18.

The Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities 

Delayed operationalisation of the Wildlife Compensation Scheme:

The Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities is directly responsible to oversee and ensure that the compensation scheme is in place, however, there has been some delay and this scheme is not yet in place. The committee therefore recommends that the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities should expedite the process of formulating policies and regulations to guide and operationalise the wildlife compensation scheme.

Uganda Wildlife Authority

The committee observed that there are rampant and uncontrolled bush burning reported in the national parks and protected areas. These incidents coupled with lack of emergency plans to put off the fires have proved harmful, disastrous and destructive to the wildlife ecology and private investments in the protected areas.

The committee recommends that:

    i) Uganda Wildlife Authority should immediately put in place fire emergency response units to counter fire outbreaks.

    ii) Uganda Wildlife Authority should train its rangers and come up with a well-equipped professional team so that moderate force is used when need arises, and the professional use of weapons is embraced, not forgetting the respect for the principle of natural justice being put into consideration.

Uganda Hotel and Tourism Training Institute (UHTTI) 

Lack of a hostel for the institute

The committee was informed that Uganda Hotel and Tourism Training Institute spends Shs 450 million per annum on hostel accommodation for its students. The committee therefore recommends that the Government provides Shs 6 billion for the construction of a hostel at UHTTI for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

Uganda Wildlife Conservation Education Centre (UWEC)

Establishment of regional satellite wildlife conservation centres, construction of a pier and a wall fence 

The committee was informed by Uganda Wildlife Conservation Education Centre that the institution is soon getting a modern 50-seater boat through CEDP-AF to boast Lake Victoria Tourism Circuit. The boat will have nowhere to dock since the current pier was washed away by the floods.

The committee was also informed that UWEC has secured 60 acres of National Forestry Authority (NFA) land at each regional cities of Mbale, Gulu, Mbarara and Fort Portal. UWEC is planning to establish regional zoos in all the cities. Mbale will be the first phase in this financial year, and other centres will be established subsequently.

Furthermore, the committee was informed by UWEC of the construction of electric wall fence as a pertinent aspect to subdue the human-wildlife conflict, which has proved to be one of the biggest challenges that the neighbouring communities to the protected areas are facing.

The committee, therefore, recommends that Shs 9.5 billion be provided to UWEC so that the three aforementioned projects are implemented. This will in turn address the constant human- wildlife conflicts that are constantly reported on the Floor of Parliament and also bring closer the services to the people through the regional zoos in the cities.

Honourable members, in the interest of time, I beg to move to Uganda Tourism Board (UTB). Uganda Tourism Board is mandated to sustainably promote Uganda as a competitive tourism destination for inclusive development. On page 23, there are key planned activities for the Financial Year 2022/2023, which amongst others include: Explore Uganda tourism campaigns and four content creation tours organised and conducted across the six tourism development areas of Uganda for promoting Uganda.  Honourable members, you can read the rest.

Observations

The committee was informed that the Quality Assurance Department at Uganda Tourism Board is grossly understaffed with only four employees out of a staff establishment of 12. This incapacitates the efficacy of the department and it is difficult to embark on the inspection of the facilities that require the service, for instance, the accommodation facilities countrywide.

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government should provide Shs 2.6 billion to enable UTB fill the key positions in the Quality Control and Marketing Department and also avail Shs 1 billion to purchase three inspection vehicles that UTB requested for, as this would enhance mobility, which in turn would ease the inspection and thus ensure quality control.

The proposed committee allocations are on page 25.  

The committee observed that Tourism Development Programme entities are grossly underfunded. The committee was presented with several unfunded priorities however, the following are considered very critical and should be provided for within the Financial Year 2020/2023, through reallocation as follows:

    1.  Uganda Tourism Board - quality assurance vehicle pickups - Shs 1 billion. 

    2. Uganda Tourism Board internal reallocation from nonwage recurrent to recruit additional staff - Shs 2.6 billion.

    3. Ministry of Wildlife Tourism and Antiquities, construction of a wall fence - Shs 3.2 billion; a pier, where the boats will be docking is Shs 0.5; and regional satellite education centre in Mbale is Shs 5.8 billion. UHTTI - Jinja to fully fund the implementation of the structure is Shs 1.5 billion. UWRTI- Kasese to fully fund implementation of the structure to conduct wildlife related research is Shs 1 billion. Uganda Hotel and Tourism Training Institute Jinja, to kick start the construction of a students’ hostel is Shs 1 billion. Project Code 1700: Mt Rwenzori Tourism Infrastructure Development Project is Shs 2 billion.

To develop and maintain Mwanga-Kabalega Sanctuary Site is Shs 1 billion.  The total is Shs 19.6 billion. These are the areas the committee thought it would reallocate funds to.

Trade, Industry & Cooperatives Sector

The entities under this include:

    i) Vote 015 - Ministry of Trade, Industry & Cooperatives;
    ii) Vote 154 - Uganda National Bureau of Standards;
    iii) Vote 136 - Uganda Export Promotion Board.
    iv) Vote 500 Local Governments.
 
Affiliated institutions

    i) Uganda Development Corporation;
    ii) Uganda Warehouse Receipt Systems Authority;
    iii) Management Training and Advisory Centre
    iv) AGOA Secretariat.

Trade and industry sector 

The sectors comprises four votes that contribute to the development programme and promotion of competitive and export-led private sector and these include sectors under Trade, Industry & Cooperatives that I had read on page 27.

Honourable members, allow me to take you straight to page 30.

Source of funds identified for relocation

These are the funds we thought we could identify and I will later justify why and where we relocated them. The committee identified Shs 34.3 billion from within the trade and industry sector and reallocated it within the sector’s key priority areas. The table below shows the identified sources. 

Vote 015: Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives

The contribution to autonomous institutions:

Uganda Warehouse Receipt System Authority – I will justify later – Shs 12 billion.
Compensation of War Debt Cooperatives Claims – Shs 11.3 billion. 

Rationalisation of UDC projects allocation:

Zombo Tea factory – Shs 5 billion was deducted.
Luweero Fruit Factory – we believe Shs 3 billion is adequate. 

For Zombo and Luweero, they allocated money to buy machinery, but we don’t think you should buy machinery when you have not yet even purchased the land, done civil works and planning. Therefore, we have deducted Shs 5 billion from Zombo and given them just Shs 5 billion so that they can first purchase the land. The same applies to Luweero factory.

For Soroti Fruit Factory, we have deducted Shs 1 billion. They are always asking for money to purchase fruits. So, we thought we should leave them with only Shs 1 billion not Shs 2 billion as earlier indicated. 

For Integrated Sugar Factory in Luuka – this is the factory in Busoga – we believe Shs 4 billion is adequate to purchase land and do the civil works and not Shs 6 billion they had earlier planned for. 

Therefore, a total of Shs 34.3 billion had been allocated and we are going to reallocate it and I will justify. 

Honourable members, on page 35, the total budget allocation to the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives is Shs 93.023 billion of which the ministry is allocated Shs 35.174 billion (38 per cent), UDC Shs 39.723 billion (43 per cent), Uganda Warehouse Receipt System Authority Shs 15.06 (16 per cent), AGOA Shs 0.55 billion (one per cent) and MTAC Shs 2.5 billion (three per cent). 

The bigger share of the budget to UDC is on account of allocation of UDC projects. The total wage budget is Shs 12.39 billion non-wage is Shs 77.76 billion, while Shs 2.05 billion is for development. 

I will straight away, in the interest of time, take you to observations on page 37.
 
Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives

Compensation of war debt claims. 

The committee notes that the main objective for the introduction of the cooperative movement was to contribute to the wellbeing and development of the Ugandans. 

However, subsequent policies and events affected the operations of these cooperatives to the extent that the political instability in Uganda at that time led to the suspension and or closure of these cooperatives. However, as part of Uganda’s reforms, a political decision was taken to compensate the cooperatives in an effort to stimulate the economy. 

The committee observes that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives is currently carrying out verification and payment of war debt claimants concurrently. The committee, in its wisdom, does not find this feasible. The compensation of war debt claimants is an exercise that started way back in 1986. 

It is, therefore, inconceivable that the verification process is still an on-going exercise. Without completion of the verification, we shall experience more claimants coming up, multiple payments of the same claimants and ghost claimants. This will continue to cause the Government financial loss. It is, therefore, right and fitting to have the whole compensation exercise streamlined by completing the verification process and then the compensation payment of all the claimants that would have been duly verified. 

In the audit report for Financial Year 2020/2021, the Auditor-General observed that: “In some cooperatives, the amounts to be paid as compensation for war losses were in excess of the amounts originally claimed by the cooperatives. In addition, payments amounting to Shs 14 billion were made to persons and law firms other than the beneficiary cooperative societies.” So, it is based on these reasons that we have withdrawn the money that had been allocated to the compensation and we have allocated only Shs 2 billion so that they first verify all the claimants and pay at once. 

On page 39, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and cooperatives should halt the payment of war debt claimants and concentrate on the verification exercise of these cooperatives. This will guide Parliament as regards the exercise of appropriation and also eradicate ghost claimants, multiple claims and payments and, above all, curtail potential opportunistic behaviour by players in the compensation process. 

The committee recommends that Shs 2 billion be allocated to the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to carry out the verification of war debt claimants – the rest of the details there. 

I will go straight to UDC. 

The committee observed that the majority of projects being implemented by UDC have not yet started operating at full capacity and are not making any profits for the Government, according to the Auditor-General’s report for financial year 2020/2021. These projects were experiencing various challenges such as need for additional machinery in Soroti Fruit Factory and inadequate inputs to match the factory capacity as seen in Atiak sugar factory, to mention but a few. 

The committee recommends that the management of UDC should improve implementation of processes by ensuring that guidelines are put in place. 

Honourable members, on page 41, there is the Uganda Warehouse Receipt System Authority.
The committee made the following findings.

The funds budgeted by the authority – amounting to Shs 10.15 billion – for use to refurbish storage facilities and provide metrological infrastructure, analysis and mechanisms, were budgeted for a work programme outside the mandate of the authority. 

The warehouse receipt system authority is established under Section 3 of the Warehouse Receipt System Act, 2006, herein after referred to as the Act, as a regulatory authority. 

The functions of authority are: 

(a) 	License warehouses;
(b) 	License warehouse keepers; 
(c) 	License warehouse inspectors; 
(d) 	Issue negotiable warehouse receipt books; 
(e) 	Carry out and perform such other functions as are conferred or imposed on it by this Act or regulations made under the Act. 

The committee finds that the funds budgeted by the authority – amounting to Shs 15.15 billion – for use to refurbish storage facilities and providing metrological infrastructure, were budgeted for a work programme outside the mandate of the authority and, as such, should not be appropriated. 

Indeed, to grant funds to the authority to refurbish storage facilities and provide metrological infrastructure will allow the authority to participate in activities that are licensed by itself under the Act. This will make the authority a regulator while at the same time participating in the industry it regulates. 

Recommendations 

The authority’s request for Shs 10.15 billion to be used to refurbish facilities and provide metrological infrastructure was not approved by the committee and should not be approved by the House since the authority does not have such mandate under the law. These people have gone even as far as buying gates for private storage facilities. 

The committee further observes that Section 17(2) of the PFMA Act, 2015 requires that all unspent balances at the end of the financial year be repaid into the Consolidated Fund. However, Uganda Warehouse Receipt System has continued to hold money across financial years without disclosure. For instance, at the end of Financial Year 2020/2021, the authority did not transfer Shs 4.87 billion into the Consolidated Fund. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the accounting officer of the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives should cause the transfer of the said money to the Consolidated Fund and also continue to effectively supervise that particular agency. 

Now, on the following – MTAC and Uganda Export Promotion Board – I will give one example on Uganda Export Promotion Board on page 46. They do not have boards. Therefore, it is illegal for us, as Parliament, to even appropriate money for salaries. I will justify as follows. 

Uganda Export Promotion Board is established under Section 4 of the Uganda Export Promotion Act (Cap 102), with the objectives of facilitating the development, promotion and coordination of all export-related activities that lead to the export growth on a sustainable basis.

Under section 8, the board is supposed to carry out functions of –

    i) overseeing the implementation of the board’s policies and programmes;

    ii) approving the annual budget and action plans of the board;

    iii) monitoring and evaluating performance of the board against the budget and plans;

    iv) approving the annual reports and accounts of the board;

    v) establishing and approving rules and procedures for proper financial management and accountability; and

    vi) approving rules and procedures for appointments, discipline, etc.

Under Section 13, the Executive Director prepares and submits to the board of directors, for its approval, estimates of income and expenditure of the board, which submits the estimates to the minister for approval - in this case, without a board, there is no way these agencies could have submitted directly to the minister.

No expenditure – and I want to quote - shall be made out of the funds of the board unless that expenditure is part of the expenditure approved by the Board of Directors under the estimates for the financial year in which the expenditure is to be made, or in estimates supplementary to it under Section 13.

Observations of the committee

The committee observes that the Uganda Export Promotion Board has not been constituted for the past three years. Considering the functions the existence of the board, as a governing body, is paramount. All the processes carried out with the aim of seeking approval of the budget estimates by Parliament are rendered nugatory since they bear no legal thrust.

In the case of Sam Kutesa v. Attorney-General it was held that when several persons are appointed to exercise judicial powers, then in the absence of the provision to the contrary, they must all act together. There can only be one adjudication and that must be the adjudication of the entire body. 

The same rule would apply whenever a number of individuals were empowered by a statute to deal with any matters as one body. The action taken would have to be the joint action of all of them otherwise, they would not be acting in accordance with the provisions of the statute. 

The recommendations

The Minister of Trade should constitute a board with immediate effect or seek for disbandment or merger of, in order to avoid unnecessary Government expenditure. 

Madam Speaker, as I conclude at page 50 – here are the observations of the committee under UNBS.

The committee received, in writing, submissions from the Uganda Scientists, Researchers and Allied Workers’ Union stating that 90 per cent of UNBS staff are scientists yet were not considered in the ongoing salary enhancement. 

Furthermore, in the Financial Year 2021/2022, Shs 6 billion was provided towards clearing terminal arrears. This only covered 82.35 per cent of the total arrears. This implies that there is still a deficit of 17.65 per cent, of which, no provision has been made. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that UNBS should be availed with funds amounting to Shs 7.425 billion for a phased enhancement of salaries for their staff in the science category. 

The committee further recommends that Government should provide funds to cater for gratuity arrears.

At the end, honourable members, you have proposed committee reallocations. The committee observes that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives entities are grossly underfunded. Vote 154 – UNBS we are recommending allocation of five billion shillings to recruit additional staff.

Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives

We are allocating Shs 10 billion for the rural industrialisation development programme.

Uganda Development Corporation/Bundibugyo Cocoa factory

Upon determination of viability by end of June, we are allocating Shs 2.3 billion for the designs and preliminaries. 

Uganda Development Corporation to invest in East Africa medical vitals to buy a second line and working capital - the only factory in Africa, manufacturing powder free medical gloves - Shs 15 billion - they required to buy a second line for production. 

Lastly, Management Training Advisory Centre – Shs 2 billion shillings. The total is 34 billion.

Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that Parliament adopts this report and approves the budgetary estimate for the Financial Year 2022/2023 under the following votes. I beg to submit.

The Speaker: Thank you very much, Chairperson for the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry. (Applause)

Honourable minister, do you have something to say? 

3.51
The minister of state for trade, industry and cooperatives (Industry) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I want to thank the chairperson of the committee and the members for the report presented. I think it is a well written report, especially, the point they make that this sector is the engine of the economy and, therefore, supporting it will grow our economy, jobs and industry.

I only have a comment that as we move towards the Budget Committee, I can see that the committee has recommended that the money, which was allocated to compensate cooperatives should not be approved until all of them have been verified. Our view would be that those that are already verified should be paid as we continue to verify others, which are not.  Otherwise, if you say, “Stop everything until you verify,” I think that can cause some trouble. 

The second is also the reallocation of the money for the warehouse receipt system. We hope that the money for the wages of the staff and basic activities of the institution have not been affected. 

Also, to commit that the appointment of the board - the Export Promotion Board - is already business of Cabinet. There were just a few queries, which we were answering. We will be able to sort it out before the end of June. Thank you.

The Speaker: When you look at rule 159(c) on the general functions of a committee of Parliament, you realise that it states as follows: “To assess and evaluate activities of Government and other bodies.” 

The Committee on Tourism, Trade and Cooperatives ought to have seen and known that there was no board. It should have been brought to this august House. 

We do not want to cripple the operations of the institution. I think what we can do is to give the ministry a deadline of May to have the board in place as we go ahead with appropriation; we should go ahead with appropriation for the Export Promotion Board. We cannot say, “We are not giving them money.” We will give them the money but on condition that they will have the board in place. That is the amendment I want the chairperson to make in his report. Like the honourable minister is saying, we just give them a condition that before the House supplies, they must have this in place. 

Mr mayanja: Procedure, Madam Speaker.

The Speaker: What is your procedure point about?

Mr mayanja: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. Rule 149 talks about the consideration of the reports on policy statements and the proposed annual budget. Under sub-rule (2) it states: “The House shall consider the reports of the Sectoral Committee and refer the approved recommendations to the Budget Committee for reconciliation, harmonisation and consideration, not later than the 30th day of April….”

Madam Speaker, my concern is that you at least give us five to 10 minutes to have our input in these reports. I think we are not moving procedurally well because we have not made our inputs into these reports. Thank you.

The Speaker: I have already given you the five minutes. Hon. Allan Mayanja, we are receiving the ministerial policy statements from sectoral committees with their recommendations. We are forwarding these under Section 149(2), to the Budget Committee. 

The Budget Committee is going to bring a consolidated and reconciled report to help us look at it, item by item. That is where you are going to start debating. 

I do not know what you want to debate here; on the challenges or recommendations? Is that what you want? 

3.56
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo North County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I just want to emphasise one very important issue that Government seems not to be taking seriously; the funding that the Government of Uganda receives from Europe, the USA and China passes through the Chinese Export Credit Agency. It comes with a condition that the company implementing the programme must be from China; the same applies to Europe and USA. 

Now, if we do not strengthen the Export Promotion Board and the agency, we are going to lose out in DRC, the way we lost out in South Sudan; we are going to lose out the way we have lost in Somalia. As we speak now, Madam Speaker, the Kenyan Government flew a team of investors into DRC and opened an Equity Bank Branch there. They are building a warehouse; our work is to take our sons and daughters to die in DRC and build a road while others go and invest. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to request the Prime Minister to commit more funding so that we build a warehouse facility, a cold system in the Goma, where we are constructing a road and have the UPDF so that we can promote our export. The same should be done in Somalia and South Africa. The budget that has been provided for is not adequate. Madam Speaker, I wish to emphasise.

3.58
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bukimbiri County, Kisoro): Madam Speaker, I wish to be guided because I am sure that all of these ministers had come here today to answer issues relating to policy not estimates. The policy statements - if you are not a Member of a particular committee, it means your constituents will not be served. It is only here where we would raise issues related to policy issues; like the issue of human resource management, which is very poor in this country. You find that in the local governments and tourism, the shortfall is 65 per cent. 

Therefore, if we do not raise policy issues here and wait for estimates to be raised by the Committee on Budget, these ministers will go celebrating knowing that their policies and budgets have been passed. We want to be assured that when we are discussing the budget we shall also discuss issues to do with policy because it is the policy that informs the estimates. I want to be assured, Madam Speaker, that they should not go celebrating thinking that these policies have passed. These policies have not been passed because they were not discussed. Can we say that we have passed them? I thank you. 

4.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, the Public Finance Management Act was formulated, and given the timelines that we have. I think your guidance is appropriate and will help the Members. When we combine all these reports before the Committee on Budget - because the Budget Committee report does not only touch on the policy but also talks about the figures. 
Madam Speaker, I think we should be given more time when we are debating the report of the budget committee. Otherwise, if we debate every report, and then the budget committee comes, we will find the House repeating actually – anyway, we do not have the time. If we can combine these reports into the budget committee report then at that time, we will be able to have enough time to debate both policy and numbers. I think the guidance you have given will benefit Members. 

4.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Martin Mugarra): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also wish to thank the chairperson of the committee and the members for the good report. Of course, the most important thing to note about the committee report is that this ministry still needs support. Before COVID-19, it was bringing in the highest revenues in this country; around Shs 1.6 billion and employing a huge number of Ugandans. I think we need to be supported so that we can get back to our feet and be able to bring in the same amount of money and employ the same number of Ugandans. I would like to thank the committee and Parliament for their support. 

However, I would also like to implore the Members of Parliament here today that, please, you also travel around this beautiful country, Uganda. When you are travelling, tweet about it, carry as many constituents as you can, and enjoy the Pearl of Africa. We expect you to be one of the marketing tools for the Pearl of Africa. I implore you to please travel. We shall be climbing Mountain Rwenzori; Members, come and we climb together. I thank the committee for the report.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have already guided the House on this. We are looking at the challenges; the estimates. I am actually happy with the report. They were even able to reallocate within the same budget; where they felt the money was not useful enough, they had to put it into a useful venture. We are going to look at these items one by one; after consolidation and reconciliation by the Committee on Budget. 

Honourable members of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry, I would like to thank you for the report. I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry be adopted with amendments.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: The amendments we are making are the ones we have already said; export promotion and then -

MR NAMBESHE: Madam Speaker, I have not come to challenge your ruling, but in compliance with our Rules of Procedure, especially rule 149(2) - what is of concern is the word “shall.” let me read it verbatim: 

“The House shall consider the reports of the sectoral committee and refer the approved recommendations to the Budget Committee.” 

In essence, this is the time to have a debate on these reports that are coming from the sectoral committees, before we make a recommendation that they are referred to the budget committee. This is as per the rules, if we are in strict compliance and adherence to the rules. Madam Speaker, I would implore your Chair to reconsider that ruling.

THE SPEAKER: What do you want us to do? The reports that we are adopting are going to the budget committee so what do you want us to do?

MR NAMBESHE: I would want us to work within the rules – 

THE SPEAKER: Are we not working within the rules? 

MR NAMBESHE: To debate each sectoral committee as it comes and then we make recommendations referring it to the Budget Committee as per the provision of the rule. Madam Speaker, the word is “shall.” That the House - and this is the House now - shall consider. That consideration is about debating -

THE SPEAKER: But what we are doing is considering. I have given people time to speak. I have given the ministers time to give comments on what they have heard. How do you want it to be debated? Do you want it to be put to a vote?

MR NAMBESHE: Madam Speaker, with all due respect, the ministers are not mentioned anywhere in the rules. They are the ones to guide – [MR Geoffrey Ekanya: “Clarification] - No, I am on procedure. 

THE SPEAKER: He is seeking clarification even if you rose on procedure.

MR NAMBESHE: I need to allow you but I have not. Madam Speaker, it does not make mention - with all due respect - anywhere in the rules that the ministers are the ones to give guidance or highlights -

THE SPEAKER: But these are Members of Parliament. They are equally obliged to debate.

MR NAMBESHE: Yes, it is the debate I am talking about before any recommendations to the Committee on the Budget.

THE SPEAKER: Have you stood up and I refused to pick you?

MR NAMBESHE: I?

THE SPEAKER: Yes. 

MR NAMBESHE: No, I am happy that you have allowed me, Madam Speaker, to raise the procedural issue.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, sit down. (Laughter)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, with due respect to the Chief Opposition Whip, I think where we would be most interested in, is to look at the performance of each sector. “You were allocated money in the last parliamentary period; how did you perform?” So, when we give you money, we give it to you based on how you utilised the resources. 

That is where our interests would be. However, for now, the report of the sectoral Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry is so detailed that I do not know whether anybody would have more input because the committee carried out a lot of research on behalf of Parliament. 

They carried out a lot of research; they went to the west and east - 

THE SPEAKER: You do not have say “No.” If you have an issue, stand up and speak. It is not the first time that we are doing the budgeting process. It is just unfortunate that it is your first time but we have done the budgeting process before you even came to this Parliament. 

So, let us learn from each other. If that is what she is saying, that is what has been done. So, you cannot just say “No, no,” because you want to talk. Maybe you want to smuggle in something on cattle rustling or something else – We want something backed up by figures. Do you get it?

There was a budgeting process that was done for the last financial year. We want to assess how much was given to the last financial year, how much are we giving in this financial year and why the variance? Are we going to add or reduce? And then we will look at the source of funding: Where is the funding coming from? Is it external or internal? That is budgeting. 

Some people are lucky that they studied accounting, like some of us. 
Next item?

INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE

4.09
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Mr Moses Magogo): Madam Speaker, I will also take the opportunity - since I have not had one - to congratulate you for having ascended to that office. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, in accordance with the laws and the relevant rules, the minister in charge of the sector submitted the policy statement and our committee has analysed it. 

I am here on behalf of the committee to present the comments and recommendations in response to the observations. The Committee on Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance is in charge of vote 20 and vote 126: 

Vote 20 – Ministry of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance; and 
Vote 26 – NITA–U. 

And the number of subventions for the agencies that are under – Uganda Communications Commission, the Uganda Broadcasting Corporation, Posta Limited, the Institute of Communication Technology, and Vision Group, among others. 

In the interest of time, I will not look at the methodology but I will also state that in our analysis, we found that the policy statement was in accordance with the laws and the various policies of Government as required. I will make a general observation that ICT (or information technology) is supposed to be a crosscutting driver for the socio-economic transformation that affects almost every activity. 

Today, we live in the world of ICT; where you are seated, when you look right or left, it is ICT. Incidentally, when you look at the provisions of the funding made, do not necessarily reflect the objectives as stated in the various documents. 

In the interest of time, I will proceed straight to the challenges; I will go to page 14 of the document where we observed that almost 68 per cent of the budget of the ministry is actually payment of the former employees of Uganda Posts and Telecommunications - almost 70 per cent. 

Now, when you look at this provision, it is being done at the expense of programmes that would affect not only many people but also other programmes and to achieve the overall objective. 

The committee recommends that instead of 53 per cent of the arrears that are being paid in one year; they are rolled over three years such that only 35 per cent is paid and then the rest should be paid in the following years such that some money is reallocated for the important unfunded areas, and that would amount to about Shs 40 billion.

Page 19 is about Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC). The Uganda Broadcasting Corporation is also the same entity that runs and manages Signet. Now, for the understanding, Signet is supposed to be the company that carries the television signals of all other players in the industry for free. 

However, in our site visits and engagement with the various agencies, including UBC and UCC, we found that what we are supposed to call the National Operating Centre in Kololo - where all signals of television in this country are supposed to be collected before transmission - is in a sorry state. The control room has no air conditioning and they opened the doors such that there is natural air conditioning by wind. The equipment is obsolete and even the manufacturers can no longer provide spare parts and they are not on standby. 

Therefore, on page 21 the committee recommends as follows: 

In order to ensure proper operation by Signet, let Signet be legally disengaged from UBC by creating its own company, fully owned by Government with its own mandate, deliverables, board and secretariat - different from UBC. At the moment, UBC is both a television and an aggregator of other televisions, which is not right. 

The committee observed that all the resources that may be allocated to Signet may as well be used for other functions that may not necessarily be for the objective.

The committee recommends that Shs 2.5 billion is allocated to Signet to specifically upgrade the dilapidated National Television Operating Centre in Kololo and also Shs 7.5 billion allocated to Signet to install the Direct To Home (DTH) services for the Free-to-air services in order for television services to reach each and every corner of Uganda.

The committee further recommends that the Government provides incentives and reduction in taxes and on the DTH decoders and dishes to ensure that these are affordable and accessible, which in the long run will cut on the cost of accessing television and cut on the monopoly of the pay TVs.

Until Signet is disengaged from UBC, these funds should be allocated but withheld. Once the funds are provided, Signet should revise its charges for the Free-to-air televisions from Shs 12 million per month, which is exorbitant, to about Shs 5 million.

I will move to page 27, which is about the operationalisation of the Parish Development Model Information System (PDMIS).  Madam Speaker, we live in the era of data and the beauty of technology is that data is collected, stored and analysed. The success of the Parish Development Model (PDM) will definitely depend on the systems to capture, store, manipulate and report data. 

Whereas Parish Development Model seems to be the game changer, and digital transformation is being mentioned as one of the pillars, incidentally, the allocation of funds do not reflect exactly that. We risk a situation that decisions are going to be made once again without properly presented and analysed data. 

The committee recommends that the Government provides an allocation of Shs 7.6 billion for the operationalisation of the system for the Financial Year 2022/2023. Currently, only Shs 5 billion has been allocated instead of Shs 75.8 billion required. 

Let me move to page 28 and talk about Business Process Outsourcing (BPO). The Ministry of ICT & National Guidance is mandated and committed to accelerate national digital transformation, creating opportunities for unemployed youth using Business Process Outsourcing. 

Whereas the ministry requires Shs 31.9 billion, only Shs 800 million has been provided. The committee recommends that the Government provides the required Shs 31.9 toward business process outsourcing, digitisation and innovation for the year 2022/2023.

I will move to page 33, which is about the tribunal. Communications tribunal, as required by the law has not been implemented despite the provision in the Communications Act and the presidential directive on the matter. Up to date, the tribunal has not been placed and the danger is that UCC continues to act as a regulator and at the same time a tribunal, which is not proper.

Therefore, the committee recommends that Shs 5.4 billion, as required, for the establishment of the tribunal be allocated for the Financial Year 2022/2023.

I will move to page 35 and again, this is about UCC. The committee observed that there is a two percent levy on licensees of UCC. The objective/spirit of this provision was to generate resources to address the need of telecommunication services in areas that do not make commercial value to the private players.

Madam Speaker, when the two percent is collected one percent goes to the Consolidated Fund and one percent is retained by UCC to undertake this responsibility. There are two challenges here. The first challenge is that the one percent, which goes to the Consolidated Fund, is taken for the general use and is not necessarily put to the use of addressing areas that have such a challenge. The second challenge is that the two percent is being charged across all licensees, including broadcasters of television and radios that may not necessarily have been covered. 

It is also true that because of that, this money has not been collected since this provision was put in place. It is only collected from the telecoms but not broadcasters. Therefore, the committee recommends that there is a revision and removal of this. In any case, it is not being paid and that was not the objective.

I will move to page 41, which is about Vision Group. There used to be the vernacular papers of Rupiny, Etop and Orumuri but these were not making commercial sense and, therefore, were discontinued. Yet, they are very important in terms of dissemination of information since a large percentage of the population may not necessarily be able to read and write English. Therefore, the committee recommends that Shs 2.9 billion is allocated to the Vision Group towards revamping these particular papers. 

Madam Speaker, page 46 has a summary of the unfunded priorities totalling to about Shs 194 billion but what has been provided is only Shs 16 billion, out of the expected Shs 211 billion to ensure that information technology is used as a tool to drive the socio-economic transformation of this nation.

I, therefore, on behalf of the committee, call upon Members of this House to approve this report so that it is transmitted to the Committee on Budget for further consideration. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I would like to hear from the Chairperson of COSASE on the issues of the tribunal.

4.24
MR JOEL SSENYONYI (NUP, Nakawa Division West, Kampala City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The reason we have regulations and laws that guide entities is because we want these entities to be able to do what is expected of them. Sometimes these entities think that we want to frustrate them. No! The reason we are hard and insist that we tick all the boxes, cross every t’s and dot every i’s is because we want these entities to work because the taxpayer injects money in them.

The issue of the tribunal is a very critical one. Madam Speaker, that is another box that has to be ticked and we should not try to run away from it. Like we are saying, once we tick all these boxes, then somehow, the taxpayer is sure “I am shielded in one way or another because I am injecting my money there”.

Madam Speaker, we need to get to a point where we say, ”Before we release some more money let us have all these boxes ticked.” I think that is very important. Parliament also needs to begin to be taken seriously. We pass recommendations – we are now discussing these matters, the sectoral committees are bringing their reports and so on but sometimes they are taken for granted yet we wield a carrot and stick – if you like: we appropriate these monies. 

Therefore, we need to get to that point where we say, “You know what, before we release some more money to you, can you first show us that all the boxes have been ticked and that you have crossed every ‘t’ and dotted every ‘I’” and that whatever requirement that needs to be in place is in place. It also helps the entities. They need to know we are not doing this because we are pressing them so hard. It helps them to operate prudently and efficiently. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, what do you have to say about UCC and its tribunal? Anyway, since the minister was not in – honourable minister, can the chairperson tell you the problem with the tribunal in UCC? 

MR MAGOGO: For the benefit of the minister, I will try to summarise. On the tribunal, the challenge is that, despite being a provision in the Act and there being a challenge that the regulator at the same time also undertakes the role of the tribunal even when some players in the industry may be in conflict – this has not been actualised because of lack of provision of funds. The committee was recommending that funds be provided, if that is the excuse, such that we can have the tribunal in place.

Regarding UBC, again, Signet that is supposed to be the carrier, is also a department within UBC, which is a television of its own. The recommendation of the committee is that, legally, Signet be independent with its own board, mandates and secretariat such that resources are allocated for it to be able to undertake the mandate of taking the television signal to every Ugandan in every corner of the country. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, it is not the first time that this House is getting to know about the lack of a tribunal in UCC. When I was a chairperson in COSASE, that was one of the issues we raised. How can a whole regulator have no tribunal? And, on this note, we are going to appropriate but not give you money without a tribunal in place. (Applause)

4.29
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for the report. I am sorry, I came in late. 

The issue of the communications tribunal is a creature of the UCC Act. The major function or role of the tribunal is that it will work as an appellate court where you can appeal the decisions of UCC or decision taken by the minister for ICT on the matters covered by the law. We have been working on this issue. We have completed the regulations, which are now being finalised by the First Parliamentary Counsel – incorporating the final comments. We have also worked out the budgetary estimates required, which I think the committee has captured – Shs 6 billion annually. 

We have also been in consultation with the Judicial Service Commission, which the law empowers to nominate names for appointment by the President. So, the process is on. The only thing lacking is finance. If we are availed with the required amount of money, then we are as good and as ready to go. 

Therefore, if Parliament can support our ministry with the required resources - the preliminary activities required have already been worked out -

THE SPEAKER: Are you saying that you need the money for recruitment of the tribunal?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Yes, we have to appoint the chairperson, who is a judge, and the two members, technical advisor and the other members of staff as well as providing accommodation and space and so forth. All these have been computed.

THE SPEAKER: You have the one percent – is it one percent that you take away from the NTR? Isn’t that a priority to UCC that you would first improvise as you wait for the money?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Well, part of the two per cent involves the Consolidated Fund and the other is budgeted to support other activities –

THE SPEAKER: Other activities, including the tribunal. It is a priority in your operations.

DR BARYOMUNSI: There are also technical challenges if UCC is to fund the tribunal directly when the tribunal supervises UCC. Anyway, we can continue having the discussion but the point I am making is that -

THE SPEAKER: I mean the ministry is the one supposed to do that. If you see a conflict of interest, then the ministry should do that? It is for the good of this industry. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: What I can say is that the money, even from the one per cent, is not adequate to run UCC and the other activities and the tribunal. So, our request was for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to provide additional resources for the tribunal to be in place.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we are going to hold your budget until you have the tribunal in place. So, can we have a tribunal before the end of May? It is by law – it is a creature of law. We are not just imposing it on you.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Then, on the issue of UBC, yes, we need to complete the digital migration process. What is required, also, is Shs 7.5 billion and that will enable Ugandans to pick UBC signals anywhere in the country without necessarily going to Star Times, DStv or these other networks. 

THE SPEAKER: Is that the Signet? 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Yes. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairman for the very good report. I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister as far as Free-to-air services are concerned in this country. 

Madam Speaker, I remember that many years ago, Parliament had been budgeting and the ministry provided Free-to-air services within Kampala only. Every year, we budget for this. This time, I am happy that we are allocating Shs 7.5 billion to provide the services across the board. 

I would like to find out from the chairman of the committee whether they took time when discussing to find out what happened in the past so that they compare with the present and know what may happen in the future. This is because we may budget again and the services will not be provided to Ugandans. This is what I would like to find out.

MR MAGOGO: Thank you very much. I would also like to provide more information that the two percent that is collected – and from which one percent goes to the Consolidated Fund – in the next financial year, this resource envelope is reducing. This is because, initially, the telecom companies that pay the two per cent were also being charged on their gross because they were also undertaking the business of mobile money. 

However, with the enactment of the National Payment Systems Act, this is now being regulated by Bank of Uganda. So, a substantial
amount of revenue will no longer be going to UCC. That is just for the information of the House. 

Back to the question, what is different with the provision of the Shs 7.5 billion compared to the past are two issues. These are two issues. First, is the recommendation we are giving that Signet should be given its own mandate such that whatever revenues are allocated will be monitored to make sure that they undertake the activity for which they have been budgeted.

In the past, Signet being a department of UBC, and these resources go to UBC, it becomes difficult to separate which resources are for which activity. 

Secondly, it is also not true that the Free-to-air service is only in Kampala. It is also in other parts of the country, but is not reliable because of the technology being used being terrestrial. “Terrestrial” means going through the air and people have to negotiate with the hills and the valleys that come along.

With the recommendation of the Shs 7.5 DTH – which is, Direct To Home via satellite - it does not matter where one may be. They will have a footprint of the satellite and every Ugandan will have access to Free-to-air television –(Applause)- it is not only UBC but all Free-to-air channels. Thank you.

4.37
Mr silas aogon (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. And I want to appreciate the chairperson. That is why it is very important to always have brilliant chairpersons leading committees. You have done a great job. The report is good. Anybody asking “why” knows the answer. It is not easy to give a good report. 

I have three issues of concern. First, the issue of the newspapers - Etop - I think we even lost Rupiny and Orumuri –(Interjections)- even Busoga had one. 

Anyhow, people have been thinking that these papers are loss- making. However, there are special issues that are attended to when we have these newspapers run. For instance, when a common person wants to run an advert for administration of estates, it is much cheaper. It has been cheaper for us when we use those local newspapers. 

Therefore, I think it is brilliant enough for us to agree with this committee to revamp these newspapers as quickly as possible. I have been seeing people running for deed polls, when they want to change their names and have to advertise things in the papers. I think it also plays part of it.

The second issue is that of the tribunal. Indeed, it is sad for us to have an entity that has no mediator between itself and the wider public. I think that becomes unreasonable. We need to do an audit in this House to find out how many laws have been made by this House but are redundant; they have not been implemented. These are part of it. 

We need this tribunal just tomorrow. I want to tell this House that the biggest power that we have, as a House, is doing appropriation. If we do not hold Government accountable at this level, then we will lose everything. 

Therefore, there should be nothing like going back. These people must set up the tribunal as quickly as possible. The minister, my friend, is a good man and I believe that he listens very well. So, we are likely to get this tribunal as quickly as possible. I think that was very important.

Lastly is the issue of reliable and credible data, which is very critical. Recently, we saw what happened. When we wanted to get the data of the people who needed support when COVID-19 hit us, our people went into disarray. They were not able to put their books to order. So, we just went and gave money even to people who did not deserve to get it. You sent us to the field and we got this information. This was all because we were not well prepared. We did not use ICT to put data together; data, which is well collected and analysed and ready to use for the benefit of this country. 

Therefore, I want to back up the committee’s report and say, you have done a brilliant job. Your recommendations are up to date. You need to be supported and your recommendations should be adopted by the House so that we pass everything. Madam Speaker, I beg to move. Thank you. 

The Speaker: Thank you, honourable member. Prime Minister, can I request Government to present the treasury memoranda of all the other accountability committees. I want the Treasury Memorandum for Bank of Uganda, UCC, URC - that were tabled in the 10th Parliament because those will guide us. Otherwise, we are going to be repeating the same things every time. Can we have those presented to this House?

4.41
the third deputy prime minister and minister without portfolio (Ms Lukia Nakadama): Madam Speaker, much obliged. We shall do it.

The Speaker: Thank you - especially on COSASE because the MDAs under it have a lot of money. We need to know what happened. We need to know what they did and whether they handled the issues that were discovered.

I want to thank the Committee on ICT and its members. I now put the question that the Report of the Committee on Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance be adopted by this House. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

The Speaker: Now we refer the report to the Committee on Budget as per rule 149(2). Thank you, Chair.

the committee on the East African Community Affairs

The Speaker: Honourable member, kindly try to make an executive summary. Do not forget to lay your reports. ICT, did you lay your report and minutes? You need to lay them on the Table.

Mr magogo: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the report and the minutes on the Table.

4.43
The chairperson, committee on east African community affairs (Ms Noeline Kisembo): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  On behalf of the Members of the Committee on East African Community Affairs, allow me to congratulate you on assuming that top most office in this august House. 
I am here to present the report on – 

The Speaker: Honourable members, do not go away. Support other committees too. Hon. Mpindi, do not leave because your reports have been presented. 

Ms kisembo: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I hereby present the Report of the Committee on the East African Community Affairs on the ministerial policy statement for the Financial Year 2022/2023 for the Ministry of East African Community Affairs under Vote 021.

However, before I present the report, Madam Speaker, allow me to lay a copy of the report on the Table. I also beg to lay on the Table a file containing minutes of the proceedings of the committee and the engagements held with different stakeholders. 

Madam Speaker, I beg your indulgence that since the report is already uploaded on the intranet, I just read the executive summary, which is also part of the report. 

The Committee on the East African community Affairs, in accordance with Article 155(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, section 12 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and rules 189 and 149(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, reviewed the ministerial policy statements relating to vote 021, Ministry of East African Community Affairs (MEACA) and now reports.
 
Vote 021: Ministry of East African Community Affairs 

Compliance of the Ministerial of Policy Statement of Financial Year 2022/2023 to the PFM Act 2015

The ministry’s ministerial policy statement complied with section 13 (15) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. Based on the assessment for gender and equity requirements, the compliance score of Vote 021 was 63.9 per cent.  

Half-year budget performance Financial Year 2021/2022 

By the close of quarter two of the Financial Year 2021/2022, Out of the approved budget of Shs 31.833 billion, 56.3 per cent translating into Shs 17.933 billion had been released to the ministry. The funds released included a supplementary budget approved for purchasing the minister's vehicles. The ministry, however, managed to absorb only 53.9 per cent of the total funds released to them owing to procurement delays and the bouncing of funds made towards the EAC contributions. Important to note, however, is that the fund is budgeted to cater for arrears that were received and absorbed to 100 per cent. 

Further analysis of the ministry’s budget by subprogrammes reveals that the administration policy and planning subprogramme received the most funds up to a tune of 56.77 per cent, but utilised them the least and registered an absorption of only 53.09 per cent while, the regional integration subprogramme received only 37.59 per cent of its funding and absorbed up to 73.58 per cent. 

Challenges experienced by the vote 

    1. Inadequate funding to effectively meet the obligations and mandate of the ministry. 

    2. Inadequate funds releases for Uganda's annual contribution to EAC organs and institutions. 

    3. Inadequate resources to undertake effective public awareness on EAC programmes, opportunities, market requirements, quality standards, among others; and 

    4. The slow pace by which MDAs are amending their respective national laws to align them to the EAC Common Market Protocol and remove all the non-conforming measures in their respective laws.

The Ministry of East African Community Affairs’ budget for Financial Year 2020/2023:

The ministry has been allocated Shs 31.75 billion for the Financial Year 2020/2023 indicating a slight increment to their budget equal to Shs 0.21 billion, which is 0.66 per cent. This is attributed to the increase in the recent budget of the ministry from the current financial year. Of this, four per cent, which is Shs 1.24 billion, is wage. Then 95 per cent, which is 13.09 billion, is non-wage and one per cent, which is Shs 0.43 billion, is development expenditure. 

While there is a 53.8 per cent reduction in the Government of Uganda funded development funds allocated to the ministry, Members should note that a total of Shs 9.282 billion has been provided to cater for pension and gratuity arrears in the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

The budget strategy and resource allocations for Financial Year 2022/2023 have been done along with the programme approach premised on the 20 development programmes identity right in the NDP 3. The Ministry of East African Community Affairs will contribute only to three NDP 3 development programmes. At the ministry level, the Ministry of East African Community Affairs will operate two subprogrammes to achieve the objectives of the NDP 3 development programmes. 

Underfunded/unfunded priorities of the ministry 

The ministry has several underfunded and unfunded priorities totalling Shs 7.5 billion. The committee observes that the Ministry of East African Community Affairs is keen on ensuring that EAC integration in Uganda works meaningfully to deliver a competitive environment for business. However, the Ministry of East African Community Affairs remains critically underfunded. 

Madam Speaker, on page 11, there is a table; table number 7. It provides the details of the unfunded and underfunded priorities. It is important to note that of the total budget, that is Shs 29.711 billion that is provided for in the appropriation bill, only Shs 4.29 billion is available for the ministries, operational expenditure and all regional integration activities, which is quite limited. 

The committee recommends, therefore, that reconsideration be made to increase the budget of MEACA, Vote 021 of Financial Year 2022/2023 to Shs 39.25 billion commensurate to the expanding mandate and increasing activities of the community. This would cover the current funding gap of Shs 7.5 billion. 

Hosting of the 22nd EAC Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Trade Fair in December 2022:

The exhibition brings together small and medium enterprises from the EAC partner states commonly known as Jua Kali/Nguvu Kazi representing the informal sector. This sector has the most entrepreneurs and is vital in the region's development process. Uganda has committed to hosting the 22nd EAC Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Trade Fair in December 2022, but it remains an unfunded priority. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that Shs 1.2 billion required for hosting the 22nd EAC Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Trade Fair in December 2022 be provided to the ministry to facilitate preparations for hosting the activity.

Sensitisation of the Ugandan citizens to appreciate the East African Community agenda

Despite its earlier recommendations in the Budget Framework Paper and also other reports of previous committees, the committee observes that Uganda still had low public awareness and sensitisation on EAC integration. The lack of understanding continues to disadvantage Ugandans from accessing the gains of the EAC integration. The involvement of the political leadership with the youths and the business sector is critical in strengthening the integration process, considering that the EAC is private-sector-led and market-driven. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that an additional Shs 1.8 billion required for sensitisation and public awareness activities be provided for the ministry to create awareness of the expanding EAC integration agenda and the developments among the citizens –(Interruption) 

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, aware that we have a time constraint, you had guided the chairpersons to summarise. The way I see my honourable chairperson moving, I do not know whether she is summarising or reading the entire report. I am seeking your guidance, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think the chairperson is about to finish. She is giving you the breakdown of the additional funding that they want. So, she is giving you the breakdown of that and she is about to finish.

MS KISEMBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise guidance. I will go to regional engagements and I will summarise. Allow me to read this: In the wake of EAC integration and the accession of the Democratic Republic of Congo to the community, there is need for more efforts to support the private sector players to access market opportunities in the DRC. The involvement of the political leadership of MEACA to participate in EAC sectoral council meetings and coordinate the identification and resolution of non-tariff barriers and bilateral engagements on trade issues related to agro-trade and private sector development is critical. 

The non-tariff barriers increase the transaction time and costs of doing business, affecting Uganda’s intra-regional trade volumes with partner states. 

Madam Speaker, on this, the committee recommends that an additional Shs 2.5 billion be provided to the ministry to facilitate these engagements. 

Compliance and harmonisation of domestic laws to conform to the community laws, directives and decisions

Madam Speaker, in view of time, allow me to read the recommendation since the report is uploaded. 

The committee recommends that:

    1. The additional Shs 0.849 billion required for compliance with implementation of EAC decisions and directives be provided. 

    2. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should table a Bill for amendment of the Public Finance Management Act, to provide for a certificate of EAC resolutions compliance of the ministerial policy statement. This will compel all the affected MDAs to incorporate EAC resolutions and decisions as and when passed in their policies and budget frameworks without which budgetary appropriations would be affected. 

    3. Lastly, the committee recommends that the summit gets more involved in supervising the implementation process. For example, the coalition of the willing member states working methods can be reviewed. 

I will now move to the conclusion, which is on page 19 of the report. 

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, the committee notes that the Appropriation Bill proposed funding as in table 11 below: Recurrent Expenditure – Shs 29,286,102,000 and development expenditure - Shs 425,180,000, making a total of Shs 29,711,282,000. 

However, subject to the above observations and recommendations, the committee recommends that Parliament approves the vote budget estimates to a tune of Shs 39.25 billion commensurate to the expanding mandate and increasing activities of the community. This would cover the current funding gap of Shs 7.5 billion. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairperson of the Committee on East African Community Affairs. 

4.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, committee chairperson and members, for the good report that you have presented this afternoon. 

There is little that we can say about the report but just reminding Members that we are in the East African Community on a number of grounds:

1. 	Pan-Africanism

2. 	To take advantage of this huge market of the community with a population of over 200 million people, we can actually turn the fortunes of this community into a very strong community. For example, talking about the markets alone, East African Community imports goods worth US$ 60 billion amidst the resource that we have. 

The Minister of Energy and Mineral Development would inform this House that, for example, this country has gold worth US$ 12.8 trillion. And yet we continue to import jewellery worth over US$ 200 million. 

So, collectively, we think that if we are in the community, we can try to banish the demons of the bad history that we have had, and bend the curve of our future into prosperity. So, this is the reason why we are in the East African Community. I think any support that we give to this ministry, on our side as Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives working with the Ministry of East African Community, we are doing our level best to make sure that the non-tariff barriers are worked on. 

One of the things that have been hindering the progress of the community, are transport costs. And that is the reason why we have been talking about issues of the Standard Gauge Railway and now, the Meter Gauge Railway so that our goods can be transported to Mombasa.

We are also talking about the pipeline, which we are working together on. So, there are things that we are working on to make sure that we facilitate business and development in the East African Community. 

While I agree that we should have a certificate of compliance of all the documents to talk about the East African Community, I think as leaders, we do not need to be whipped to talk about the future of our continent. We do not want to be whipped to talk about the future of the East African Community. We must whip ourselves and be able to talk and support anything that supports the community; you should not wait to be whipped.
 
Madam Speaker, the chair has recommended compliance certificate but we think we should actually not be whipped mechanically; this is something that we can work on as leaders. Members, there are issues, which were raised about DRC. I just want to inform colleagues that we are setting up a delegation to go to the DRC at the end of this month to negotiate deals so that we can make money for our country. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

5.03
MR PAUL OMARA (Independent, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the chair for the presentation but with a very heavy heart. 

I would like to say that Uganda is not ready for the East African integration. This is why: As the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we had the opportunity to visit Dar es Salaam, later on Nairobi, and then Mombasa. About 10 years ago, the East African Head of States together with the East African Community ministers agreed on a number of protocols. One of them was to build the necessary infrastructure to allow goods and services to move across the region. 

In Dar es Salaam, they have increased about 19 berths; they have finished port of Tanga and Mwanza. At Mwanza they are now building a cargo ship to service Uganda and they have finished the Standard Gauge Railway. In Kenya, they have finished - 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Omara, is that a benchmark that you are making to disqualify us from being in the community? 

MR OMARA: Yes, please.

THE SPEAKER: Is that a benchmark? Are we discussing today whether we should be in the community or not?

MR OMARA: What I am talking about, Madam Speaker, is our sense of readiness. This is because the Ministry of East African Community Affairs is supposed to coordinate the MDAs to make sure that the protocols that are signed are executed in the country. Right now, goods have been delivered in Mombasa through the -(Interruption)

MS AVUR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am the Vice Chairperson of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Madam Speaker, I want you to guide us whether we are proceeding right for a member of the committee to come and start deliberating on a report that has not been officially brought to the House?

THE SPEAKER: We are not proceeding well and this is why I am asking if the Member is using a benchmark to determine whether we should be in the Community or not? Members, today, we are not looking at whether we should be in the Community or not; we are looking at the budget estimates. 

MR OMARA: Yes, Madam Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: You are not going to debate a report that you have not presented to this House. What you are saying now is hearsay. 

MR OMARA: Thank you, for your guidance, Madam Speaker.

MR MOSES OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to provide information to Hon. Paul Omara by saying that he is highlighting the challenge of implementation and in this report, we have clearly mentioned that implementation is a challenge. So, we should address it by using the Summit. We should give the Summit more room play in trying to see that implementation is done well. We have, therefore, proposed a structural aspect in that report.

THE SPEAKER: It is because of that problem that you are asking for more funding. Once we give you the funding, then we should be able to move on well. 

Members, I now put the question that the report of the Committee on East African Community Affairs be adopted by this House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: In accordance with rule 149(2), this report is forwarded to the Committee on Budget for reconciliation, harmonisation and consolidation. This should be handled before the 30th of this month.

5.08
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the expanding mandate of the East African Community with the advent of the DRC and the increasing activities.

Madam Speaker, the minister has made mention of deals that are being ‘cut’. I am concerned about that and so, I want him to throw some light because we know of the East African Community failures, as a result of being a top-down entity, whereby only the Summit leadership makes decisions, including closing borders at that high level. Could he throw light on the shady deals that are being “cut”?

THE SPEAKER: It is now a bottom-up approach.

MR NAMBESHE: It is our prayer that it changes to a bottom-up approach.

THE SPEAKER: It is now a bottom-up approach and this is why he is communicating to you, as the representatives of the local people. So, go back to your people and they will give you more information on how we should ensure that the East African Community performs better.

MR NAMBESHE: Madam Speaker, those deals resurrect the ghosts of mafias who cut deals at that top level.

THE SPEAKER: It is not a deal. By the time the minister wants you to be involved, that means it is now a bottom-up approach; it is no longer at ministerial level alone. If it was at ministerial level, then it would be discussed at the Cabinet, not in the House. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, the deals I am referring to are good deals; they are businesses between the people of Uganda and the people of the DRC. They are not the other ones that you are thinking about. This is for the progress of the two countries. (Applause) Thank you.

PRESENTATION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Norah, give us the executive summary of the report from the Committee on Foreign Affairs. Honourable Members, the Committee on Foreign Affairs includes our missions outside Uganda. This committee has a lot of challenges. It has actually become local affairs because they cannot even go and visit one embassy.

Since today the frontbench is full, kindly lobby and support the Committee on Foreign Affairs. These people cannot go to one embassy because of lack of funding. Whereas we appropriate here, when it reaches Cabinet, they will say, “We cannot release this money”. I, therefore, want to communicate to the frontbench that appropriation is done by Parliament; leave us with our powers. (Applause) Look at how that committee is suffering. Hon. Norah Bigirwa, present your report.

5.03
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Ms Norah Bigirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for that guidance and for reminding the frontbench of what it is supposed to do in regard to this committee. On my behalf and on behalf of the people of Buliisa and the members of the sectoral Committee on Foreign Affairs, allow me congratulate you upon your election as the Speaker of this august House.

Madam Speaker, I also thank you for affording me this opportunity, as the chairperson, to execute a duty, which is prescribed under rule 149(1) of our Rules of Procedure. The above-mentioned rule gives a reporting timeline within the budget cycle. Considering recent developments, it has not been easy to meet the deadline. Therefore, on this point, Madam Speaker, allow me to thank you for the enabling environment you allowed us to work throughout the last couple of weeks, including the Easter weekend.

Also, I thank members of the committee for their tireless commitment; attending meetings, some of which were convened during the night hours and weekends. To the Muslim members of this committee, I salute you. You are in the fasting period but you had to go up to late hours. I want to really applaud you.

Finally, allow me to thank the committee secretariat who captured all the deliberations and submissions and put together this report. In the same vein, I recognise the support of the ICT Department that enabled us to hold virtual meetings of all the 30 missions and the two consulates of Uganda.

I also thank the four missions and their accounting officers that struggled within their means to come and interface with the committee in person. These were the missions in Juba, Riyadh, Nairobi and Kinshasa. 

Madam Speaker, it is indeed monumental for me to report that for the first time and true to section 45 of the Public Finance Management Act, this committee has held meetings with all the accounting officers of missions abroad. 

With that, Madam Speaker, I now beg to present the report of the Committee on Foreign Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for Financial Year 2022/2023 for Vote 006 and Votes 501-536. 

Madam Speaker, you have indeed indicated, in your communication, that the foreign affairs committee is very unique. For that case, I am requesting you to briefly allow me to highlight a few things. 

The mandate of the committee

Rule 187 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament establishes the Committee on Foreign Affairs and mandates it to cover missions abroad and bilateral, multilateral and intergovernmental relations. 

Vote 006: Ministry of Foreign Affairs 

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs comprises the ministry’s headquarters, 34 diplomatic missions abroad and two consulates. The mandate of the ministry is to implement and manage Uganda’s foreign policy. This mandate is executed with a mission to promote and protect Uganda’s interests abroad. 

Strategic objectives of the ministry and the missions abroad are: 

    i) To promote regional international peace and security.

    ii) To facilitate promotion of trade and tourism, and attraction of investment and transfer of technology. 

    iii) To facilitate mobilisation of resources from abroad for development. 

    iv) To facilitate promotion of inter-institutional partnerships and capacity building.

    v) To facilitate maximisation of benefits accruing from adherence to international obligations. 

    vi) To provide protocol and consular services and protection; 

    vii) To enhance Uganda’s image abroad, and;

    viii) To mobilise the Ugandans in the diaspora for national development. 

The committee:

    a) Examined the ministerial policy statements and budget estimates for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and missions abroad. 

    b) Examined the alternative policy statement from the Office of the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament. 

    c) Held physical meetings with the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs (International Relations), ministry’s officials and some heads and accounting officers of missions abroad. 

    d) Held virtual meetings with some heads and accounting officers of missions abroad, in accordance with Section 45(5) of the Public Finance Management Act. 

The committee scrutinised the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and missions abroad for Financial Year 2022/2023 in accordance with Section 13(15) of the Public Finance Management Act, and reports on the following areas. Because of time, I am going to be very fast.

Performance and key achievements of the ministry and missions abroad during the Financial Year 2021/2022

The committee observed that over the years, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has been at the helm and epitome in promoting and protecting Uganda’s image at high-level international events and, in so doing, has registered the following achievements that demonstrate that it is a productive and not consumptive government institution; 

    i) Promotion of commercial and economic diplomacy. 

    ii) Investment promotion. 

    iii) Cooperation assistance and frameworks. 

    iv) Tourism promotion. 

    v) Promotion of regional and international peace and security.

    vi) Mobilisation of the diaspora for national development.

    vii) Provision of legal services and compliance with and reporting on Uganda’s international obligations. 

    viii) Provision of protocol services. 

    ix) Provision of consular services. 

    x) Promotion of the country’s image through public diplomacy, institutional capacity building, and; 

    xi) Property management services.

Madam Speaker, this ministry and its missions has registered a number of achievements. For example, on promotion of commercial and economic diplomacy, they hosted the Fourth Session of the Joint Permanent Mission (JPC) with Tanzania, during which cooperation agreements were concluded in the fields of trade, culture, energy, youth, livestock and fisheries and shared natural resources, among others.

Over the recent and past years, Uganda’s export earnings from Tanzania have been increasing from $46.7 million in Financial Year 2017/2018, $67.69 million in Financial Year 2018/2019 and $94.7 million in Financial Year 2019/2020. You realise the slight decline to $90.02 million in the Financial Year 2020/2021 could have been due to the disruption in economic activities occasioned by the COVID-19 pandemic.

The ministry and its missions negotiated for the export of Ugandan sugar to Ethiopia. Apparently, Uganda’s exports to Ethiopia have been on the increase from $10.87 million in Financial Year 2017/2018, $12.47 million in Financial Year 2018/2019, $16 million in Financial Year 2019/2020 and $23.66 million in Financial Year 2020/2021. However, we have not been exporting sugar to Ethiopia. 

Madam Speaker, still under promotion -  we are trying to show this House that the ministry is doing a lot to this nation – Elite Agro is interested in setting up seven agro-processing tea plants in Uganda in Kisoro, Zombo, Buhweju, Kabalore, Rukiga, Bushenyi and Mitooma. Each factory is estimated to cost $500 million. 

Madam Speaker, when it comes to cooperation assistance and framework, we received, processed and circulated 141 scholarships and training offers from Malaysia, Turkey, USA, UK, Australia, Egypt, India, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Switzerland, Serbia, China, to name but a few. Out of these, 452 Ugandans benefited from the scholarships.

On tourism promotion, the missions, in collaboration with the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities and the Uganda Tourism Board, continue to engage in international tourism expos/exhibitions/promotions to market Uganda as a preferred tourism destination. 

The tourism expos attended included, among others, the UAE Expo convention on promoting Uganda’s cultural tourism and other tourism products; the IZMIR International Tour and Travel Expo in Turkey, and; Uganda Week in Nairobi on tourism and education promotion. 

Madam Speaker, the other achievements are:

    • Promotion of regional and international peace and security.
    • Mobilisation of the diaspora for national development.
    • Provision of legal services and compliance with and reporting on Uganda’s international obligations.
    • Provision of protocol services.
    • Provision of consular services.
    • Institutional capacity building.
    • Trained all senior managers in leadership and management, and;
    • Supported 11 missions in preparation of their respective strategic plans. These include Washington, New York, Abu Dhabi, Qatar, Berlin, Brussels, Addis Ababa, Bujumbura, Pretoria, Kinshasa and Riyadh. 

Madam Speaker, we have half-year budget performance of the ministry and the missions during Financial Year 2021/2022. 

Ministry of Foreign Affairs headquarters’ was allocated a total of Shs 67.983 billion for Financial Year 2021/2022 and of this 39 per cent was non-wage, nine per cent was wage, one per cent was development and 51 per cent was in areas. Table A above clearly indicates it. By half year, Shs 46.459 billion was released, indicating 68.3 per cent of the ministry’s approved budget. It should be observed, however, that no funds were released for the development budget.

The budget absorption 
Overall, 65.1 per cent, which was Shs 44.236 billion of the total release, was spent by half year. It should be observed that 100 per cent of the released arrears was spent by 31 December 2021. On the other hand, wage performance was at 45.6 per cent. The least absorption (26.4 per cent) was registered under non-wage. 

Madam Speaker, this is the Ministry of Foreign Affairs headquarters half-year budget performance at sub-programme level. Table two explains everything that is on page 10. We go to page 11. By the end of quarter two, which is half year, release performance under Regional and International Economic Affairs, Regional and International Political Affairs, Regional and International Cooperation, Protocol and Public Diplomacy and Policy and Planning and Support services were 42.6, 42.1, 0.0, 40.6 and 31.1 per cent, respectively.

Madam Speaker, I would implore colleagues to look through these votes in the tables because all the information is in there. 

On page 12, we have looked at the approved budgets. The information is therein. Foreign Affairs missions were allocated Shs 223.157 billion for the Financial Year 2021/2022. Out of this, 73 per cent was non-wage, 12 per cent was wage and 15 per cent was development. 

The release performance for half year in the Financial Year 2021/2022
A total of Shs 127.751 billion was released, indicating 57.2 per cent of missions’ approved budget. 

The budget absorption overall was 76.90 per cent, which is Shs 98.019 billion of the total release spent by half year. It was observed that only 43.204 per cent of the release arrears were spent by 31 December 2021.

On the other hand, wage and non-wage, respectively performed at 92.31 per cent and 90.84 per cent. The absorption of 31.24 per cent was registered under the Government of Uganda developments. The poor performance on the absorption on the development fund was due to the on-going procurements on a number of construction projects that are within the missions. 

Madam Speaker, page 13 of our report is on the compliance of the MPs with the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. It is evident that most requirements, as stipulated under Section 13(15) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 were provided in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and foreign missions as you have seen in the table on page 13. 

On page 14 are major challenges that affected the performance of the ministry and the missions abroad by Financial Year 2021/2022. The committee was informed that in pursuit of the set targets, missions could not achieve all the set targets because of the following challenges, which were many.

Whereas many of the challenges are general and cross-cutting in nature, the rest are unique to specific Missions. 

Inadequate allocation for development budgets
The estimates for the development budgets of various missions are not commensurate with the items for which they are allocated. Taking an example of the development budget indicated in the Appropriation Bill, 2022, allocated to the permanent Mission in Ottawa, Canada and considering its numerous issues surrounding the renovation and reconstruction of both the Chancery and official residence, the funds allocated may go to waste.

Restrictive cultural and architectural requirements of host countries that require missions to be availed adequate capital development funds

In some missions, it was indicated that most host countries that have cultural attachments have hindered progress in renovation or construction of properties by our missions. 

The Mission in Ottawa, for example, and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, have for the last many years been engaged in the process of getting all the relevant clearances to have the Chancery and official residence of the Mission in Ottawa renovated or constructed. 

However, both buildings are located in heritage conservation districts, which location necessitates acquiring a heritage permit before commencement of construction or renovation. Their being in these districts makes the procedure of acquiring the permit long and complicated.

Lack of funds for economic and commercial diplomacy 
The new focus of the sector is economic and commercial diplomacy. The committee has, however, been informed that out of the 36 missions that we have as a country, only seven have been funded for economic and commercial diplomacy. This was since 2016. Up Now, there has not been a rollout on the rest. We are afraid that even the upcoming financial year, this funding will not appear to the seven missions. Therefore, we will need your indulgence, Madam Speaker.
 
Loss on poundage 
This is one of the challenges. The committee observes that funds for missions are budgeted in Uganda shillings but are transferred in foreign currencies. As a consequence, there are losses incurred due to fluctuation of foreign currencies due to exchange rates as well as stringent policies in some host countries. 

The committee observed that loss on poundage on releases affects critical items such as rent, foreign service allowances through security contributions and in the long run affects the performance of our missions.

Cash flow projection and proposed budgetary allocation for Vote 006 and votes 501 to 536, Financial Year 2022/2023 and medium-term projections

Headquarters
In the medium term, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs Headquarters total budget is projected to remain the same. However, its budget will increase from Shs 33.55 billion, in the Financial Year 2021/2022, to Shs 36.03 billion, in Financial Year 2022/2023 due to increase in the amount allocated to the non-wage component from Shs 26.85 billion to Shs 27.12 billion; and allocations of Shs 2.49 billion to domestic arrears. Wage allocations are projected to remain the same in the medium term, as indicated in Table four below. 

However, the Foreign Missions’ total budget will reduce from Shs 222.48 billion in the Financial Year 2021/2022, to Shs 197.46 billion, in the Financial Year 2022/2023. This is largely on account of a reduction in the amount allocated to non-wage and development by Shs 12.75 billion and Shs 12.27 billion, respectively. Wage allocations are projected to remain the same in the medium term.

Madam Speaker, the tables are here indicated. Everything is in there. I pray that Members look through them.

Comparison of ministerial policy statements figures with draft estimates of Financial Year 2022/2023 

The following observations were made. 
The ministry headquarters budget, which runs under Vote 006, will reduce by Shs 1.022 billion from Shs 33.11 billion to Shs 32.088 billion. 

The Foreign Missions budget will increase by Shs 4.37 billion from Shs 176.8 billion, to Shs 181.18 billion. I refer you to table six. 

The budget strategy and resource allocation for the Financial Year 2022/2023 have been done along the programme approach premised on the 20 development programmes identified in the third National Development Plan (NDP III). The rationale of this programme approach is to improve prioritisation and eliminate the silo approach to budget implementation and the associated duplication inefficiencies and wastage.

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs Headquarters will contribute to four NDP III development programmes while missions abroad will contribute to the 12 development programmes, in the Financial Year 2022/2023, as indicated on the table below. That is, table seven.

Critical unfunded planned output for the Financial Year 2022/2023 

Madam Speaker, due to the budget cuts and freeze on the items of travel abroad, the workshops and seminars, the ministry will not be in position to deliver the following key planned outputs in line with its core mandate of promoting and protecting Uganda's interests abroad. Other unfunded priorities are indicated in table 8 below. 

Madam Speaker, because of the importance of these, I pray that you allow me to go through them very fast.

We have areas that have not been provided for in the budget of Shs 20 billion; arrears to international organisations, funding towards international organisations of Shs 27 billion, promotion of regional and international peace and security here, participation of the ministry in IGAD, ICGLR, AU, EAC, COMESA, NBI meetings and UN systems where important decisions are made. This is Shs 0.70 billion that is not captured in our budgets and yet it is very critical. 

Defending the country's position before the Human Rights Commission in Geneva requires Shs 0.06 billion and it is not captured in our budgets. 

Thirty bilateral meetings on Uganda’s strategic interests on matters of regional, peace and security are to be convened and participated in DRC, Ethiopia, Egypt, Algeria, Nigeria, South Sudan, Tanzania, Kenya, Rwanda and Burundi to the tune of Shs 0.33 billion. All this is not captured in our budget. 

As a country, we have been given the chairmanship of the Non-Aligned Movement for the three coming years and there is no budget for this. Therefore, the hosting of NAM to the tune of Shs 3.5 billion is also not captured in unfunded priorities. 

Promotion of commercial economic diplomacy
Eleven joint permanent commissions on political and economic cooperation are to be convened or participated in DRC Ethiopia, Egypt, Algeria, South Sudan, Tanzania and Kenya, Rwanda and Burundi to the tune of Shs 2.0 billion. 

Sixteen investment, trade and tourism promotion events to be coordinated and participated in China, UAE, Denmark, India, Qatar, Turkey, USA, Malaysia and the UK to the tune of Shs 0.54 billion has not been provided for. 

Four investment and trade promotion events to be organised in Uganda for diplomatic corps focusing on Rwenzori Region, Northern Uganda, Eastern Uganda and the World Triangle to the tune of Shs 0.20 billion, is not captured and yet it is very crucial. 

Four joint economic commissions to be organised or in which we should participate as a country, in Czech Republic, Indonesia, Hungary and China to the tune of Shs 0.280 billion is needed, but not provided for in our budget. 

Thirty-one MoUs on economic, political and labour externalisation cooperation were negotiated; as you can see from what we are presenting, a lot needs to be done for the sector and we need your support. 

Findings and general observations of the committee 
A comparison of the ministerial policy statement figures with the draft estimates for Financial Year 2022/2023 indicates that the ministry Vote 006 budget will reduce by Shs 1.022 billion from Shs 33.11 to Shs 32.088 billion. 

The budget for Missions Abroad will increase by the figures that you have seen as indicated. The committee noted that there were some missions, which had poor budget performance or poor absorption capacity of the development budget due to procurement and local content requirements of the host countries. The Mission in Nairobi, for example, had an approved budget of Shs 11.4 billion but only 5.3 was spent. 

The Mission in Kuala Lumpur had an approved budget of Shs 170 million to procure a vehicle but by half year, the process of procurement of the vehicle had not been concluded, although it was later concluded in the third quarter. 

Other Missions that had optimal performance were Missions in Abuja, Addis Ababa, Guangzhou, Abu Dhabi, Dar-Es-Salam and Mogadishu. 

One of the findings that the committee got out of the interactions of the 36 missions that we have was lack of mission charters. While several achievements were made by both the ministry and the Missions Abroad, the committee observed that missions’ charters were out-dated but they were operating using strategic plans for the Financial Year 2021 to 2024/2025. The absence of a mission charter may have contributed to some missions’ failure to achieve the objectives because they had no basis to use their rights to undertake and fully execute their responsibilities, in accordance with structural establishments and purposes. 

Lack of adequate finance
Resources allocated to most Missions are adequate to enable them to respond to the distress calls and monitor the relevant parties for compliance. The activities relevant to consular services take up the largest share of the budget. These costs continue to increase as deployments increase. This is exacerbated by the budget cuts within the financial year, which cuts affect the core activities of the Mission. 

The table below clearly illustrates this where Missions require additional funding. We have a Mission in Nairobi that requires Shs 10 billion, Copenhagen, Shs 0.8 billion is for additional funding for consultancy assessment of integration, production of design and the bills of quantities. 

Mombasa requires designs and BOQs for the construction of the chancery to a tune of Shs 1.50 billion, Addis Ababa requires additional funding for the consultancy to produce designs and BOQs to the tune of Shs 0.90 billion. Mogadishu requires the construction of two staff residences at Shs 1.50 billion. I would implore colleagues to go through this, but this list is very important for us to capture because if we do not really add this funding to these entities, it would be very difficult for them to be able to execute your work. 

The recurrent budget enhancements 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs - the amount of Shs 4.5 billion. The purpose is to reinstate the budget for travel abroad to facilitate the mandate of the ministry. 

To conduct GPCs with the 10 countries to enhance market access; that is Shs 2.0 billion; 

Preparations for Uganda's chairmanship of the Non-Aligned Movements (NAM) for the period 2022 to 2026 and hosting the Third G77 and China Summit Missions Abroad 

Madam Speaker, Shs 11.54 billion is required to reinstate the budget for travel abroad and workshops to facilitate the mandate of the Missions Abroad. Kinshasa requires Shs 0.576 billion to provide funds for the rent of the chancery.

Economic and commercial diplomacy for the 28 missions that have not been getting this Vote to promote market access, investment, tourism and bilateral cooperation
 
The committee observed that some missions require the following additional funding to enable them to execute their mandate adequately. This is because over 80 per cent of the Missions were not allocated capital development funds. This has incapacitated Missions abroad to pursue construction of premises, purchase of vehicles and other critical areas. 

In the interest of time, there are high costs of maintenance of old properties; for example, in Canada. A Property located at 235 Mariposa and another at 231 Cobourg has high costs of rent. The residents of Mariposa spend Shs 1,735,000,583,206 in its annual budget on rent; 231 Cobourg, the Chancery spends Shs 2,116,425,742 annually on rent. Table 11 shows all this. Madam Speaker, something has got to be done. 

The lack of adequate facilities such as the call centre, and delays in developing vacant land, is another challenge for us in our missions. This led to the repossession of the land in some missions, for example, in Addis Ababa. Further delays will lead to loss of land such as land in China and Addis Ababa. The more we delay to develop this land, the more we end up losing it and this also taints our image as a country. So, we have got to do something.

Lack of adequate human resource, recalling of and transfer of staff midway the financial year, are some of the challenges. 

Unfavourable host countries labour laws
It was observed that some missions were affected by local labour laws of the host countries because the labour laws may not be commensurate with Uganda’s mission budgetary allocation.

For instance, in India, the law requires the mission to recruit local staff for specific positions. The same law requires that missions should pay terminal benefits to locally recruited staff upon resignation or dismissal an amount totalling to the salary of the number of years, which a specific employee may have worked at the mission, which may be over and above the mission’s available fund. Likewise, labour laws in Switzerland require that locally recruited staff should earn a minimum wage, which is approximately US$ 3,800. Unfortunately, this amount is more than what Uganda’s home-based staff earn.

Additionally, Madam Speaker, some host countries have unfavourable rental terms. We also have high costs of living and this affects our staff. Lack of joint technical committee meetings are some of the challenges.

Recommendations
    1. Funds for travel abroad and economic diplomacy should be reinstated. The Committee on Foreign Affairs should be availed with the budget for travel abroad to enable it execute its mandate appropriately because some of these challenges, as we did indicate, we cannot ably do this unless the committee is facilitated. 

Coupled with lack of funds for travel abroad in the selective budget allocations for economic diplomacy yet all missions’ strategies require that they undertake these activities. Government should allocate funds to all missions to enable them undertake economic diplomacy activities. 

    2. Tracking of Ugandans travelling abroad for jobs. There is need to amend the labour laws. Madam Speaker, this is very paramount. The current labour laws should be amended to include the Ministry of Foreign Affairs since it is mandated to protect Uganda’s interests abroad. This will also cure the problems surrounding externalisation of labour and protect the image of Uganda.

    3. Recommendation on settlement of arrears. As a country, we have registered many of these international organisations. However, when we keep in arrears, it taints our image. So, I am imploring you, Madam Speaker, through your powers and the House that we ensure that all these arrears are settled. 

    4. Presentation of treaties, protocols or international agreements before Parliament. Madam Speaker, Government should lay before Parliament, treaties, international agreements or protocols entered into by the Government of Uganda within six months after it has been concluded or signed or provided by Rule 40 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

There is a lot but because of time, we pray that as a House, we go through these things and make sure that – Madam Speaker, diplomacy starts with the image of the person’s – Foreign Affairs leads the way and floodgates are open. The Minister of Foreign Affairs and the missions abroad, if well facilitated and funded, can easily lead this country to the middle income status that we have for long desired.  

Madam Speaker, I beg to move that this report be adopted. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Hon. Norah Bigirwa. Hon. Bigirwa has made a very good report as you have heard. Minister of Foreign Affairs, please lay the report and the minutes.

MS BIGIRWA: Madam Speaker, allow me to lay the report on the ministerial policy statement and the budget estimates for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for the Financial Year 2022/2023 for Vote 006 and Votes 501–536.  I beg to lay. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. As you have heard, foreign affairs and our missions abroad are the face of our country in the international community. The image they portray is a reflection of our country. So, we really need to do a lot to make sure that our image is being maintained. 

As Parliament, we need to support these missions to ensure that they portray a good image of our country. I liked the point that the labour laws should include our embassies outside. People are suffering in those countries and the embassies are not even aware of those people who are in that country. That should be included in the labour laws. 

The issue of the treaties, sometimes the government enters into an agreement with another country and as the local Parliament, you do not know the agreement they have entered into or what they are going through and at the end of the day, you find yourself breaching the treaty. So, an aspect of laying it on the Table after six months is a proper one. (Interjection) There is a procedural matter here.

5.51
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bukimbiri County Kisoro): Madam Speaker, Uganda is the only country where foreign policy is in the heads of the ministries. The minister has a foreign policy that is not written. The Constitution commands that Uganda shall have a foreign policy and that the foreign policy must be a public document. That is why you find that when some of our people go out, they do not know how to relate with foreigners and which country to relate with and you find people complaining about modern slave trade. This is lack of a written foreign policy, which should be given to all Ugandans. 

So, has the Ministry of Foreign Affairs tried to implement what is in the provision of the Constitution as far as foreign policy is concerned - because we do not know how to relate with other countries? Even when Members of Parliament travel, there are some countries where we are not supposed to go but we do not know. We do not know how some of these treaties are supposed to be domesticated. 

Therefore, would the ministry be kind enough to tell this House why we do not have a written foreign policy as a country so that it can also be domesticated and people know it. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you will respond to that. 

DR BATUWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is a procedural matter that I fetch from the interaction I had with our ambassador to Tanzania. In that interaction, I came to know that we got a piece of land near Tanga Port, where our oil pipeline – 

THE SPEAKER: Are you a member of the committee?

DR BATUWA: No, I am not a Member of that committee. However, - [HON. PACUTO: “Procedure, Madam Speaker.”]

THE SPEAKER: He is also on procedure. Continue.

DR BATUWA: Madam Speaker, I will take her information. She is very uncomfortable.

MS PACUTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to inform the Member that the information that you are about to divulge has not yet come from the committee to the House. So, please hold it.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Pacuto is the chairperson, Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development and that report is from the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Do you want to start smuggling information from a committee report into the House?

DR BATUWA: Madam Speaker, I am here to acknowledge that Hon. Jane is my chairperson and I will humbly sit, relax and rest peacefully.

THE SPEAKER: I am going to give space to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to present its report. Can we have the Shadow Minister on Foreign Affairs?

5.54
MR NKUNYINGI MUWADA (NUP, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Chairperson of the Committee on Foreign Affairs for leading the committee into a successful report. As the Shadow Minister of Foreign Affairs, I want to say that most of the tangible recommendations within the report have a bearing in our alternative policy statement. 

I wish to add a recommendation that Uganda should put more emphasis on negotiating bilateral agreements especially, labour-related agreements. This should be urgent and it requires appropriation in our budgeting process. Madam Speaker, we have a labour agreement with the United Arab Emirates but up to now, it has not been operationalised and part of the reason is funding.

Equally, we heard from the mission in Saudi Arabia, Riyadh. Wheras they have a population of above 100,000 Ugandans working in Saudi Arabia, one of their challenges is inadequate professional staff, especially sharia speaking staff -

THE SPEAKER: Shadow minister, does the labour agreement say a mission or an embassy outside Uganda is responsible for the people in that country?

MR NKUNYINGI: Madam Speaker, within the report, there is a recommendation to amend our labour laws.

THE SPEAKER: Talk about amending the laws, first, before you start asking for money. Do not create an illegality.

MR NKUNYINGI: Madam Speaker, away from amending the law, there is recommendation to do with recruitment in the main report and -

THE SPEAKER: Under which law are you recruiting?

MR NKUNYINGI: Under the existing law.

THE SPEAKER: If you do not know what you are talking about, then sit. Hon. Aogon.

5.57
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I have only three issues. One, let us allocate money to develop our land in China. If a country has given us with one heart, why should we take time to do something? Madam Speaker, we are the ones who appropriate and so, my submission is that let us give money so that we secure that land.

Secondly is the issue of travel abroad for the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government). Madam Speaker, committees of this House need to be activated immediately. Otherwise, whatever we are allocating to these missions or embassies will just go to rot because there is no watchdog to follow what happens with this money. Therefore, I appeal that we should activate the parliamentary budget for travel abroad so that we watch what is happening.

Lastly, on the issues of labour, I have heard a lot of youth crying; those who have gone to the Middle East. This particular ministerial policy statement seems not to address the challenge we are facing in the Middle East in terms of the mechanisms of managing what is happening to our youth abroad.  People go there and their passports are confiscated and they are not traceable.

Madam Speaker, I want to support the committee’s recommendations and invite this House to adequately support this committee so that we see something happen that will be for the good of this country.

I would like to remind Members about our neighbour, Rwanda. These people managed to pay money to Arsenal Football Club and they have something written on the Arsenal jersey, which says “Visit Rwanda”. How can a big country like Uganda fail to do something in terms of commercial diplomacy and promote our country abroad? 

I beg to move. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The issue of the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) must be worked upon. Much as we are appropriating money, we need to have that money accounted for.

6.00
MS JANE AVUR (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Chairperson of the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the committee members for the good report. 

Madam Speaker, like you rightly observed, a country’s image is seen from these missions. Just like at home, when you enter a dirty kitchen, you can imagine what the bathroom is like. I want to support that the budget for foreign travel, especially for the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Committee on Foreign Affairs, be reinstated. (Laughter) I do not know why my minister is looking at me sideways but that is a fact.

THE SPEAKER: You should have said, “especially for the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government)” because this committee does the accountability aspect. 

MS AVUR: Madam Speaker, there are two ministers here; Hon. Musasizi and the Minister of Information, Communications Technology and National Guidance. I remember at one point, the Minister for ICT was the Acting Government Chief Whip for about two weeks or so and he met the committee leadership and gave us a lot of hope that Cabinet was going to meet and that the Minister of Finance was going to lift the ban.

Madam Speaker, these two ministers should tell us what happened to that meeting. In fact, he promised to plead for the Committee on Foreign Affairs so that the ban is lifted. I am actually hearing in the corridor that he is going to be the Government Chief Whip. Can he tell us whether we should trust him and keep hoping that what he told the leadership of the committees is what will happen? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, one of the core roles of a Member of Parliament is oversight. Members do not just travel because they want to; they go to do their work. Do not teach this Parliament bad manners. Otherwise, if you deny us money for travel, when you bring something, we shall reject it and yet you will say Parliament has issues. It will be tit for tat. Please do what you are supposed to do for us.  We are not requesting it; it is our right, as Members of Parliament. So, we need to complement each other as the Legislature and the Executive. Hon. Panadol, do you want to say a word?

6.03
MR PETER MUGEMA (Independent, Iganga Municipality, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to add to the issue of the Committee on Foreign Affairs.

Madam Speaker, our embassy house in Nairobi is in a dilapidated state. Last year, there was a possibility that they were not going to renew our lease for the land because it needed the intervention of our Minister of Foreign Affairs. In fact, we lost two of our plots in Mombasa, where we have property holdings. 

As I speak, three of them, which are housing Rugasira Good African Coffee, are on the verge of being taken. So, we need our Ministry of Foreign Affairs to liaise with those people so that we see how best we can secure back our land. Otherwise, there is a possibility that we are not likely to renew our lease for our embassy house in Nairobi. We, therefore, need the intervention of our Minister of Foreign Affairs and the minister from the other side. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have heard from the Minister of Foreign Affairs and you know the challenges of foreign affairs and they must be addressed. 

Honourable minister, there was an issue of the foreign policy. What plans do you have for the committee?

6.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS) (MR OKELLO ORYEM): Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues. First of all, let me take this opportunity to thank my chairperson, Hon. Norah Bigirwa and the members of the committee, for this report, which is honest, factual and informative. I, as the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, do appreciate it.

This report has managed to expose the successes and the good work of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, in addition to the challenges that we face.

In spite of the shortage in the budget, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs endeavours to undertake its responsibilities and duties to the best of its ability. We encourage our staff to be nationalistic, patriotic and to endeavour, under all circumstances, to bear the challenges that they face, mainly because of the shortage of funds. 

I take this opportunity to respond to all the issues raised by my colleagues. Particularly, I am also at pain – and concerned like you, Madam Speaker – over the challenge my committee is facing in being almost impossible to travel abroad to do their duty. This matter was brought to my attention by the chairperson, the vice-chairperson and members of the committee. However, it is beyond my capacity. I would wish for this House to find mechanisms through which this matter can be resolved. 

I am sure that were this committee to visit some of our missions physically and see some of our missions in the state they are in or the beauty some of them are in, they would be able to talk very factually, having seen what is on the ground. 

I am sure that they would have had the opportunity to have talked to our staff and listened to the issues and the challenges that they face and the issues they have successfully worked on as Foreign Service Officers in our different missions around the world. We have 34 missions and two consulates.

Therefore, I appeal and join all those who have urged that lots of money be found for the committee to be able to travel. If there is a suspension on travel, the committee’s travel ban should be lifted because the job of the Committee on Foreign Affairs is to be abroad and only visit Uganda when they are doing their parliamentary duties. 

On the issue of the foreign policy, Madam Speaker, the foreign policy of Uganda is not static. It is not cast in stone. The foreign policy of Uganda depends on how we respond to various issues and in particular circumstances. For example, our foreign policy as to how we deal with circumstances and how we vote at the United Nations in the prevailing situation between Russia and Ukraine is different from what it would have been three or four months ago. 

We respond and generate and create policies guided by the President, the fountain of foreign policy, based on the circumstances that prevail at that particular moment. 

Foreign policy also changes from time to time because, whereas today you have - let me take the example of Rwanda. Whereas for many months, almost years, we had challenges of the border being closed and access to Rwanda was a challenge, having worked on how to reverse that situation, our foreign policy then changes as time goes on, on how we engage Rwanda based on that particular circumstance. 

Today, the border has opened and hence, our policy has changed and today, we speak a different language when we talk with Rwanda. Therefore, it changes from time to time.

However, we, at the same time, have a foreign policy document which is in place – with His Excellency the President, awaiting his approval –(Member rose_)- 

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you allow him to finish?

MR OKELLO ORYEM: Now, this foreign policy document has been generated by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs with consultants, who are composed of ex-diplomats and former high commissioners of Uganda. It should be the basis of our foreign policy. The document is with His Excellency the President; we are waiting for his approval of what will be the basis and foundation of our foreign policy. 

Therefore, we are waiting for the response from the President and I can assure you that once His Excellency the President approves it, we will Table it here in Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Do you want the President to first approve it before you bring it to the House?

MR OKELLO ORYEM: Madam Speaker, the fountain of foreign policy is the President. Once it was generated by us in conjunction with -

THE SPEAKER: I thought we would look at it and then you send it for assent.

MR KWIZERA: Madam Speaker, I am raising a point of procedure in regard to what the minister, who is a lawyer, knows. Part 28 of the Constitution commands the Government of Uganda to have a written foreign policy. 

Therefore, when you say that the foreign policy will depend on what the President thinks – the foreign policy is also supposed to guide the President on how to relate to issues. So, what is supposed to guide who? The policy guides the President and all the employees. The first diplomat, who is the President, the second country diplomat and the other diplomats who go out there are supposed to be guided by a written foreign policy – but not for it to be in someone’s mind. How would you read the mind of the President if you don’t write it? I thank you.

MR AOGON: Honourable minister, for how long has that policy that you are talking about been at the desk of the President, awaiting approval? Yes, it might be true that it is the Cabinet that approves policies but for how long has it waited? 

I know that most ministers these days just come here – if you are coming up with a Bill, they tell you, “The Government is working on it. It is just around the door. It is about to reach the gate.” That is how they do it. In the meantime, how are you operating? (Laughter) Can we get to know about it?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, just get the last one.

MR WANDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am getting very concerned when the minister says our policy changes depending on the circumstances. My understanding, and in line with what the honourable colleague stated, is that we should have a framework policy. What changes are the instructions, not the policy. I would like to get clarification from him on whether that is impossible to have. 

Mr moses ogwal: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to appreciate the way they have been presenting the papers, from the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives moving on to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. It brings me to the issue, which I consider to be the foreign policy related to commercial diplomacy. 

I have looked at the costs, which support commercial diplomacy and noticed that they are not funded while on the other side, there is some funding, which I see under trade, especially, for external trade.

My inquiry is: is there a way or have you considered the issue of realigning Government in such a way that external trade is managed under foreign affairs so that the funding gap is bridged? Thank you.

Mr oguzu: Honourable minister, we have all agreed that there is need for guiding principles on how to deal with any emerging issues in different countries. The need for this was clearly at display when there was a war in Ethiopia. We heard army generals issue statements, which did not reflect the position of the country. You have to agree that it is very important that there must be a foreign policy to guide everybody. 

As a matter of clarification, a number of disasters or emergencies have occurred, like in Ukraine, and there was an outbreak of the Coronavirus in China - you find countries evacuating their people - and all those interventions reflect on our image. There are cases where we just find Ugandans stuck and running everywhere. 

When I look at the request for money, that does not feature anywhere. How do we intend to deal with unforeseen things that are going to emerge? 

The second clarification I am seeking from you is, I have seen some of our embassies now turned into rental units. They have put our property there up for rent but that money has not been reflected. How is it accounted for? We need to know that because there is need for capital development. You are not saying how the money we raise through rent - in New York for example, we are renting out the premises. Uganda has prime property, especially in the developed world. How much are we making out of that? Where is that money going? You need to tell us. Thank you.

Ms Cecilia ogwal: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two issues that I would like the Minister to clarify. First of all, the world now is changing its diplomacy to be focused on trade and commerce. I would like to know the diplomats or our ambassadors you have appointed recently, or those who are already in the Foreign Service. Can you give us the ratio? What is the ratio of the professional diplomats vis-a-vis the commercial and political diplomats? We need that information for us to know whether we are really moving with the trend. 

Secondly, I would have expected the Foreign Affairs report to reflect on how we have improved on developing our own assets in the various centres. I can give you an example of the premises in Addis Ababa. We have got land there yet we are spending a lot of money renting the chancery for the staff; we were given that land long time ago. 

If you compare the amount of money we spend in a year and what you will require to build our own asset, definitely you realise that the country would have benefited a lot. 

Madam Speaker, you will be surprised to learn that for our chancery in Rwanda, it is the Committee on Foreign Affairs that pushed for it to be built and it has helped us a lot. So, I believe that we need to come in sometimes and guide. 

Therefore, I am really upset to hear from the Minister that the policy, which is supposed to inform the President and the Cabinet on how to conduct state affairs - instead, the ministers have turned the President into the alpha and omega of the policy. This is unthinkable in the modern day politics and business. You do not do things like that. The President must be advised. He cannot author his own policy; it is not right. You are now branding our President as an absolute dictator. I do not think that is what he wants. 

Therefore, the ministers must rise and come up with a foreign policy, bring it to Cabinet and then the President can have his input. Otherwise, to come here and say, “We are waiting for the President,” I would not want to be part of this country.
 
Finally –

The Speaker: The good thing is that you are in your evening – (Laughter) - Imat Cecilia, can you finish.
 
Ms CECILIA ogwal: Madam Speaker, I am just finalising. I just want to know - maybe I should spare him.

The Speaker: Honourable minister, what Members want to know is what guides your actions when it comes to foreign issues?

Mr okello-oryem: Madam Speaker, with due respect, I did not say, on this Floor of the House, that His Excellency, the President is the Alpha and Omega of foreign policy. I did not even raise the word “dictator” and I am surprised that my Mama here has used such a strong word in what is such a simple issue, which would be resolved. 

I said that having composed, discussed and finalised what is supposed to inform the foreign policy, we plan to present it to the President for his evaluation or assessment. That is what I explained here. I did not say that he will be the final person to decide on that foreign policy. We created it. We developed it. We discussed it. We met consultants on it and now, we are to present it to him to have a look at and maybe make a contribution to it. Therefore, I am surprised –
 
The Speaker: Honourable minister, how long will it take for us to have the policy in place?

Mr okello-oryem: Can I, Madam Speaker, with due respect, say that I will ensure that I talk to His Excellency, the President and be able to tell you. However, in my view, I should come with it here within three months –(Interjections)– yes, why can't it be three months? I am telling you that I will be here within three months and you are doubting. 

Anyhow, Madam Speaker, this document will be here within three months in this House. I can tell you, confidently; I am not joking about that matter. I am very confident that this matter can be handled within three months.

On the issue of commercial diplomacy, those who are appointed by His Excellency, the President to be Ambassadors and High Commissioners are approved by this House. It is Parliament that approves them and it is Parliament that rejects them. Therefore, the ability and quality of being able to do this job as Ambassadors and High Commissioners, finally, is in the hands of this House. If this House chooses to approve, it is then and when they become Ambassadors and High Commissioners. 

Now, on the issue of ratios - I think that question should be part of your determination when you are approving or disapproving people to be High Commissioners. If you are not satisfied with the ratios, it is up to you to decide that the ratio is not appropriate and reject it. The Appointments Committee should do that. It is not for me; it is for you. It is in your hands. If you approve all of them, as they are, it means you are satisfied with the ratio raised to you.  

The issue of land 

It is true that we have land in Tanga, which was sought by our Mission. This land was strategically procured to be used as part and parcel of the pipeline that is going to go to Tanga. The offer has been made to us by the Tanzanian Government. We are going to look for money from the Ministry of Finance and we hope that this House can support us to get the money from the Ministry of Finance so that we acquire this prime land that our Ambassador in Tanzania did manage to get to us. 

It is true that the Government of China gave us land in Guangzhou. It is important that we do not lose this prime land. We are scheduled to raise, from the Ministry of Finance, money to build a consulate there, in over three years. If they do budget for that money in the next budget, we will be able to start construction on that property in Guangzhou.

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, we are at the very right moment of appropriation and this House is powerful when it comes to appropriation. I thought it was the right time for us to act. We want to see figures shifting towards that area. Guangzhou, for your information, is the main territory for Ugandans who are doing business with China. I would like to invite this House to take this matter very seriously and we make a recommendation to pull money from wherever and fix it to this particular item. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what the Member is raising is helping your ministry. There is land that has been given to you; you are renting. Why don't you include it in your budget? Why don't you implore your committee to make a provision for that place to be constructed?

MR OKELLO-ORYEM: Madam Speaker, I will do the needful. Every year – (Interruption) 

MR WAMAKUYU: Madam Speaker and Members, the information I would like to give the House is that some time back, there was a developer from Guangzhou who wanted to put up a structure so that he could utilise part of it and Government utilises the other part, for him to recover his money. Once the money is recovered, he would vacate the premises – he was just waiting for Government commitment to do that.

MR EDAKASI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Like all the others have reiterated, this embassy or consulate in Guangzhou is a very active space for business, as we speak. In fact, we spend a lot on USA and all these other European embassies, but if you consider where Ugandans are trading, these are the places. There are people now in Guangzhou who are acting privately to make business happen for our people here. I think it makes credible effort for us to actually allocate money to Guangzhou, and to have a home there. 

Likewise, to the others like UAE; you will find that for the UAE, for instance, we do not have a home there - and we are not spending on it. I just wanted to give that information that this is a place where most Ugandans are doing business and it makes sense for us to invest in it. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you conclude? 

MR OKELLO-ORYEM: Madam Speaker, as the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, first of all, we should be congratulated for making efforts to get that land in Guangzhou because it was our effort to request the Government of China to give us this land. That is why we got it in the first place. What is now important is the money for the construction of the consulate. The same goes for Mombasa. We also deliberately went and created a consulate in Mombasa because of the busy channels that go through Mombasa. 

At the end of all this, if we had sufficient money and are given enough money, I could ask my permanent secretary to give you a full budget of what we need to renovate; Nairobi, Tanga, Dar-Es-Salaam; Guangzhou and Dubai. Once we get the money, Madam Speaker, we will be able to build all these properties and Uganda will have as many properties as it should have, which will be homes called “Uganda House” in these avenues. Therefore, as a country, we need to decide that foreign affairs is important; the face of Uganda is a reflection of what we have and get that money we can be able to construct first-class properties. 

We have nice properties in London, New York, and Kenya. I am sure we can have very good properties abroad, if we put the same determination and will, like the governments of the day that did it at the time of putting properties in New York, London and other places. 

We should not be worried about the property in Nairobi; that lease will be renewed. We are talking at a very high level on the issue of the property in Nairobi. No property will be lost in Kenya. I can tell you confidently that no property will be lost in Kenya. We are talking with the authorities at the highest level possible. 

The issue of labour abroad

Madam Speaker, this is something that I want to appreciate you for; that sincerely, there needs to be an amendment on the labour law. This is because the Ministry of Foreign Affairs was not knitted out or designed to deal with the number of external workers that we have now. We have close to 150,000 Ugandans in Saudi Arabia; they are spread all over Saudi Arabia. 

However, the Mission does not have the kind of funding needed to visit the various parts of Saudi Arabia, even when any particular officer is in charge. In fact, what is required is that we need two or three labour officers to be based in Saudi Arabia. We need them fully funded to be able to travel and traverse Saudi Arabia and deal with the girls, even when they need requirements. These are labour officers who are trained and are adequate for the job, not Foreign Service Officers who adapt to a situation, which they are not trained for. 

I think there is need for us to debate this issue of external labour in-depth and see how others do theirs and become successful. How can we do ours and also be successful as Uganda? It is a very good thing. It is being done by other countries but, as a country, we need to be able to handle this matter properly. 

Some of the institutions that get away with this issue of external labour are those agencies that take our children abroad. They are not held enough to account for our girls. They are not held responsible for these girls and boys when they need to come back. 

Whilst you look at the Ministries of Foreign Affairs the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, why don’t we look at those who take millions of shillings from our young people to go abroad and make themselves extremely rich from this job, yet when it comes to the pain and grief that our children suffer, they do not want to spend their money? 

So, we need to look at these agencies well - those who take our children abroad and make lots of money - and question them very seriously and put them to task. There seems to be amnesia when it comes to the issue of challenging these agents who take our children abroad. They need to be brought to book and not only the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. I put the question that the report of the Committee on Foreign Affairs be adopted by this House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the following committees have not presented their reports: Physical infrastructure; public service and local government; defence and internal affairs, gender, labour and social development; environment and natural resources; health; education; agriculture, animal industry and fisheries; legal and parliamentary affairs and; finance, planning and economic development. 

I implore you to look at rule 149(1): “Consideration of the reports on policy statements and proposed annual budget. A sectoral committee shall consider and review policy statements…” and the word here is “shall”. “A sectoral committee shall consider and review policy statements and budget estimates committed to it under Rule 148, including the budgets of public corporations and state enterprises that fall within their respective jurisdictions and present it to the House not later than the 20th day of April of each financial year.” 

The 10 committees that have not presented their reports must present them tomorrow. And I am saying “must”; if you do not present, we will not receive them in the House. The House is going to start tomorrow at 11.00 a.m. and we shall start with the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development, the Committee on Defence and Veteran Affairs, the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, and the Committee on Public Service. And then the rest, we will have them in the afternoon. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 11.00 a.m.

(The House rose at 6.37 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 20 April 2022 at 11.00 a.m.) 
