PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTSECOND SESSION - THIRD MEETINGTHURSDAY , 20 APRIL 2023PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA8230Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS & BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FY 2023/2024Thursday, 20 April 2023It has clear objectives of ensuring that at a certain time, Uganda becomes malaria free. Our slogan as the Uganda Parliamentary Forum on Malaria is “A Malaria-Free Constituency Is My Responsibility”. For today, Mr Speaker, allow me appreciate you for accepting to be the patron of this forum, and above all, being a very committed patron, especially on matters of accountability. (Applause) Mr Speaker, I remember when you challenged us in Entebbe to clearly utilise whatever funds we get as a forum. Honourable members, I want to officially let you know that the forum, together with the Ministry of Health and other partners, have organised a Malaria Walk come Sunday, 23 April 2023. We shall have our patron, the Deputy Speaker, as the chief walker of the day. (Applause)The forum has gone ahead to mobilise a number of participants for the day. I request the honourable members and members of the public to support the forum and spare something small to get their kits for the day so that we are smart. Honourable members, the World Commemoration of Malaria is going to be in Bugiri District on 25 April 2023. I now take the opportunity, on behalf of the patron of the forum and the leadership of the forum, to invite all of us to participate in the Malaria Walk on Sunday. Afterwards, we shall participate in the IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentSECOND SESSION - 29TH SITTING - THIRD MEETINGParliament met at 10.12 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, we are continuing with the ministerial policy statements. Where is the Chairperson of the Committee on Education and Sports because I am starting with that committee? We have a lot of issues to do with infrastructure; so, I want the Committee on Physical Infrastructure to present next, when more Members have come in. I want us to finish by midday. That is why I want us to start with the Committee on Education and Sports. As part of my communication, I request Hon. Christine Apolot to make an announcement on my behalf. Thank you.10.15MS CHRISTINE APOLOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. We thank God for this day. I am going to speak about the Uganda Parliamentary Forum on Malaria, a forum that was launched by His Excellency the President. 8231THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 20 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.World Commemoration of Malaria in Bugiri District. We want to have a situation where we record zero cases of malaria, but that is only possible when we all get committed. Since I am making this presentation on behalf of the Deputy Speaker, I remember one day, he challenged all of us to be members of this forum. I now want to invite all of you to join the forum, as we join our efforts in the fight against malaria.Allow me wind up by saying that besides the Malaria Walk, we also have other activities organised for the day. We shall have blood donation; we have tasked the coordinator to engage one of the specialists in blood donation and have media coverage of them giving us the advantages of blood donation. If you have never donated blood, please come and save the lives of people in this country on the 23rd. Across the country right now, we have challenges of  blood shortage. We shall also have a medical camp on that day and a number of tests will be conducted here with treatment.In summary, those are the activities for that day of the Malaria Walk, but I am also inviting Members to participate in the commemoration of the World Malaria Day, come the 25th of April this year. I thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, April is a very critical month. It is the month where we create awareness against malaria. It is especially our duty, as legislators, from the aspect of appropriation - ensuring that the right measures are taken as far as fighting malaria in the country is concerned. I do not think we have any Member of Parliament whose constituency is not affected by malaria. Yesterday, the Shadow Minister for Health talked about the aerial spray. We might not have agreed with the aerial spray but we need to take action. Malaria is killing people; so, we should all be there. Yesterday, we were also told that the blood bank has a shortage of blood. I will personally be donating blood on Sunday. The Government Chief Whip, the Leader of the Opposition and even Hon. Linos have committed to donate blood. We also accept blue blood, like the one of the Leader of the Opposition, who said his blood is blue. Honourable colleagues, I did not want to open up debate on this - the time is from 7.00 a.m.MS CHRISTINE APOLOT: Mr Speaker, the walk starts at 7.00 a.m. There is also physical fitness for the day and it begins at 6.00 a.m. A roadmap has been cleared by the DPC of Parliament and we shall be guided on how the walk will take place.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, share that information on our platforms and we ensure that we all come.MS CHRISTINE APOLOT: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will also be joining the Rotary Club in Mbarara because we have a Rotary conference and our focus is fighting malaria. Let us put all our efforts, as colleagues, and contribute to this fight. Honourable colleagues, we are also going into Eid, but I will comment on that at the end of today’s session.LAYING OF PAPERSSEMI-ANNUAL REPORT ON INFLOWS, OUTFLOWS AND ASSETS OF THE PETROLEUM FUND FOR THE PERIOD ENDED 31ST DECEMBER 202210.21THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Semi-Annual Report on the Inflows, Outflows and Assets of the Petroleum 8232Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS & BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FY 2023/2024Fund for the period ended 31st December 2022. I beg to lay.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The report is referred to the Committee on Budget for consideration and report back.CONSIDERATION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS ON THE POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2023/2024THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, you have 15 minutes.10.22THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mr John Twesigye): Mr Speaker, I take this pleasure to present a report of the Sectoral Committee on Education and Sports on the Ministerial Policy Statement and Budget Estimates for the Education and Sports sector for the Financial Year 2023/2024.Mr Speaker, allow me to lay on the Table this report and the minutes before I go to the main presentation. I beg to lay. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson.MR TWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, because of the time allocated to me, allow me not to go through all the details. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The full report will be captured on the Hansard.(The report is hereby attached.)MR TWESIGYE: Briefly, the report has the introduction, the methodology, gender and equity compliance, consistence of the sub-programme, objectives with the National Development Plan (NDP) III, and the budget performance for half-year of Financial Year 2022/2023. It includes all the votes under the sub-programme and this goes up to the human capital development programme budget estimates for Financial Year 2023/2024, and the education sports and skills sub-programme for the Financial Year 2023/2024.Mr Speaker, allow me to go to the observations and recommendations and I will be presenting this vote by vote. V ote 013: Ministry of Education and Sports a) Budget cutsThe committee observed that despite recommendations earlier made by the committee at the National Budget Framework Paper Financial Year 2023/2024 approval in regard to the Ministry of Education and Sports, 80 per cent budget cuts especially to the subventions, the Ministry of Education and Sports budget ceiling has not been adjusted to cater for those shortfalls and the following are the likely implications:a) The loan scheme has accumulated arrears in regard to payment of tuition fees for the continuing students under the scheme and the board will not be able to admit new beneficiaries in the coming Financial Year 2023/2024.b) The Ministry of Health’s examinations board, that is, the Uganda Nurses and Midwives Examinations Board and the Uganda Allied Health Examinations Board, will not be in position to effectively discharge their mandate of assessment of students given the 80 per cent budget cuts. c) The Uganda National Commission for the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO) will not be in position to pay annual subscription to UNESCO and to the Islamic World Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (ICESCO) and implement its activities. Mr Speaker, these are among the few cuts that have been imposed on the sub-programme but [Mr Musasizi]COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR8233THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 20 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.overall, the subventions under the Ministry of Education and Sports had a budget cut of Shs 170.95 billion.The recommendation by the committee is that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development reinstates the budget of the subvention under the Ministry of Education and Sports by Shs 170.95 billion that was cut for effective implementation and discharge of their mandates as envisaged in the Act that brought them into force and in line with NDP III.b) Grant aiding of primary and secondary schoolsMr Speaker, allow me to go straight to the recommendations. The committee recommends the following:i) It reiterates its recommendation for the release of Shs 6.80 billion that was appropriated for grant-aiding of the 28 primary schools and Shs 16.88 billion for the 37 secondary schools in Financial Year 2022/2023. ii) That the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development avails Shs 11 billion for grant-aiding of 100 primary schools in Financial Year 2023/2024. iii) That the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development avails Shs 20 billion for grant-aiding of 50 secondary schools across the country in Financial Year 2022/2023. Mr Speaker, part two and three is in addition to what had already been catered for in Financial Year 2022/2023. The reason the committee took that position is because we have realised that it may not be easy for Government at the moment, given the economic situation, to construct seed schools and construct new primary schools in every parish. c) Rehabilitation of traditional secondary schoolsThe committee recommends that Shs 15 billion be allocated each financial year towards the rehabilitation of these old traditional schools where most of the infrastructure is in dilapidated state, in order to ensure delivery of quality education services countrywide.d) Salary enhancement for Arts teachersThe committee recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports considers enhancing salaries for all teachers in a phased manner, with special consideration for head teachers and their deputies earning less than the teaching staff under their supervision.e) Recruitment and deployment of teachers. Mr Speaker, on this, you will observe that around May to July, the Education Service Commission recruited about 4,000 teachers who are not yet deployed in secondary schools. The committee was further informed that the ministry requires at least 3,000 additional primary school teachers in order to improve pupil-teacher ratio in the least staffed primary schools and this is estimated at a cost of Shs 122 billion.The committee, therefore, notes the need to address this urgently and recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development allocates an additional Shs 122 billion for deployment of the 4,000 secondary teachers already appointed, and Shs 25 billion for recruitment of additional 3,000 teachers for primary schools.f) Full implementation of the teachers’ scheme of serviceThis arises out of a situation whereby we have so many graduate teachers who are still enforced in service as assistant education officers. 8234Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS & BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FY 2023/2024The committee recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports liaises with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to provide for the necessary wage bill amounting to Shs 6.7 billion to implement the scheme of service in the education sub-programme.g) Inadequate staff housing across education institutionsThe committee recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports liaises with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and other stakeholders in order to provide staff housing for teachers and tutors in different education institutions across the country, especially those in the hard-to-reach areas. h) John Kale Institute of Science and TechnologyThe committee observed that the Project 1368 John Kale Institute of Science Technology was exited from the Public Investment Plan (PIP). We recommend that the Project 1368 John Kale Institute of Science and Technology is reinstated in the PIP since it was a Presidential pledge, and will also address the needs of the people in the Kisoro sub-region.i) Directorate of Industrial Training (DIT) There is inadequate funding of the lower secondary curriculum. We recommended that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should allocate DIT with an additional Shs 11.44 billion for training of 14,016 secondary school teachers on Assessment Training Packages (ATP) and Competence-Based Education and Training (CBET) approaches to ensure the full implementation of the lower secondary curriculum.Mr Speaker, we observed, during our oversight trips, that most of the secondary school teachers implementing the lower secondary curriculum have not got the hands-on skills that they are able to transfer to those students.j) Higher Education Students Financing BoardAs I already communicated above, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development urgently allocates the Higher Education Students’ Financing Board additional Shs 20.664 billion in Financial Year 2023/2024 to enable 4,189 students already on the scheme to continue with their studies, and enable 1,500 new cohort attain higher education by accessing loans through the board. Mr Speaker, there is a big problem here. The board has not been provided with the funds because of those cuts and the universities are threatening to dismiss the students from studies. k) Shs 14.59 billion be allocated towards clearance of fees domestic arrears accrued with the various universities to avoid litigation due to non-payment – they made MOUs with universities and some universities, especially the private universities, are threatening to sue the board. l) The Ministry of Education and Sports implements section 42 of the Higher Education Students’ Financing Board Act, as has always been recommended by the committee, to vest all kinds of Government scholarships with the board as was envisaged in the Act. As we speak, most of these scholarships are still scattered in different places, including the central scholarship in the Ministry of Education and Sports. m) The funds the Government allocates to the 4,000 students, on merit, be allocated towards the board funds so that we can help more needy students to access higher education through the loan scheme. The reason the committee is recommending this is because we have realised that most of the 4,000 students who are admitted, on merit, to these universities are from the high-notch [Mr Twesigye]8235THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 20 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.secondary schools, which are charging a lot of money and, therefore, the students that qualify from there are children of the rich and the children of the poor remain disadvantaged.Examination boards Uganda Allied Health Examinations BoardWe recommend that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development reinstates its subvention budget of Shs 6.36 billion and gives them additional Shs 6.2 billion for the board to effectively carry out its mandate.Uganda Business and Technical Examinations BoardThe committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development allocates the board an additional Shs 3.2 billion as development budget, where Shs 2.2 billion will enhance the construction allocation to  about Shs 5 billion and Shs 1 billion for retooling of the board towards the acquisition of field containers for examination storage, computers and other necessities. Uganda Nurses and Midwives Examinations BoardGiven the mandate of that board, we recommend that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development allocates the board an additional Shs 20.3 billion to cover its budget shortfalls in regard to management and the general administration of examinations and construction of the new office block. This one is already on-going. V ote 128: Uganda National Examinations BoardGiven the current mandates under the new law, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development allocates;i. An additional Shs 1.2 billion to effectively support the Special Needs Education (SNE) candidates.ii. An additional Shs 4.6 billion to cater for the revised unit cost for hosting centres to accommodate UNEB marking, due to an increase in basic commodities. iii. Shs 3.9 billion as top-up for markers of candidates’ scripts.iv. Shs 6.7 billion as enhanced field transport for the examiners.v. Shs 6.6 billion to carry out National Assessment of Progress in Education (NAPE). vi. Shs 3.5 billion for continuous assessment guidelines and data capture tools for science subjects. Other entitiesV ote 132: Education Service CommissionMr Speaker, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development allocates the commission an additional Shs 5.1 billion to kick-start the construction of its premises and for retooling the commission.V ote 122: Kampala City Council Authority (KCCA)The committee recommends that:i. KCCA be allocated an additional Shs 1.3 billion for revised capitation grants for Universal Primary Education, Universal Secondary Education/Universal Post O’level Education and Training (UPOLET) subvention to KCCA schools. ii. Shs 16 billion be allocated to KCCA for covering the shortfall of science teachers in Financial Year 2023/2024. 8236Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS & BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FY 2023/2024iii. Shs 6 billion be allocated towards the on-going construction of the KCCA Philip Omondi Stadium. The committee further recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports works closely with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and KCCA in ensuring that more seed schools are built in the city to address the issues of the growing numbers of learners. Given the fact that it is not easy to access five acres of land in the city, as the requirements for constructing a seed school state, they can consider having storied structures in order to ensure that learners access quality education.V ote 164: National Council for Higher EducationWe recommend that:i. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development allocates the National Council for Higher Education a development budget of Shs 5 billion to enable the council procure computers and office equipment, procure vehicles for the field and embark on its infrastructure development.ii. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development allocates the council Shs 2 billion that was appropriated in 2022 but was not released, for recruitment of additional staff. Mr Speaker, the council has a lot of challenges at the moment. They are not able to effectively carry out the monitoring in the field because of lack of the funds. Central admission for higher institutionsHere, Mr Speaker, we have established that because of different admissions of students at different times in these high institutions, the Higher Education Students’ Financing Board finds it difficult to admit students in a more streamlined manner. So, we recommend that the Ministry of Education and Sports should liaise with the National Council for Higher Education and the Higher Education Students’ Financing Board to effect the recommendations of the central admissions for higher education institutions to avoid delays in processing the list of students to be supported by the loan board.The National Curriculum Development CentreIt experienced huge budget cuts like other agencies. So, we recommend that:i. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development allocates the National Curriculum Development Centre an additional Shs 26.941 billion to enable the centre achieve its planned but unfunded activities like such as the printing and distribution of Early Grade Learning Materials, review and rollout of A‘ level curriculum, domestic arrears and missing components of the printing press.ii. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development allocates Shs 15 billion to the NSCDC for the development of a modularised Technical V ocational Education and Training (TVET) curriculum. iii. The instructional materials unit – Mr Speaker, this unit has been under the Ministry of Education and Sports, but we observed that there is an overlap of roles with the National Council for Higher Education, the National Curriculum Development Centre and –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is an indication that your time is up. Conclude.  MR JOHN TWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, it is because the sector is big. I am sorry, but let me summarise. The instructional materials unit under V ote 013 should be transferred to the National Curriculum Development Centre for the council to effectively implement its roles as per the law. [Mr Twesigye]8237THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 20 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.Remission of non-tax revenueThe committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development reviews this and allows the NCDC to retain 50 per cent of its NTR collections to support textbook evaluation and other activities that require instant payment for intellectual input. There, we realised that a similar problem affects universities and other V ote holders that collect NTR because, sometimes, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development cuts the money that is supposed to be going back to those institutions.V ote 166: National Council of Sports (NCS)Inadequate funding to NCSWe recommend that:i. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development reinstates, in Financial Year 2023/2024, the Shs 47 billion allocation. ii. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development avails the National Council of Sports a development budget of Shs 50 billion to kick-start the development of the sports complex/arena at Lugogo and Shs 202 billion for the national stadia regionally, in the medium term. Public universitiesUnderstaffing and high staff turnoverMr Speaker, we recommend that the Government commits to addressing this persistent issue of understaffing and high staff turnover in public universities.Wage bill requirement for staff harmonisation and promotionsWe recommend that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, together with the Ministry of Education Sports and the Ministry of Public Service, ensure that the new instruction by the Ministry of Public Service is backed up with an appropriate increase in the wage bill for universitiesTherefore, Shs 62.6 billion should be allocated for staff harmonisation, and Shs 24 billion for the promotion of staff including those at Makerere University.Inadequate funding for Government-sponsored studentsThe committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning, and Economic Development allocates enough funds commensurate with the number of Government-sponsored students in those universities. What was observed is that when the university admits students in the first year, the Government does not continue paying for those students in the second and subsequent years; they only keep sending money for the first-year students.Mr Speaker, I have already talked about the harmonisation of Government scholarships in institutions of higher education, under the board.Inadequate research funds to universitiesOn this, we recommend that other than Makerere University, other universities be allocated Shs 5 billion to assist them with research work. And since there are no funds for travel abroad, the recommendation is that money be provided to enable them ably continue with their external partnerships and research work.Inadequate funding for the rehabilitation of the dilapidated structures at Makerere UniversityMr Speaker, on this, we recommend that an additional Shs 10 billion be given for the renovation of the College of Health Sciences and Medicine, and the College of Veterinary Medicine for the construction of the Animal Resource And Biosecurity Centre, and the renovation of the halls of residence.  8238Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS & BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FY 2023/2024Mbarara University of Science and TechnologyThis university has a problem of a dilapidated medical school. The committee, therefore, recommends that Shs 50 billion be allocated for the construction of a multi-purpose block at the Faculty of Medicine to house all lecture rooms, laboratories, and offices, and another Shs 18 billion will be required in the Financial Year 2023/2024 to kick-start the process.Mr Speaker, I have already talked about the wage bill for the recruitment of staff and promotions.Makerere University Business School (MUBS)Mr Speaker, Under MUBS, we recommend that an allocation of Shs 12.4 billion be allocated to enable the university clear its domestic arrears.Kyambogo UniversityThe committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development allocates Kyambogo University an additional Shs 34.2 billion in the Financial Year 2023/2024, to enable it address the process of asbestos-sheets roof removal - the university has buildings littered with asbestos sheets - and handle the dilapidated infrastructure.We further recommend that the university considers engaging the convocation to source funds for the initial fencing of the university to stop encroachers on its land. Busitema University Inadequate release to the Maritime Institute at NamasagaliThe committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development allocates Shs 8.7 billion in order for it to start the implementation of the programme. There is also funding for the technology innovation and incubation centre and we are proposing Shs 1 billion to be allocated for at least the next three financial years.Funding toward completion and equipping the medical school This one is at Mbale Campus. We recommend that Shs 3.7 billion be allocated to fast-track and complete the rehabilitation of the medical school.Muni University Inadequate funding to the universityWe recommend that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development revises the recurrent non-wage of Muni University upwards to at least Shs 7.71 billion in the next financial year, and the MTEF period, in order to avoid a supplementary request each financial year, which sometimes is not given to the university.We further recommend for an additional Shs 8.2 billion for the completion of the construction of a multi-purpose hall to house the health science modern laboratory and administration annex building, and Shs 1.2 for Erepi Primary Teachers’ College. The university also needs more Shs 4.8 billion to recruit staff.Kabale UniversityThe committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning, and Economic Development should maintain the budget of Shs 9 billion, in the medium term, to enable the university to complete its on-going infrastructure development, and that it avails an additional Shs 22.6 billion for the procurement of a pre-specialised equipment and machinery.Soroti University The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should allocate an additional Shs 17 billion to enable it complete the Anatomy Block.Gulu University The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development [Mr Twesigye]8239THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 20 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.reinstates the universities development budget of Shs 11 billion to take care of inadequate funding for other key development projects, and provide Shs 13.455 billion to help the university undertake the construction of a multipurpose building at the college in Moroto and the teaching hospital.Muni UniversityThe committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development allocates the university Shs 12.6 billion to complete the main administration block and procure the necessary medical equipment for the teaching hospital.Uganda Management InstituteOn this, we recommend that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development avails UMI an additional Shs 1.5 billion for the construction of a new classroom block at Mbale and Mbarara study centres, and Shs 10 billion to kick-start the construction of a multi-purpose building block at the Kampala Campus.Mountains of the Moon University This is a new university that came on board at the beginning of last financial year. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairman, please make a correction. You have been talking about the Mountains of the Moon Hotel; it is Mountain of the Moon University.MR JOHN TWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I was saying, being a new university, this university still suffers inadequate funding for infrastructure development.The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development reinstates Mountains of the Moon University development budget of Shs 5.41 billion and an additional Shs 5.4 billion be allocated as a retooling budget, plus Shs 20 billion, which is a Presidential pledge, to enable them complete the construction of the Faculty of Science, Innovation, and Technology.Under local governments, the committee recommends that the Government makes a deliberate effort to take stock of all government education and sports facilities across the country with an aim of improving them with special attention to districts that are usually affected by natural disasters.We have a section on key unfunded and underfunded activities of the education sports and skills sub-programme. A list of the unfunded and underfunded, yet critical activities for the sub-programme, have been attached as an annex.In conclusion, Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the policy statement for the Education and Sports Skills Sub-programme be approved. I beg to report.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: At this level, we adopt; we don’t approve. Approval is done after the Committee on Budget have gone through the figures and returned them for approval.Secondly, chairperson, you must take note that at this stage, we deal with figures and financial implications. So, please read the summary in the estimated supply table. You can read the totals V ote by V ote; read the summary in bold.MR JOHN TWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, this is indicated in table 13 for V ote 13: Ministry of Education and Sports, the total recurrent - the figures are in billions of Uganda shillings -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, you did not put the whole total together. It is okay. You can do that.MR TWESIGYE:  The recurrent expenditure - Shs 159,937,277,000 Development expenditure - Shs 292,915,383,000. 8240Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS & BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FY 2023/2024V ote 111: National Curriculum Development Centre Recurrent expenditure - Shs 20,144,615,000 Development expenditure - Shs 3,074,000,000V ote 128: Uganda National Examinations Board Recurrent expenditure - Shs 114,658,450,000 Development expenditure - Shs 11,544,000,000V ote 132: Education Service Commission Recurrent expenditure - Shs 8,035,820,000 Development expenditure - Shs 2,436,410,000V ote 164: National Council for Higher Education Recurrent expenditure - Shs 12,102,335,000 Development expenditure – Shs 0 V ote 165: Uganda Business and Technical Examinations Board Recurrent expenditure - Shs 24,654,802,000 Development expenditure - Shs 2,800,000,000V ote 116: National Council of Sports Recurrent expenditure - Shs 16,966,514,000 The development expenditure is not captured here, Mr Speaker.  I think this is something that we have to provide –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairperson, this is what we are going to do: if you are not sure, kindly let the Clerk-at-Table help you as we begin the debate. At the end, we can read the figures, before adoption. MR JOHN TWESIGYE: Much obliged, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, coordinate and avail the Chairperson with the table so that he can be sure of what he is reading because the totals are critical. Do not mind; they are going to help you. Hon. Ssewungu is your colleague in the committee and he is already working. Honourable colleagues, we are going to debate and we are going to do it like we did yesterday. That is number one. Two, the guidance is very clear; your submission on this should either state whether we provide funds for unfunded priorities, as cited in the report, or we do not. Do not bring in issues outside the report. Three, your submission should be very clear on issues which the Budget Committee is going to consider. If you bring issues, which the Budget Committee is not going to consider - issues of a policy nature - I want you to make statements that have a financial implication. That is how we process ministerial policy statements. With that, I open the Floor for debate. Members of the committee, please do not stand up. I will pick Hon. Josephat, Hon. Joel Leku, Hajat, Hon. Connie Galiwango and Hon. Allan Mayanja. I have already gotten five Members; so, I will pick others depending on my mood. (Laughter) Please take two minutes each. 10.57MR JOSEPHAT TUMWESIGYE (NRM, Bugangaizi South County, Kakumiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for processing a good report. I am standing to raise an issue that is very important and it touches me and the rest of the Members, especially from Bunyoro.I listened attentively to the chairperson as he read the report and he enumerated all the public universities and what they are going to get in the next financial year. Like I have said before on this Floor, Bunyoro is a very important region. (Laughter) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, all regions are important. MR JOSEPHAT TUMWESIGYE: Yes, they are all important but I want to say it without fear that Bunyoro is marginalised, Mr Speaker. (Interjection) - Excuse me. While all the major regions of this country have got public universities - I may not mention them - but it is a known fact that all the major regions of this country have got public universities; some even have two universities. Why couldn’t [Mr Twesigye]8241THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 20 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.the committee be so sympathetic to include Bunyoro University in their policy statement? Last financial year, there was just a small budget provision of only Shs 2 billion and –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable - no, we do not work that way. It is two minutes - colleagues, you determine how to use your two minutes.10.59MR JOEL LEKU (NRM, Terego West County, Terego): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to draw the attention of the House to the grant-aided schools. I thank the committee for putting that in the budget. The primary school that appeared on social media, where there was one teacher in a class of about 500 pupils, is in my constituency. We really need to aid these primary schools so that we get more classroom blocks for them. It is more appealing when we continue to see retooling in the budgets that have been read. If you put all these figures together into the educational sector, I think we will be able to get more school blocks for these institutions. Secondly, there are schools on the border of Terego and Madi-Okollo; Ocea Primary School, Odobu Primary School and Ariwa Primary School. Their UPE funds go to Madi-Okollo and then the salaries come to Terego. This is the third quarter running and this has been happening for a full year. It is total confusion; we do not know where these schools belong.Therefore, it will be wise, as the ministry is here today tabling the budget, for us to know where these schools lie; where the fund is going. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 11.01MS MELSA A V AKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I thank the committee for the report. Members, as we are all aware, education is a prerequisite for improved livelihood. It is very unfortunate that the committee has reported a severe budget cut of 80 per cent. We are talking about education, which has to be affordable to Ugandans and for it to be affordable, we need to talk about performance. How do we improve performance when the budget is severely cut? That is my concern. The committee talked about effective assessment of students, regular inspection of schools, teacher enhancement and so on. I am raising my voice to join the committee to support the votes recommended should stand as they are. (Applause) Thank you.11.02MS CONNIE GALIWANGO (Independent, Woman Representative, Mbale City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good work done - the observations and the recommendations. Mr Speaker, I am disheartened from what has come out of the report. One wonders if a budget cut by 80 per cent is a budget. Education is the key to all the sectors without which, there will be no other. (Applause) If it is cut by 80 per cent, then there will be no effective assessment for health education. So, how will a nurse come out without being assessed? Won’t they kill the people? I pray that there is money for assessment. Otherwise, if there is nothing in education, then nothing will go on. Mr Speaker, it is said that there will be no more recruitment for the loans scheme yet the scheme is for the children of the poor and they are the majority in this nation. It is only the children of the rich who get Government sponsorship because they can afford good schools. Mr Speaker, my heart is bleeding because of the Ugandans that are going to miss education. Should they miss, we will have thugs all over the country. Therefore, the best we can do is to allocate money to the loan scheme so these children can also become somebody –(Member timed out.)8242Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS & BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FY 2023/202411.04MR ALLAN MAYANJA  (NUP, Nakaseke Central County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. My concern is about the salary enhancement for the arts teachers. Honourable members, we are here because of teachers. Their salaries need to be enhanced so that they are in a favourable environment to teach our children. This should be done as soon as possible. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development committed to increase the salaries for science teachers but they have failed. Teachers are suffering in Nakaseke. Even the President committed himself to increase the salaries for these science teachers. In Nakaseke District, science teachers have not been paid for two months. I raised this matter and you sent just Shs 1.6 billion but they are still suffering. Please, their salaries need to be enhanced as soon as possible.The second concern is about grant aid in primary and secondary schools. You cannot send Shs 10,000 a year per child in Universal Primary Education schools and Shs 40,000 per child in secondary schools. Sincerely speaking, how do you cater for a child for the whole year at Shs 10,000? We need to increase this money as Parliament because it is not enough at all. Thank you. 11.06MR STEPHEN KISA  (NRM, Luuka South County, Luuka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The quality of education and that of the people in the country are linked. It is very dismaying to see the Government of Uganda mapped over 600 schools for grant aid in this country. There are teachers in such schools who are meant to be paid by Government. There are children who are supposed to receive education in such schools but the budget is not provided for. A shortfall of Shs 19 billion is a lot of money. Therefore, I want to appeal to Members of Parliament to provide money to ensure schools that were meant to operate under Government aid must be operationalised. (Applause)Secondly, the Government of Uganda across the board is talking about skilling Ugandans. How do you fail to provide money for BTVET? Why are we wasting time on skilling? We are moving up and down in the Parish Development Model. We are not providing this money. I want to appeal to Members of Parliament to stick to the principle that money for BTVET is provided in this next budget. Thank you. 11.08MR OKIN P. OJARA  (FDC, Chua West County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concern is about the rehabilitation of the traditional schools. I have seen Shs 15 billion earmarked for that but when you move around the countryside, which I had the opportunity to do, most of these traditional schools are in dire need of rehabilitation. To just allot Shs 15 billion is completely inadequate. The report says it is going to be done in a phased manner. We would like to understand how many phases there are. We started discussing this issue of rehabilitation in the 10th Parliament but nothing has happened so far. I would like to inquire from the chairperson the phases we have for this rehabilitation. Also, can we add money to revamp these traditional schools? Lastly, on the enhancement of the scientists’ salaries and those of the arts, there is a very thin line between the two. To say, “This is social science, this is empirical science,” and segregate teachers along that line is unfair. May we, therefore, ask that the salaries of even the arts, which is social science, be enhanced? (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Mpindi, Hon. Lokwang, Hon. Chemonges - Honourable colleagues, let me tell you the formula I am following and I am very cautious. If someone from your region has spoken, just sit. I am picking per subregion so as to get a picture of the whole country. I have already sorted out Bunyoro, Bugisu, West Nile, Busoga, Acholi and Buganda.8243THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 20 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.I will pick Hon. Asaba, Hon. Koyekyenga for Ankole and Hon. Kwizera for Kigezi [Members rose_] No, I have to devise means as a strategy to have each area covered.11.11MR BUMALI MPINDI (Independent, PWD Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise in regard to special needs education. In   the report and in the budget, special needs education has been left out. Mr Speaker, you wanted to know why children with hearing impairment failed the PLE exams last year. One of the reasons was about funding and it continues to be the same. We lack special needs schools. The Government committed to constructing some special needs school, but time and again, that issue has not been addressed. I pray that the budget for special needs education be increased this financial year. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lokwang for Karamoja. 11.12MR HILLARY LOKWANG (NRM, Ik County, Kaabong): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. Article 36 of the Constitution talks about the minority groups and Article 32 talks about the marginalised communities. I am advocating for affirmative action. The communities that I represent – like the Batwa, the Benet, the Tepeth and the Ik – are not benefiting from these affirmative action programmes. I have never seen any Benet, Tepeth or Batwa getting a special scholarship.The other issue is about the schools. In Ik, for example, I have five primary schools. Three are community schools and they stop at Primary Four. I have only two Government-aided schools. We do not even benefit from these grants. Now, where is the affirmative action? Are we implementing Article 36 and Article 32 of the Constitution? So, we also need to be taken into consideration and one day, this House should approve some money for affirmative action for the marginalised. I am also talking about women, the disabled and other groups that are not captured. Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Chemonges for Sebei. 11.14MR WILLIAM CHEMONGES (NRM, Kween County, Kween):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I thank the committee for coming up with this report. However, the report is not comprehensive in that it has not considered the traditional schools properly because I have seen Shs 15 billion being allocated to the traditional schools. All of us, Members, have got very old schools, which have no structures but their teachers are earning. For example, I have about three town councils without schools and one has a very old school. Another serious issue is the loan scheme. We can all agree that the loan scheme is not doing us a favour in the country. When you look at the names that come, they are actually the names of people who are able to pay their school fees in the universities. In the last list that came out, the entire Kween – I even went ahead to look at the entire Sebei. The entire Sebei, I think, had five beneficiaries only. That was really shocking.Finally, I managed to move around our UPE schools last week. I got shocked. Even as we plan and say that we are improving education, we are not doing it. There are no funds for exams in the UPE schools. There is even no cup of porridge for any child there. There is completely –  (Member timed out.) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Kwizera for Kigezi.8244Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS & BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FY 2023/202411.16MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bukimbiri County, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, thank you. I also thank the committee for the work that they have done.Mr Speaker, I do not see why when the population of the country is growing and the number of children going to school is growing, you cut down the budget. This means there is economic and social sabotage.The Education budget should be regarded even more than the one for defence. This is because without education, you cannot get a good army. So, we need good soldiers, who are well schooled. Secondly, the people who manage education in public schools are undermining public education in favour of private schools because these private schools are owned by many people in the Government. So, we should look at the reasons why education cannot be well funded. Another issue, Mr Speaker, is about the standardisation of education. We have a number of universities, but there is the issue of the employability of the graduates. We need to put more money into the standards of education and set specific standards for our graduates. In this region, you may not recruit graduates from other universities – you may find it is only Makerere, Kyambogo, Nkozi or KIU. We have no standards because of poor budgeting. I would like to thank the President for recognising the people of Kisoro by establishing a public university or institute there because it helps to improve the human capital development. Investing in education means you are investing in human capital. There will be inflow of foreign capital from Rwanda, Burundi and other countries because of the institute called John Kale Institute. I thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Koyekyenga, for Ankole. 11.18MS OLIVER KATWESIGYE (NRM, Woman Representative, Buhweju): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the chairperson of the education committee for the report. However, I have a few things to note. Mr Speaker, my first concern is about understaffing in seed schools and Government-aided schools. In the report, they showed us that there is a gap of 43 per cent - understaffing. Of course, this is very bad because the Government has invested money to build some of these schools, but when you go to those schools, there are no teachers and children are just loitering without studying. When you try to inquire, the district tells you about the wage bill at the district. They cannot recruit teachers because there is no money. Mr Speaker, I think we need to add more money. Mr Speaker, another issue is the Shs 8 billion to start the renovation of Makerere halls. This is a mockery. Shs 8 billion is too little. For those who know Makerere, when you go there and look at those halls, you feel like crying. Shs 8 billion is nothing. We need more money to renovate our halls so that our – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Babungi, for Rwenzori. 11.20MS JOSEPHINE BABUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I also add my voice to thank the committee for the report. My comment is about salary enhancement for all the teachers. There should be equality in salary enhancement. Mr Speaker, we have a scenario where some of the head teachers are also teaching science subjects. At Sindila Secondary School in my district, we have a head teacher who also teaches chemistry and maths. However, he was not considered on the science teachers’ pay enhancement. You find a teacher earning more than a head teacher. So, how is the school 8245THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 20 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.going to be run when some of the teachers are being paid higher than the supervisors?There is also a scenario of the rehabilitation of the old schools. This should be done in all the districts; there should be a thorough check. In this same school - there is a class whose roof was blown off. I personally wrote to the OPM asking for iron sheets. I was not given the iron sheets but we all know where the iron sheets ended up yet we have such structures in a sorry state in some of the schools. So, I support the rehabilitation of some of the old schools, which are in a sorry state. Thank you.11.22MR PAUL ASABA (NRM, Kyaka North County, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to take this opportunity to thank the Committee on Education and Sports, for the report. Mr Speaker, I have a very serious concern in my constituency but which I think is occurring in other areas too. There is a technical school that was pledged by the President to be constructed in my constituency. After the pledge, the army came and started the construction but after roofing, they abandoned the site. It is now almost four years. I have moved to the Ministry of Education and the last time I went there, they promised that in this budget, it would be considered but when I look through the report, I do not see River Muzizi Technical School in Kyaka North. It is not put anywhere. I am really afraid of that area. Secondly, Mr Speaker, people are talking of secondary schools but in my constituents, I have five subcounties without secondary schools. Mr Speaker, I recall when you once visited my area and you saw one secondary school, which is Bugogo Secondary School. This school is, however, around 48 kilometres from the other nearest secondary school. Mr Speaker, you recall, you even helped me to write the Ministry of Education and Sports. I followed up by writing, but up to now, nothing has been done. This school too is reflected here. I only request that in this budget, we cut here and support the education sector. Otherwise, if we do not support the education sector, we shall be in danger. Thank you. 11.24MS MAXIMUS OCHAI (NRM, Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I want to thank the Committee on Education and Sports, for the reports presented to the House. I want to agree with the submissions so far made although I want to add one thing: that is support to the tertiary education subsector. Mr Speaker, Tororo District is the home to a faculty of science education. The people of West Budama North Constituency, and of Tororo District at large, have actually been advocating for the upgrading of that faculty to university level. How I wish, as we support the tertiary education sub-sector, we consider upgrading the Nagongera Campus, from being a Faculty of Science Education to a fully-fledged university. That will go down well for us. I thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.11.25MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Education is the driver of all sectors that we are talking about in this budget. So, allow me to address my concern, first of all, to the students’ Loan Scheme, which is supposed to benefit the children of the poor, who are the majority. It is very unfortunate that the Ministry of Finance, Planning, and Economic Development only releases money for first-year students. Some of these students are even doing science courses and they need money; they need to be supported because if we do not support them, it means we will be breeding university dropouts. At the moment we are grappling with school dropouts at the primary level, and so, it will really be so sad.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR8246Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS & BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FY 2023/2024Secondly, allow me to say something about public universities. There is a big problem but I want to address myself to Lira University. We are doing so well, in terms of numbers because we have many students but the issue is funding. Mr Speaker, the Medical School at Lira University needs an additional Shs 12.6 billion, and I want to support the committee on this. Similarly, there is the issue of the staffing level in this public university; it is not mentioned by the committee, but Lira University has only 27 per cent of the filled vacancies. I think it is high time we had student numbers matched with staff. Finally, is the issue of the curriculum –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. No. I would want an ordinary member. Honourable minister, you sit in Cabinet but since I have failed to get an ordinary member from Teso, I will pick you, Hon. Musa Ecweru –(Laughter)– because you know the regions, which have not contributed.11.27THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr Francis Musa Ecweru): I want to thank you, Mr Speaker, for your flexibility. I first want to thank the chairperson of this committee. My request to the committee and the ministry - last financial year they allocated resources for the rehabilitation of some traditional schools but unfortunately, because of, I think procurement challenges, they did not implement that programme. And Teso College Aloet, for example, was one such schools. I did go with Hon. Peter Ogwang, the Minister of State for Sports, to the launch but we were advised that there were still some issues to be resolved. My prayer is that that resource be ring-fenced so that we do not abandon those traditional schools, as far as rehabilitation is concerned. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, I want to thank the chairperson and the team, and you, for the contributions. Of course, there are issues that are very unique to the education sector, which I have seen will be gravely affected, for example, by the ban on travel abroad. If you remove travel abroad for universities, when they have external examiners, how will they work? When we don’t fund research – university teams travel to meet different agencies. For example, there are universities with research budgets of up to $100 million. That involves engaging stakeholders because the money we are giving to research is extremely small. Honourable minister, I think you said this will be on a case-by-case basis; we hope the education sector will be given serious attention.Then for the National Council for Higher Education - if you want degrees from universities to be recognised globally or to be considered that they are very important, we must have curricula, which are approved. We must have universities that are assessed well but we are increasing the number of universities without increasing funding to the National Council for Higher Education that is supposed to give reports - you may find they have a huge backlog, which means universities are going to be teaching courses that are not approved because the council is not well facilitated to recruit staff to go do assessments, and so, how are we going to be assessed globally? It means our universities are going to be affected, in terms of ranking, and once they are affected, we shall not attract good research funding.Also, our people won’t be competitive, in terms of international jobs and even locally, by the way. It may also mean that research - all this will be clearly affected. I know the issues with the National Council for Higher Education; I was in the higher education sector. They need very critical affirmative action, honourable minister. They do not even have computers. You see universities are employing very strong software but we have a regulator who is lame-dark because of the lack of financing. Even [Ms Alum]8247THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 20 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.the man we brought for this financial year - honourable minister, kindly intervene – I think they needed like Shs 1 billion for the computers to be able to assess but they are not able. So, honourable minister, please, we request you to intervene. In this era, we still have a university that has asbestos roofs, after they have been declared cancerous. We have a university that has asbestos roofs and we are sending children there to go and get cancer! Do we want Prof. Katunguka to sell whatever he has and roof a university? In the end, we shall blame these institutions, but what do you want the administration to do if we cannot provide money for roofing? Honourable colleagues, there is something that I want to assign the committee and the minister to look at; the issue of the Joint Admissions Board (JAB) forms. The cost is very high. I got a very painful experience in my constituency. I have discovered that many children from poor schools are unable to fill these forms because they cannot afford them. I have a very good example: some of you have come to my constituency and I have an area which neighbours a national park; it is one of the areas more or less forgotten. Hon. Musa Ecweru went there. They even call it “Congo.” In this area, some of the students that study there think that they can only qualify to go to, probably, a plumbing school or teach somewhere; that is all they know. They do not have high hopes. In the last exams, the only school that has A’ Level in the area - I think they had about seven students - we got one student who is even partially blind; he could not even afford a braille machine but he managed to squeeze through and scored aggregate 20. However, this student had not filled out the JAB form; so, he could not qualify for Government sponsorship. Another lady, whose process of education I cannot narrate here, got 19 points but she had not filled out the JAB forms, reason being that she could not afford it. Therefore, who are we educating at university? We are educating those who can afford it. That is a very good example showing you that the poor are even going to miss out on opportunities because even the opportunities you call “Government sponsorship or free” have money tagged to them. Those who cannot afford that money cannot get those opportunities. Honourable colleagues, if it was in your constituency, what would you do? The burden is going to be transferred to me, as their Member of Parliament, to educate those children because I cannot leave them to suffer. I am going to ensure they become lawyers. Maybe, they can transform the community; I am going to pay. If we do not address this issue, the burden will transfer to you. Today it is me, tomorrow it will be you. Honourable colleagues, these are issues we must tackle head-on. If we do not do so, we will pay the price, on top of our communities suffering. 11.35MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before the minister comes, there is a new terminology that has been coined by all ministries, which is used in presenting reports and it is called “retooling.” Can the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development help us to define what this “retooling” is so that we do not pass reports with subversive statements and end up where our colleagues are?Two, there are many budget cuts in the Ministry of Education and Sports. We were told of securing our future, but how is this future going to be secured? How are we going to progress steadily, when there is no money in the education sector?The Minister of Education and Sports recently recruited 4,500 teachers and gave them appointment letters, but they have not been posted to any schools. They may end up suing Government. When they go to any secondary school, they are told there is no place and they cannot be placed, but they have appointment letters. We need money for all these teachers.8248Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS & BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FY 2023/2024My colleagues have talked about the higher institutions loan scheme. Instead of Shs 27 billion, only Shs 5 billion has been provided. This means that those who are already in universities may be discontinued, and those who have just applied will not be taken. This is a loan - and we are told those who completed are paying back very well. Why don’t we find the money for the loan scheme?The Shs 15 billion for the rehabilitation of traditional Government schools is little money. You know the traditional schools such as Nganwa High School, Sir Samuel Baker Secondary School, Kitgum High School, Lango College where the Chief Whip went, Teso College Aloet - all these schools are in embarrassing conditions. I believe this money is not enough.I have seen the suffocation of political space in universities. Prof. Barnabas Nawangwe is expelling students because of their ideologies. If people cannot have freedom at university, where will they find freedom? I know very many of you who were leaders in universities, including the Speaker and several ministers. Now, when we come here to Parliament, and they are being suffocated, and we keep quiet about it, and just give them money - we should be able to say, “Before we give you money, stop suffocating the political space because it is a learning ground.” Even a demonstration is a learning experience. I am a product of demonstrations and I am doing very well. (Laughter)Mr Speaker, you know that Mama Mabira is a product of demonstrations. Even the name came out of demonstrations. The point I am making is; these are learning institutions and people should not be suffocated or expelled just because of their political ideologies. I thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. I will start with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Just two minutes, honourable minister.11.39THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me begin by taking this opportunity to appreciate honourable colleagues for the passionate debate they have made on the education sector. Education is one of the last major interventions, which touch all of us. For some of us who started from church schools, we know what the story you are talking about means. The budget for the Financial Year 2023/2024 has been anchored on various principles and one of them is to completely suppress travel abroad except for the entities, which we have also defined. That notwithstanding, we have said, on a case-by-case basis, if the reason for the travel is justified, we shall be able to provide for it. The case of the external examiners is clearly understandable. I want to assure you and the House that this will definitely be provided for as we finalise the budget. On the subventions, the 80 per cent cut is the principle we adopted. However, further analysis has shown that some interventions are doing critical activities, where the 80 per cent rule may not apply, like the examinations board, the loan scheme and many others. Right now, I have instructed our technical teams to analyse and pick out those cases. These are some of the areas the corrigenda will address.Hon. Mwijukye wanted me to define “retooling”. In the budgeting sense, retooling captures the following items: building, computers and motor vehicles. Where you have seen the budget for retooling cut, we are trying to implement the principle of not buying cars in the next financial year. If you have a motor vehicle in the retooling budget, we have taken away that money. We are not allowing entities to start new buildings, except those already in progress. This is why the retooling budget is going down. Why are we doing this?[Mr Mwijukye]8249THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 20 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.In the coming year, our discretionary budget will be reduced by Shs 2.5 trillion. Also, we still have another deficit of Shs 3 trillion to cover up yet we have to do efficiency within the available budget since we do not have an additional resource envelope.The last point is to ask Members to understand the situation. The budget cycle is just 12 months. In this budget, we are trying as much as possible to deal with those items, which cannot wait. For those we think can wait, I appeal for your support that we defer them to the future financial years.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, we shall have further debate when the final report comes here because the minister’s submissions are crosscutting. Honourable minister, as per the statutory deadline, we are finalising the ministerial policy statements; so, I expect you to get all the recommendations from the ministry’s policy statements for your team to study. That will guide your corrigenda, which we expect to receive very soon. I do not want us to stampede Members with a budget to say, “We only have one hour of handling it.” No, I want us to finish the work within the timelines provided. Minister of Education and Sports, I only answer issues of financial implication since that is the one we are referring to the Committee on Budget. For the rest, I will get you some space, maybe next week, to address them.11.45THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you, and the honourable members, for the overwhelming support to put education at the centre and prioritise it in terms of funding. Most of these issues, as you have said, are centred on budgeting. We just need more money.On the implication of the budget cuts – the ministry had put in a place a task force for Bunyoro University and Busoga University and they have started walking the journey. The implication of not providing funds to Bunyoro and Busoga universities is that the gains we have so far achieved will be retarded.  The task force will be rendered jobless. So, that needs to be considered. (Applause)The implication of not allocating funds for the renovation of the seed schools and managing congestion in primary schools directly affects the performance and the quality of education of our children.A lot needs money, and as you said, Mr Speaker, when we do not provide the money, at the end of it, we will not meet the international standards in terms of education quality. We shall not even meet the standards within our East African Community.Lastly, on the roadmap, we have the 18 zones, which must have a Government university. We also have constituencies that need to have Technical and V ocational Education and Training (TVET) or skilling. Recall the Presidential pledges that have been raised. Once we do not fulfill those skilling programmes, the implication is that our youth are not going to be competitive on the job market. Every subcounty is supposed to have a secondary school. That is the policy roadmap. Also, parishes are supposed to have a primary school. It is our desire and commitment to ensure that we have all of those within our administrative units so we improve the quality, accessibility and equity of our children. Thank you.MS KAAYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am standing on a procedural matter, we are -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: State the rule.MS KAAYA: I am deliberating on rule 149 - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Read rule 78(4).MS KAAYA: Mr Speaker, if putting such an item -8250Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS & BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FY 2023/2024THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, if you cannot state the rule – let me read for you rule 78(4); it reads: “Where a Member interrupts debate on a point of procedure, the Member shall state the Rule of Procedure he or she deems to have been breached by the Member holding the Floor.”Honourable colleagues, there is no Member holding the Floor; so, I do not know which rule is being breached. Honourable colleagues, let us move on. Before I put the question, honourable minister, you talked about retooling. If the issue of asbestos is covered under that, kindly, let us help our people because we shall be sued in future. This morning, I received a message from a resident in Arua who said, “Rt Hon. Speaker, I am told you are going to be debating education. Mvara Secondary School, one of the traditional schools in Arua, still has asbestos roofs.” Let us identify those schools; even Kyambogo is one of them.Honourable chairperson, read the supply table and the figures.MR JOHN TUMWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, I am sorry. Actually, the supply table has no issues. The figures appearing here, both for recurrent and development, are the ones in the Appropriation Bill’s draft estimates. So, the figures are correct. I had reached V ote 166: National Council of Sports – let me repeat it.V ote 166: National Council of Sports Total recurrent – Shs 16,966,514,000Total development – Shs 0V ote 301: Makerere University Kampala Total recurrent – Shs 346,669,558,000Total development – Shs 19,072,698,000V ote 302: Mbarara University of Science and TechnologyTotal recurrent – Shs 54,295,012,000Total development – Shs 3,764,047,000V ote 303: Makerere University Business SchoolTotal recurrent – Shs 103,103,575,000Total development – Shs 2,125,530,000V ote 304: Kyambogo UniversityTotal recurrent – Shs 131,291,738,000Total development – Shs 1,710,496,000V ote 305: Busitema UniversityTotal recurrent – Shs 52,112,893Total development – Shs 5,892,464,000V ote 306: Muni University Total recurrent – Shs 24,080,694,000Total development – Shs 4,752,000,000V ote 307: Kabale University Total recurrent – Shs 56,011,281,000Total development – Shs 2,586,568,000V ote 308: Soroti University Total recurrent – Shs 22,879,364,000Total development - Shs 1,257,362,000V ote 309: Gulu University Total recurrent – Shs 61,529,303,000Total development – Shs 1,671,020,000V ote 310: Lira University Total recurrent – 29,983,277,000Total development – Shs 5,000,000,000 V ote 312: Uganda Management Institute Total recurrent – Shs 35,594,073,000Total development – Shs 1,720,000,000V ote 313: Mountains of the Moon University Total recurrent – Shs 37,702,810,000Total development Shs 0V ote 612: Local GovernmentsTotal recurrent – Shs 3,129,560,000,000Total development – Shs 349,030,000,000V ote 122: KCCA Education Grant Total recurrent – Shs 46,710,000,000Total development – Shs 2,230,000,000I beg to report, Mr Speaker.8251THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 20 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, committee chairperson. Hon. Christine Kaaya, you seem to have a very burning issue.MS KAAYA: Mr Speaker, my procedural matter is on the entire business of the House – I am moving under rule 149. I could not see the title on the Order Paper. So, I am just inquiring if it is of harm to include it on the Order Paper. Wouldn’t we be proceeding rightly if the names of these reports were indicated on the Order Paper?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Kaaya, when we were starting, I informed the House that the whole budgeting process is provided for under the motion for supply. So, all these items will be under that. It has different items and we shall move for many days under this same motion. So, what is very important is for the Hansard to capture that under this motion, we continue with A, B, C and D. So, that is how it is captured, traditionally. Thank you.Honourable colleagues, I now put the question that the report of the Sectoral Committees on Education and Sports on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the Education and Sports Sector for Financial Year 2023/2024 be adopted.(Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, committee chairperson. I did not receive a minority report. The report is referred to the Committee on Budget for further consolidation and consideration.Hon. Ssewungu?11.59MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank all the Members for supporting our report, which is very strong. (Laughter)Mr Speaker, we have had a lot of issues in education and, indeed, this committee summoned the PS/ST to appear on Tuesday because he refused to appear. However, the issue I am raising – you heard about traditional schools. I pray that the finance ministry and the education ministry sit and seek a loan for the rehabilitation of all schools in Uganda.The primary schools in our constituencies are in a terrible state. These Members of Parliament are the ones building toilets and repairing them – putting up doors, painting them and everything. The fact is that all our primary schools are condemned. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, let us not reopen the debate – no, he sought guidance from me; I do not want us to go back on this thing. The only thing that Parliament can do is to recommend financing, but it is the Government, which knows the source of financing – it can be borrowed or they can do reprioritising. Really, we cannot sit here and say, “Government, go look for a loan.” What if they say they have money or that this does not meet - I do not want us to report this. Next statement. CONSIDERATION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2023/2024THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairperson of the committee, you have 15 minutes like the rest have been doing. So, at 12.20 p.m. your time will be done. We have a clock in the corner, in case of any doubt. 12.20THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr David Karubanga): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity you have given our committee to present the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates. Before I proceed, allow me to lay a copy of the committee report and the minutes of the meetings of the committee proceedings. 8252Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS & BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FY 2023/2024Mr Speaker, I am here to present the committee report on the integrated transport, infrastructure, and services programme where the Ministry of Works and Transport is the lead agency, and the one for the sustainable urbanisation and housing programme, where the Ministry of Lands Housing and Urban Development, is the lead agency. Mr Speaker, I would like to go through the V otes. Under the Integrated Transport, Infrastructure, and Services Programme, we have:V ote 016: Ministry of Works and Transport;V ote 113: Uganda National Roads Authority;V ote 118: Uganda Road Fund; and V ote 609: Local Governments. Under the Sustainable Urbanisation and Housing Programme, we have the Ministry of Lands Housing and Urban Development. And under the Natural Sources Environment, Land and Climate Change Programme, we have the Uganda Land Commission. Mr Speaker, since you have given me only 15 minutes, I would seek your indulgence to go to page 40 where I want us to look at the allocations. The budgets for the programme - the current budget and budgets. I want us to look at column 2, which is the Integrated Transport Infrastructure Services Programme, excluding KCCA. The Ministry of Works has been allocated Shs 1,375,800,000,000 – see the summary form - and UNRA has been allocated Shs 2,547,210,000,000; the Uganda Road Fund - Shs 467,000,000; and Local Governments got an extra Shs 1 billion; so, they have Shs 204,450,000,000. Then we have some little money, which the Ministry of Works and Transport gets, which is about Shs 2.4 billion and that is under Sustainable Urbanisation Housing. The ministry also gets some little money for regional balance development; so, the Ministry of Works and Transport gets a total of Shs 1,378,000,000,000 and the total allocation under that is Shs 4,595,410,000,000. Mr Speaker, I want to draw the House’s attention to page 48 of the report on the observations and recommendations. On the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development - of course, I hope that Members have seen the allocations under the ministry - we have an issue to do with the physical development plans. We realised that the ministry requires Shs 183.85 billion but only Shs 46.85 billion was allocated, leaving a funding gap of Shs 137 billion. The committee recommends that Government, in the medium term, commits to funding the implementation of the physical development plans so as to reduce the mushrooming slums. Rent and Construction requirementsThe Parliamentary Commission intends to demolish Development House, which currently houses the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and for that matter, the ministry requires Shs 24 billion to cater for rent in the Financial Year 2023/2024, and Shs 102.75 billion as money required for the construction of a permanent home.Mr Speaker, from that observation, the committee recommends that the Shs 24 billion for rent and Shs 102.75, in the unfunded priority category, be provided to the ministry to cater for office rent and the construction of a permanent home for the ministry to relocate. Mr Speaker, under construction of low-cost housing for Ugandans, the committee realised that in Financial Year 2021/2022, the Government remitted only Shs 30 billion, leaving a balance of Shs 88 billion. And whereas the balance budgeted for the Financial Year 2022/2023 was affected, there were budget cuts under capital development items and no allocation was given. So, Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that the Shs 88 billion and the Shs 55 billion should be allocated to National Housing [Mr Karubanga]8253THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 20 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.and Construction Company Limited and the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs, in this financial year, to cater for the balance on the acquisition of the National Housing and Construction Company Limited towards the clearance of the debt owed by the Ministry of Lands Housing and Urban Development. And also Shs 88 billion be given to National Housing and Construction Company Limited, as arrears. Mr Speaker, the committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendation that indeed, the Shs 88 billion should be paid to the National Housing and Construction Company Limited and then the Shs 55 billion to the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, which will be later paid to National Housing. Under land acquisition and compensation, the committee recommends that Government commits to funding the settlement of payment towards outstanding obligations to claimants under the various ranches since the arrears have really gone to a big figure of Shs 372.3 billion, and the narrative has been given in the report. You will see that that is an unfunded priority. The committee recommended that the Physical Planners Registration Board, whose Act was enacted, should be operationalised but there are no funds for that. Acquisition of land for the development of low-cost residential houses for industrial workers The committee was informed that Shs 25.5 billion is required for land acquisition. The committee notes and appreciates the urgent need towards solving Uganda’s housing problem, especially in providing low-cost residential houses for the urban poor. Therefore, it recommends that Government should prioritise funding in order to curb the rapid growth of slums. The maintenance of Land Information Systems The committee recognises the importance of a well-maintained Land Information System, especially in revenue collection. We have been told that the current one has challenges in securing land records, land tenure security, reduction of corruption, improvement in service delivery and consolidation of revenue collection.Therefore, the committee recommended that an additional Shs 5 billion be allocated towards the maintenance of the Land Information System from the Shs 15 billion allocated to land compensation because the Land Information System is helping the ministry to generate revenue. Ministry Zonal Offices (MZOs) The budget is only Shs 18.406 billion for the activity. Only Shs 4.105 billion has been provided. The funding gap is Shs 14.301 billion. The committee recommends that an additional Shs 4 billion be allocated for the operationalisation of MZOs from the Shs 15 billion allocated towards land compensation. Likewise, staffing under the MZOs has been a big problem. There have been many queues and complaints. The committee recommended that Shs 2.478 billion be allocated to cover the funding gap towards staff recruitment in MZOs so as to deal with those many queues. Re-affirmation of the international border The committee was informed that the ministry had budgeted for Shs 5.391 billion but only Shs 0.591 billion has been allocated, leaving a funding gap of Shs 4.8 billion. The committee, therefore, recommends the provision of Shs 4.8 billion for the re-affirmation of the international border in this financial year. People, especially in the North, have had challenges with our neighbouring country.Under NTR, the committee recommends that Government should endeavour to finance the priority areas that require urgent attention as 8254Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS & BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FY 2023/2024listed. The ministry told us it was supposed to be a funding priority, but the money towards enhancing its NTR is a problem. Strengthening of the Office of the Chief Government Valuer The committee was informed that the office has a project, which is aimed at streamlining revenue generation and only Shs 1.015 billion was allocated for that activity out of the required Shs 12.035 billion.The committee recommends that an additional Shs 6 billion should be allocated to the Office of the Chief Government Valuer from the Shs 15 billion allocated towards land compensation because the Chief Government Valuer’s Office is also helping the ministry to improve its revenue generation.Land registrationThe committee observed that there is massive systematic land adjudication and certification across the entire country. The exercise generates revenue but it is poorly funded with only Shs 151.077 million.The committee, therefore, recommends that an additional Shs 1 billion be allocated for land registration from the Shs 15 billion allocated towards land compensation. Uganda Land Commission The allocation on page 56 is per that table where the total allocation for the Uganda Land Commission (ULC) is Shs 27.333 billion. The committee realised that under the Uganda Land Commission (ULC) we are supposed to operationalise the Land Fund. Therefore, as a recommendation, Government should fully operationalise the Land Fund and increase its financing to sufficient levels to support the broader function of the Uganda Land Commission. The committee further recommends that the Land Fund be allocated Shs 73.2 billion to compensate absentee landlords.Inadequate funding of the land inventory The committee recommends that Government should provide funds to the Uganda Land Commission to cater for start-up activities towards land inventories such as sensitisation with MDAs and other stakeholders, boundary openings and valuations. Court casesThe committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that Government should prioritise allocation to the Uganda Land Commission in this financial year that we are budgeting for to cater for court compensation to clients of ULC. The Uganda Land Commission BillThe committee realised the money required is very little, which is almost Shs 0.6 billion but only 0.1 billion has been provided. The committee recommends Government to prioritise the allocation of an extra Shs 500 million in the medium term.Mr Speaker, the funding gaps are there summarised. There are funding gaps under land compensation for absentee landlords.  You can see the figure. Under the subdivision surveys, you can see the figure. Government land inventory, you can see –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairperson, your time is up. MR DA VID KARUBANGA:  Mr Speaker, let me go to the Ministry of Works and Transport. We have recommendations. First, is the implementation of the Resettlement Action Plan for the new Kampala ports at Bukasa, the PAPS –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairperson, skip the recommendations that do not have any financial implication because in the budget, you deal with figures, not policy statements.[Mr Karubanga]8255THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 20 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MR DA VID KARUBANGA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Only Shs 2 billion has been provided and the requirement is almost Shs 30 billion. We are requesting for those PAPs to be paid.Under the development, the ministry had requested Shs 30 billion but it has been allocated only Shs 1 billion. The committee recommends that Government finds the balance of Shs 29 billion.Under road equipment for cities and municipalities –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Committee chairperson, I want to move with you on your report. I do not want you to bring figures here that are not from your report. On the last one where you said that around Shs 30 billion is needed, I do not see it in your recommendation. If you do not have a figure in the recommendation signed by the committee –MR DA VID KARUBANGA:  Mr Speaker, the figure is Shs 29,991,339THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is that for? MR DA VID KARUBANGA:  Bukasa project. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. I mean, is it for the implementation of the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP)? MR DA VID KARUBANGA:  Yes. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, where is it in the recommendation? This is what the Committee on Budget will be dealing with. If you have not captured it in the recommendation, then they will not also capture it. At this stage, you cannot amend the report. Maybe a Member can move a motion that we amend and include that recommendation. MR DA VID KARUBANGA:  Mr Speaker, thank you. I think that was an omission. Under the development of the new Bukasa Port, the committee recommends that Shs 29 billion be allocated towards the development and completion of the new port.Under road equipment for cities and municipalities, the committee realised that almost $50 million is required. The committee’s recommendation is that in the medium term, the Government finds money to fund that.Under improving road safety and regulation of the transport sector, only Shs 23.86 billion has been allocated against the requirement of Shs 62.88 billion. The committee urges the Government to prioritise funding towards activities aimed at ensuring road safety in Uganda. Under streamlining management for motor vehicle registration, only Shs 14 billion has been allocated. It has a requirement of Shs 86.2 billion with a very big project of building a one-stop center. The committee, therefore, recommends that an additional allocation of Shs 72.26 billion be provided in this financial year to streamline motor vehicle management and registration if the ministry and Government are to meet the set targets and outputs. Mr Speaker, there is the Kasoli Housing Project which has a SACCO. It is a low-cost housing project where the SGR is supposed to sit in Tororo. The SACCO petitioned Parliament. The fund required is Shs 3.74 billion for the Project Affected Persons (PAPs) in 92 houses, DFCU Bank Shs 3.1, PAPS in the 90 structures Shs 817 million and there is another group of 17 freehold offers from pool housing of Shs 143.5 million. The committee recommends a total of Shs 4.73 billion to be paid to SGR of which, Shs 3,186,960,558 should be paid to DFCU Bank.Mr Speaker, you gave a directive that this issue should be rested once and for all. You gave the assignment to the Prime Minister.  Regarding critical funding under civil aviation, the committee was informed that the country continues to lose a lot of foreign exchange from the tourism sector due to the poor status of one 8256Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS & BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FY 2023/2024of our aerodromes in Kisoro. The committee was informed that resurfacing that aerodrome and other works requires Shs 6 billion. That will help us to deal with the challenges we have been having with the tourism sector in that corner. The committee was also informed that Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) is supposed to undergo The International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) audit this September but they lack key security and safety equipment. The requirement for that is Shs 11 billion. This has a reflection on the country so the committee recommends that funds be reallocated from the three proposed items under the Ministry of Works and Transport for an additional Shs 3 billion for the aerodromes. Also, Shs 6 billion for surfacing and Shs 11 billion for security and safety equipment.On failure to fully fund road equipment for the 16 districts, the committee observed that there has been partial funding. There are 16 districts which do not have road equipment. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development said we should budget for it this financial year but there are no resources for that. Our recommendation to the Committee on Budget is to see where they can get money to ensure districts without road equipment are given the balance of Shs 27 billion. There is a table which shows the proposal allocations under the Ministry of Works and Transport. The committee recommends that a total of Shs 46.8 billion be allocated as follows:a. Civil Aviation Authority, Shs 3 billion for aerodromes, Shs 6 billion for Kisoro and Shs 11 for security and safety equipment;b. KCCA, an additional Shs 20 billion to the Shs 10 billion they have been given for the rehabilitation of roads and maintenance in Kampala;c. Ministry of Works and Transport, Shs 6.2 billion for upgrading of urban roads under the local ceiling. Mr Speaker, the committee observed that UNRA has continuously failed to make payments to contractors pending interim payment certificates. The outstanding areas as of 31st March stand at Shs 453.5 billion. UNRA has therefore continued to accrue interest to a tune of Shs 227 million per day, at a rate of 15 per cent per annum. The outstanding interest payment obligation is Shs 14.28 billion from the arrears only. The committee was informed that in the meantime, UNRA should not enter any new contractual obligations until their outstanding debt payments are completed. The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should avail the required funding to pay off the outstanding debt obligations by UNRA to its contractors.Under reduction in the nonwage budget, the committee recommends that the nonwage budget components should be increased to provide for supervision costs for ongoing, planned projects and privatisation of the critical roads within the Financial Year 2023/2024.Under the right of way, the committee recommends that the Government should ensure that substantial right of way is acquired to at least 60 per cent continuous section and the corridors demarcated prior to the signing of contracts for these projects.Kampala Capital City AuthorityInadequate funding for road maintenance and drainage infrastructure; Mr Speaker, Kampala Capital City Authority expressed dissatisfaction over the inadequate funding for the road maintenance and drainage infrastructure. They gave us their network and how it is divided in different divisions. [Mr Karubanga]8257THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 20 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.The committee was informed that as of March 2023, only Shs 30.8 billion had been released against the budget allocation of Shs 103 billion for the Financial Year 2022/2023 (Shs 78.540 billion from the Integrated Transport Infrastructure and Services (ITIS) and Shs 24.9 billion from Uganda Road Fund). KCCA says it is impossible for the authority to meet its set targets and outputs, according to the releases. The committee observed that they had been given only Shs 10 billion under this financial year – which we are processing – from the ITIS programme, which is a considerable decrease from Shs 78.54 billion in the last financial year.Mr Speaker, the committee was informed that there are projects which are ongoing – and the kilometres are there – but KCCA said that they were in the process of launching some of these. Of course, you have been seeing what is in the media. The committee was, indeed, concerned about the slow progress of those works, given that the closure date is supposed to be December 2024. The committee further observed that KCCA has no roads committee to oversee the maintenance and rehabilitation of roads. The committee recommended that:i) KCCA should be allocated more funds under the ITIS programme.ii)  KCCA should deliberately commit funds towards the desilting and maintenance of drainages across their road network that is to undertake a comprehensive drainage infrastructure systems design. iii) KCCA should expedite the launching of the loan projects – which loans matured long ago. iv) KCCA should be adequately funded in order to enable it to accomplish its set priorities and achieve the required outputs. V ote 609: Local GovernmentsThe committee noted that although the Cabinet made a decision for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to allocate Shs 1 billion directly to all districts and municipalities for maintenance and rehabilitation of roads in the Financial Year 2023/2024, there were no clear guidelines on the usage of the money and the role of the Uganda Road Fund as per Section 25(2) of the Uganda Road Fund Act, 2008 in the planning and monitoring. The committee, therefore, recommends that the additional Shs 1 billion to all local governments should be disbursed through the Uganda Road Fund –(Applause)- to enable the Uganda Road Fund to guide the district administrators to prepare and make timely submissions of their road maintenance and rehabilitation work plans, and also monitor the implementation of these work plans. Mr Speaker, subject to the above observations and recommendations, I beg to present the figures below for adoption and supply under the V otes under the jurisdiction of the committee. The figures of supply are;V ote 012: Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development Recurrent – Shs 52,987,499,000Development – Shs 91,444,108,000Total – Shs 144,431,607,000V otes 016: Ministry of Works and TransportRecurrent – Shs 188,102,433,000Development – Shs 1,167,619,015,000Total – Shs 1,325,721,448,000 V ote 113: UNRARecurrent – Shs 111,195,024,000Development – Shs 2,436,014,019,000Total – Shs 2,547,209,043,000V ote 118: Uganda Road FundRecurrent – Shs 644,752,413,000Development – they do not have development budget8258Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS & BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FY 2023/2024Total – Shs 644,752,413,000V ote 156: Uganda Land CommissionRecurrent – Shs 8,521,261,000 Development – Shs 18,811,960,000Total – Shs 27,333,221,000Mr Speaker, I beg to move and request the House to adopt the report. Thank you. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Just a very quick one – before I open the debate. There is one statement which I want to hear. Can you confirm that you have traced and found the Shs 1 billion for each district? Is it in - I do not mind where it is; but is it provided for in the budget? MR DA VID KARUBANGA:  Yes, Mr Speaker, it is under the local government, giving a total of Shs 204 billion.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Very good! Now, I direct the Committee on Budget to look for that money, wherever it is and bring it under the Road Fund because we cannot start doing things that way. (Applause) Pick it from the local government and put it under the Road Fund; that is how it has been managed properly. (Applause) If people are talking about rationalisation, we do not know about that. Parliament does not work in anticipation and Rule 80 is very clear on that.Therefore, Committee on Budget, go scan - you already have leads to where it is hidden - pick it and bring it to the right home. That is sorted. Two, chairperson, I want to ask - and you can guide, honourable colleagues. I have seen you referred to KCCA. So, will its budget for this road be found under the Presidential? I am asking this because you have recommended that they give KCCA money, but when it comes to the table of supply, I do not see KCCA there.So, when it reaches here, will you tell the Committee on Budget to go and pick a recommendation, under infrastructure and ensure that, under the supply for the V ote –Ministry for KCCA is covered? Hon. Byanyima, do you want to help?MR BYANYIMA:  Mr Speaker, in the usual Uganda Road Fund money for road maintenance, it is UNRA, which gets the biggest share, and the second is KCCA. So, the portion for road maintenance is there except it is not enough.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is under the Road Fund? Okay, let us ensure that when we get that money, it is also put under the Road Fund. Very good! I just wanted to coordinate the debate when I am enlightened on those issues. Honourable colleagues, I am going to start with Hon. Atima. I am going to pick you, honourable colleagues, because I am giving you some time. Let us do this quickly; I will pick many of you. 12.42MR JACKSON ATIMA (NRM, Arua Central Division, Arua City): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the elaborate report presented. However, on the allocation to the transport sector, I saw some money proposed to go towards the rehabilitation of Entebbe Airport, phases I and II put at 80 per cent. Then there is the development of Kasese Airport at 88 per cent. However, Mr Speaker, Arua Airfield, which was supposed to be upgraded to an international airport, has not been mentioned in this budget. That airfield, which is supposed to be upgraded to an airport, will enhance trade in this region. It will create employment opportunities for the youth and the traders in this region, and it will enhance the foreign income for this country. I implore the committee and the Ministry of Works and Transport, to have that considered because works, which had started have stalled. We are wondering what is happening to the upgrading of that airfield to an airport.[Mr Karubanga]8259THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 20 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.Two, Mr Speaker, the chairperson of the committee talked about equipment for the newly created cities. I did not see the figures for the cities that have been created like Arua are – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Kayagi 12.44MS SARAH KAYAGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Namisindwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank and applaud the committee for identifying Shs 1 billion to be allocated to the Road Fund.Mr Speaker, some of us who come from rural districts and mountainous areas, have got very few kilometres that are under the Central Government or UNRA. That means that most of our roads benefit from this budget of the Road Fund. So, if this money is identified and allocated, it will reduce the pressures that we have.Secondly, Mr Speaker, I want Government to consider the low-cost ceiling. For most of the roads in the mountainous areas, they are washed off once it rains; the gravel that the engineers put is removed. So, when we have the low-cost ceiling of tarmacking these roads, and given little traffic in the mountainous areas, and in those flood-prone districts, it will save us the cost of buying gravel every now and then, and the noise that our people make when the roads are damaged. I want to thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us hear from Hon. Kazini.12.46MR FRANCIS KAZINI (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Kikuube): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you chairperson of the committee. The chairperson of the committee talked about the rehabilitation of KCCA roads. However, I want to bring to his attention that recently, we lost our beloved District Chairperson for Hoima in an accident due to potholes on Hoima-Busunju Road. I, therefore, beg that before we lose other important people – Mr Chairperson, you also use the same road -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, before we lose Ugandans; even the less important are not supposed to die. MR TWINOMUJUNI:  Thank you, for the correction, Mr Speaker. Before we lose more Ugandans, including you, Mr Chairperson, because you use the same road, I beg that you also consider Hoima-Busunju Road for rehabilitation. Secondly, you talked about the critical roads - you know we have a very important road that connects from Kabwooya to the oil fields of Buhuka - you all know that oil is now the backbone of this country. I beg that you also allocate it a budget such that we move at par because we need that oil. I thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kazini, I only come to that side when visiting you. So, if you are threatening me that I might die on the road? (Laughter)MR TWINOMUJUNI:  Mr Speaker, let us work on it so that you can come comfortably. 12.47MS JENIFER AYOO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kalaki): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First, I want to thank the committee for the work well done. I also thank the Government for the Shs 1 billion that they are allocating to the rehabilitation of the roads. Mr Speaker, I have seen the issue of the road equipment here and the committee has highlighted that they need $50 million to procure the equipment for the cities and the municipalities and they are recommending that at least this money be provided.On the issue concerning the 16 new districts, the money is said not to be there. Mr Speaker, with the Shs 1 billion that has been added to 8260Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS & BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FY 2023/2024these districts to work on the roads, which we appreciate, without the road equipment for these districts, these monies, I promise you, will come back to the Consolidated Fund. It will not be of any help to these districts without equipment. Therefore, I want to emphasise to the committee and Government to please, look for funds and have all the districts get the equipment. I thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Yes, Hon. Feta.12.49MR GEOFREY FETA (NRM, Ayivu Division East, Arua City): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for doing a good job. I want to agree with the committee on UNRA because surely, the potholes we have been talking about - others being dry and some being wet - and the minister joked that he is going to start with those ones that have a lot of water –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There are some which are “bummy; they have bums.” (Laughter) MR FETA: He was alleging that the dry ones are from West Nile; we do not agree. Money should be given to Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) to do a good job.  In 2018, Government compensated landowners around Arua Airfield and about six people remained to be compensated.  However, up to today, nobody is talking about the balance to be paid to the people so that they vacate the place. Arua Airfield is the second biggest after Entebbe and people are dilly-dallying. I do not know why people do not want to speak facts. It has the highest traffic in this country after Entebbe; so, consider upgrading Arua Airfield. The Shs 1 billion given to the districts is going to solve a lot of problems. It is good that the committee has seen sense in putting that money under the Uganda Road Fund because we have a legal framework under which this money can be properly managed. A district can decide to buy equipment; Shs 1 billion can buy a grader and you begin from there. In the next financial year, you can decide to do another thing. This quarrel of not having equipment should be addressed using the Shs 1 billion through the Uganda Road Fund. In the mean –(Member timed out.)12.51MR BASIL BATARINGAYA (NRM, Kashari North County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate you and the entire Speaker’s office because you have fought hard to have this Shs 1 billion -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, we promised ourselves that in this budget we must get at least Shs 1 billion so it is a good that it has been achieved.MR BATARINGAYA: Thank you. I think this will push us. The second issue is we appropriate money for road maintenance in the recurrent expenditure. When we travel internationally, we find the roads marked but here, the road was marked when it was constructed. Now the night traffic has increased and many accidents are caused by lack of road marks. I beg that this is taken into consideration. Thank you.12.53MR LAWRENCE SONGA (NRM, Ora County, Zombo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and members of the committee for the report. Many of my colleagues have already mentioned key and priority areas. I want to emphasise the issue of the international border or the customs border points. It is very important for us in Uganda to link our customs border points so that we can generate more revenue for the country, other than borrowing high interest loans. If I had the power, I would put money where we can generate more revenue for our people. These are areas with high returns on investments. [Ms Ayoo]8261THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 20 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.My prayer is that the customs border points, especially in West Nile, which has about five points - and if you compare the revenues generated from the customs border points of West Nile, from Goli, Paidha, Awasi, Vurra, Lia, Odramacaku up to Salia Musala, the amount of money there can double the one we are getting from Malaba. I pray that these customs border points are linked so that we can generate more revenue. On top of that, these areas have security roads which can help us create peace here and also open up the DR Congo market. The distance from Koboko - Kuluba to Central Africa Republic is only 775 kilometres. That can open up market for people. The DR Congo market is about US $3 billion. Why do we go to China to borrow from –? (Member timed out.)12.55MS PAULINE KEMIREMBE (NRM, Woman Representative, Lyantonde): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the ministry for the releases to our districts under the Uganda Road Fund -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Not releases; they are proposed allocations.MS KEMIREMBE: Thank you. It has been good though in the last four quarters, there was a sharp decrease in the releases. We have a challenge; the Ministry of Works and Transport has been identifying some roads in our districts and working on them but this is done at a very high cost, compared to what Uganda Road Fund gives us. By introducing this Shs 1 billion to our districts, it will remove that double expenditure. If this money was not in our budgets, I was going to say that maybe this money - like in the case of Lyantonde, they would allocate us Shs 200 million to work on a 15-kilometre road, and yet they would allocate maybe Shs 300 million to work on the road coverage of 100 or 53 kilometres. Therefore, you see that there is a big gap compared to one kilometre being worked on. For example, when it comes to the district roads, you find that you are given about Shs 5 to 6 million and then the ministry roads are allocated above Shs 15 million.If this is done, then that double expenditure - even not having better roads - will be removed. This will enable us supervise our districts. However, there is that challenge in the ministry, where you allocate us a lot of funds and you do not let it  –(Member timed out.)12.57MR ANDREW OJOK (NRM, Omoro County, Omoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, you know that I have very good eyesight. For those of you who just came today, when we have been processing ministerial policy statements - and I know you - I am not picking any. We have been here since the other day. Yesterday, we left at 9:00 p.m. and some of you just came in today; I am not picking any of you. You can go for the caucus before the buses leave you. (Laughter)MR OJOK: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to thank the chairperson of the committee for the report. On 6 April 2023, the Prime Minister made the following statement; “The Gulu–Opit–Rackoko–Patongo–Abim-Moroto Road is a national road under the responsibility of UNRA and it is currently under maintenance.”Although the road was not listed under NDP III, it is a priority road, as stated by H.E. the President, in his pledges. As such, the road has been identified for development. Design for upgrading of this road is scheduled to commence in the next financial year. This Moroto Road has been talked about for so long and it connects over 60 per cent of Northern Uganda. Allow me to request that this is considered, as mentioned by the Prime Minister because it was not mentioned in the committee’s report. Thank you.8262Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS & BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FY 2023/202412.58MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and the committee for the good report. I am interested in knowing how much fuel is allocated to the tractors in the districts. How much is set aside for their maintenance? You can buy road units, but you do not provide the fuel to run these machines. Secondly, Kalungu, where I come from, is among the newly created districts. However, we have only one small tarmac road of one kilometre that goes to a certain Catholic Church built by an individual. I want to know whether you have put money aside for every new district that has no single tarmac. When shall we ever have tarmac in new districts? What is the interest of creating districts and we just have those roads with no single tarmac?Lastly, on the issue of Kampala, I do not know whether they have looked at Salaama Road. There are matters of litigation in KCCA where the IGG stopped contracts from proceeding. Have you looked at that? What is taking place? We need these roads maintained.On the Kampala-Entebbe Expressway, the contract was supposed to have lighting but there is none and as a result, a number of accidents occur along that road. Can we know whether something has been done regarding the challenges on that road? We need to have lights because people are getting killed all the time.On the issue of the new districts, we would like to get an update when we shall get at least one main tarmac road for a district. Buhweju is here –(Member timed out.) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We shall have the Member for Kiboga, Hon. Mayanja, Member for Soroti and Hon. Komakech. Colleagues who have not been here, why are you standing up? I will not pick you.1.00MS CHRISTINE KAAYA (NUP, Woman Representative, Kiboga): Thank you. Mr Speaker, I am the chairperson of the Uganda Parliamentarians Land Management Forum (UPLMF). My comments go to the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. They have presented the environment sector well having reported that they have cancelled over 12 land titles in protected areas. However, we need more money to help them cancel more of these land titles in the protected areas.Mr Speaker, we see a lot of money requested for, for the land information centre but we are not provided this information regularly and openly. As much as we would like the land information centre to have money, we would like the information to be shared publicly.On the issue of compensation rates, there are five districts whose compensation rates have been approved. We request that this ministry is provided with more money to help the districts undergoing compensation in the oil region that have been affected by the pipelines approve their compensation rates so they are able to help our people. I do not know what is happening because when it comes to the compensation of individuals, we tend to propose a reduction in the budget yet for institutions, we try to prioritise it.Mr Speaker, we request more money in the land –(Member timed out.)1.02MR ALLAN MAYANJA (NUP, Nakaseke Central County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concern is about the Shs 1 billion which has been allocated to each district. I propose that it is increased to Shs 2 billion because it will go to our constituencies, districts and municipalities.Secondly, Hon. Ssewungu talked about districts without a single tarmac road. I request that they are considered, like Nakaseke District, where 8263THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 20 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.President Museveni fought from. We have no tarmac road. Sincerely, it is shaming the NRM. These districts should be considered.The last concern is about KCCA. When you move around the city, most of the traffic lights do not work. The traffic lights on Kampala-Entebbe Expressway and Kampala Northern Bypass are not operational. Mr Speaker, the authority should be funded fully. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, as if in the 10th Parliament, we passed a loan for Nakaseke roads under ADB; what happened with that loan? 1.04MR JONATHAN EBWALU (Independent, Soroti West Division, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the directive that this projected Shs 1 billion should come under the Uganda Road Fund.Secondly -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It came out from the recommendation of the committee. I just emphasised it.MR EBWALU: Secondly, we have cities but it is embarrassing for the cities to keep borrowing graders from the neighbouring districts. Soroti City last year almost returned money because we had to wait for Soroti District to first grade its roads before we were given the equipment. Mr Speaker, I would like to urge this Parliament to support the Ministry of Works and Transport; we need graders, wheel loaders, rollers and dump trucks in the cities. Also, these cities need to be treated as special districts. Why am I saying this? Cities are still receiving the budget of the municipalities. For instance, Soroti Municipality had only 12 wards but when the city was created, they brought in additional 13 parishes yet the budget is for the municipality. I request Parliament to provide additional funding to the cities so that we have good roads. Thank you very much.1.06MR CHRISTOPHER KOMAKECH (Independent, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Basic science tells us that for any object to live, it should have the ability to move around. How that object moves around is upon us. We are human beings and we move around. It is, therefore, upon the Ministry of Works and Transport to ensure Ugandans who toil day and night move in a comfortable way.Speaking of the comfortable way of living, I come from Aruu County, Pader District but we have never seen an inch of a tarmac road. The President has always come there and pledged to us the Acholibur-Purang Road. This time round, when they were rehabilitating Corner Kamdini Road, they did all the works but stopped at Lira instead of proceeding to Acholibur-Purang. Can the minister tell us clearly when they are going to work on the road?Mr Speaker, Aruu has never had a Member of Parliament supporting the Government, I am the first and this should be on record.  (Laughter) Mr Speaker, protect me.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is an Independent Member –MR CHRISTOPHER KOMAKECH: Thank you very much. During the campaigns, I stated it categorically clear that we vote for the President so we can harvest something. Mr Speaker, Uganda Road Fund released a document on the 17th of April. That document indicates road maintenance indicative planning figures for 2023/2024 and new administrative  lower units but we are not included. I have Lunyiri Subcounty, Pukor Subcounty and Atanga Subcounty but all of them are not included. So, where are these human beings going to locomote from?1.08MS HANIFA NABUKEERA (NUP, Woman Representative, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the committee for the wonderful report. I would like 8264Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS & BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FY 2023/2024to emphasise the issue of land compensation in the Bukasa project. If we do not compensate these people, our project for the new port is going to stall. Secondly, I would like to talk about the court cases. Under the Uganda Land Commission, they were awarded Shs 500 million. Mr Speaker, there are many cases. Actually, over Shs 1 billion court awards. So, Shs 500 million is too little to be given to the Uganda Land Commission for compensation. I pray that the committee elevates that so that these people are awarded more costs. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, stop lobbying me. I know who has not been here. Last night, we left here past 9.00 p.m. So, there is no excuse one can give for not coming here – whether you are busy or not. The other day, we also left at the same time. So, I want to reward those who are hardworking. Hon. Eric Musana – Hon. Martin, please, take your seat. I did not call you. 1.09MR ERIC MUSANA (Independent, Buyaga East County, Kagadi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I commend the chairperson and the committee -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Wakayima was here on Monday - that is what he is telling me. (Laughter) So, you even come to lie. (Laughter) Hon. Wakayima, unfortunately, I was not here on Monday; so, colleagues and I did not see you.  (Laughter)MR MUSANA:  Mr Speaker, I have a serious concern to do with the Uganda Land Commission. We have a very big challenge, especially when it comes to the absentee landlords. Uganda Land Commission was largely put in place to make sure that the absentee landlords in Bunyoro Subregion, specifically, are paid off and the people can have the land. The biggest challenge now is that the commission is working at a very slow pace. I would like to request the minister that a substantial amount of money be given to Uganda Land Commission to pay off these absentee landlords so that the people can get their land, especially in Bunyoro. The second issue is about systematic land demarcation, where a lot of land titles were purchased by Uganda Land Commission, but the titles are lying idle in Uganda Land Commission. Can we provide enough funds for Uganda Land Commission so that people can have their own titles? (Interruption)MS STELLA APOLOT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is the Member proceeding well when we are discussing issues of roads –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Under what rule?MS STELLA APOLOT: We are on roads, but the Member is discussing land.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Please, honourable member for Ngora, I have forgiven you. This is a statement that has land and roads; so, it means you are not concentrating. So, kindly concentrate. Honourable member, conclude. MR MUSANA: Mr Speaker, I am concluding on the issue of systematic land demarcation. Honourable minister, I request that you provide enough funds for the many land titles that are lying idle in Uganda Land Commission. These titles are in Bunyoro. If we can have our own titles, that would be the best.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us have Hon. Amero and then Hon. Ayoo.1.12MS SUSAN AMERO (Independent, Woman Representative, Amuria): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. However, I am a little bit perturbed. This House appropriates money year in, year [Ms Nabukeera]8265THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 20 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.out to purchase land for the construction of the low-cost houses, yet we see nothing being done. We are even selling some of the land meant for the low-cost houses.  Regarding the land in Nakawa, we have not yet known how much money we got from it, but today we are asking for Shs 25 billion to buy land for the low-cost houses. I, therefore, propose that the Shs 25 billion that the committee is asking for be put in the Ministry of Works and Transport to work on the tourist roads so that we can be able to have good roads to take our tourists to our tourist destinations.  I beg to submit, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I would be a beneficiary. I do not have any Central Government road in my constituency. Hon. Ecweru confirmed it when he came – I am not talking about tarmac; I mean a Central Government road. I only survive - (Laughter) Let us have Hon. Ayoo, Hon. Kitanywa and, then Hon. Edakasi.1.14MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I start by thanking the committee for the good work. The chairperson of the committee talked of the requirement of Shs 30 billion for right of way for Bukasa Port. Unfortunately, I have checked in the report and found no figure provided. Therefore, I urge the chairman that when he comes back here, he moves a motion so that the figure is captured in the report for the Government to process it. Without that, we cannot handle it.Secondly, Mr Speaker, you have shown concern over the bad roads in Kampala Capital City Authority – with deep, dry or wet potholes. However, one big problem with Kampala Capital City Authority is that up to now, they do not have the roads committee, yet the law provides that it is the roads committee to receive complaints, prioritise and ensure that the roads are worked on. Therefore, I urge that, next time, if Kampala Capital City Authority does not put in place or constitute a roads committee, their funds should, first, be held. This is a question of order, organisation and proper management of resources to ensure that the roads are okay. Mr Speaker, we lose a number of people in road carnage. However, in this budget, only Shs 600 million has been provided for road safety. The committee is proposing an additional Shs 500 million, yet from the National Road Safety Policy, every year, they require about Shs 5 billion to ensure that they save lives. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Kitanywa – oh, sorry! MR AYOO: I am just concluding. We need to provide additional funds for road safety – maybe to a tune of Shs 2 billion. This is because while we talk about other things, we are losing people every day and that should be a bigger concern to this Parliament. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Sowedi – this is one of the MPs who have been here from 10.00 a.m. every day and I had not given him a chance to speak. 1.16MR SOWEDI KITANYWA (NRM, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. My first concern is about the delayed payment of contractors. In the past, if anyone had a contract with the Government, they would walk to a financial institution and be sure that they would get a loan. Today, if contractors who have contracts with the Government walk into a financial institution, looking for a loan, they are chased away. In the report, it has been indicated that the contractors have not been paid. Indeed, many contractors have even abandoned their contracts. Some of them have had their property taken by the banks because they had borrowed loans. I urge that for the contractors who have not been paid, money should be availed so that they are paid. Most of them are 8266Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS & BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FY 2023/2024local contractors. So, if we are building the capacity of our local contractors, yet we are not paying them, then, we are failing our own at the expense of the external contractors. My second concern is about the zonal offices for the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. I thank the ministry for the innovation of coming up with the zonal offices. These zonal offices have been helpful. Unfortunately, looking at the report, the funding for these zonal offices is still very little. I suggest –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us have Hon. Muzaale and Hon. Okwir – Procedure? MR ACON: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Unfortunately, I cannot remember the rule –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member. Take your seat if you cannot remember. Please. MR ACON: Let me proceed, Mr Speaker – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Acon, if I can remind you quickly – just take your seat as I remind you. Rule 78(4) says that the moment you stand up on a point of procedure, before anything, you must state the rule. The moment you forget it, then, there is no way I can proceed. The Hansard will look dirty in future. When you remember the rule, let me know. (Laughter) Hon. Muzaale?1.19MR MARTIN MUZAALE (NRM, Buzaaya County, Kamuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to emphasise the issue of arrears in UNRA. Many contractors have been affected and their businesses collapsed because of failure by the Government to pay them across board - not only in UNRA. It is a challenge that instead of the Government developing its own people, it is failing them. On the issue of national housing, when you are flying above Kampala, you will see slums everywhere. I do not know what is happening with our housing sector. Otherwise, every year, you see no change. Kampala is almost remaining the same with slums increasing. The Minister of Lands is proposing that the ministry should be given Shs 26 billion for rent. This as too much because this can enable the ministry to buy property that it can, at the end of the day, give to a small entity within the sector. Mr Speaker, I thank you. When you spoke about the potholes - the fatty ones, the wet ones –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I know where you are going –(Laughter)– conclude, Hon. Muzaale.MR MUZAALE: Mr Speaker, I am happy that KCCA has at least started on patching up the potholes. I just want to encourage the minister –(Interjection) – of course, by last night, I could see some people trying to do some work.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On Tuesday, we shall have a comprehensive statement. MR MUZAALE: Mr Speaker, I want to bring to you information from the public that people are very happy with what you talked about and what is being done right now. Thank you. 1.21MR SAMUEL OKWIR (NRM, Moroto County, Alebtong): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I join my colleagues in thanking the committee for this report. I have two issues: The first one is on the issue of the Shs 1 billion allocated to the districts for the road works. We should be very careful with the terminologies. If we say it is going for rehabilitation, then it will not go to the Uganda Road Fund. If we say it is going for road maintenance, then it will fit in the Uganda Road Fund Act. So, I appeal that [Mr Kitanywa]8267THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 20 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.we look at the terminologies we are using as we work on this documentation. Secondly, the Equal Opportunities Commission put at one per cent of the tarmac road, just like you said it is being done in your area. However, we had a meeting with the President together with the religious and political leaders from Lango and Acholi and he actually promised that at least he will build two roads in Lango; the one from Lira-Aloi-Otuke to Abim and the road from Namasale-Dokolo-Aloi-Ogul.I want to understand from the chairperson - and the minister is here - UNRA is saying they are not going to build any other new roads but the President made this pledge in front of the religious and political leaders and all the stakeholders in Lango. So, we have the provision because he said that before the end of this kisanja that at least these two roads would have been worked on. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. However, honourable  colleagues, if you say that the Shs 1 billion we have goes into rehabilitation, it cannot even do - our biggest problem is the maintenance of our small roads; that is all we have. When we are appropriating - at that stage where we have full power - we shall determine whether to send it under Uganda Road Fund for maintenance. Like in my area, tell me, what will you rehabilitate? Then, it will mean you have not given me anything in Mitooma because I do not have anything to rehabilitate. I need you to maintain our small poor roads. The moment you do that, you lift the burden off the shoulders of these MPs. So, I really thank you, honourable minister and the President, for committing and ensuring that you delivered on this. Our role is to do a follow-up. Honourable colleagues, what this means is that you must ensure you attend your road committee meetings in the districts because you are part of the road committee. If it is not there, ensure that there is a road committee. Otherwise, that money will also be misused; it will be diverted to allowances - you know how they do reallocation among priorities of the districts - and it will be lost. 1.25MR ALFRED EDAKASI (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me also thank you, on behalf of the people of Kaberamaido, for they will always remember this Parliament for that Shs 1 billion. We have been receiving less than Shs 160 million a year yet we have over 360 kilometres - now you do the math. Therefore, I thank you and this House very much for that.Secondly, I would like to ask the minister - I have been worried by the statistics I have seen that we daily accumulate Shs 227 million on contractors - the money we are not paying. Ever since we started sitting here, we have probably accumulated, per hour, Shs 9.4 million. I want to know; what is happening? Why is Government not able to find money to pay these contractors? Even tomorrow, it will be more.Related to that, honourable minister, Kaberamaido has waited for the construction of Katine-Ochero Road. This House passed a loan through the Islamic Bank. The financial year is coming to an end - and I am worried that out of these same debts, maybe we will not have that road constructed. Please, help me clarify. Finally, on the issue of the Land Information Systems, out of 10 people who are in jail in Kaberamaido, nearly five of them are there due to land disputes. My appeal is: Let us find money for this commission to improve the information for the land system. UNRA and the Uganda Land Commission will agree with me that there are thousands of people whose land titles have been lying up to now. They do not know the status of their land titles yet – (Member timed out.)8268Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS & BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FY 2023/20241.27MS JOV ANICE TWINOBUSINGYE  (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues to thank the chairperson and the committee, for the good report. I want to comment on the Shs 1 billion: I want to appreciate you and all Members of this august House for granting the Shs 1 billion that is directly going to our districts. This is mainly meant for our district roads - not the central ones - and that will help us very much. It will not solve everything but we are going to be relieved, as community leaders or as Members of Parliament. Secondly, the committee recommended that Shs 27 billion be availed for the acquisition of road equipment. I commend them for that because maybe when we procure the equipment, it will help solve the problem of UNRA roads in our districts. Mr Speaker, allow me to mention three central government roads in my area that are in bad shape: There is Rushere-Kinoni Road, Nyakasharara-Kyikasi Road and Kashwa-Kashongi-Ruhumba Road; they are all in bad shape. Also, allow me to interest the minister in, particularly, the Kashwa-Kashongi-Ruhumba Road that has been pending tarmacking. That road has been left there for the last three years without being maintained at all. I request that the minister takes interest in it. Thank you.  1.29MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you Mr Speaker. I just have two issues: The first one was on the land compensation. I think the report talked about Shs 73 billion to be given for land compensation. My question is: Does the ministry have a comprehensive plan of which places must be compensated nationally? This is because we have had this for the last 20 years. We started with the Compensation Fund of about Shs 3 billion. Is this Shs 73 billion only supposed to be in one region? Or are we going to comprehensively look at the whole country, where we need to compensate the absentee landlords?The Kampala roads are bad, but the issue of quality control is very serious, as long as KCCA makes the roads. Concerning the quality of roads; after two or three weeks, you find the whole thing giving way. Why don’t we have people in charge of quality control to ensure that before a road is commissioned, something must be done? That is the reason why we are spending much but the quality and materials used are the ones letting us down. I thank you. 1.30MR PATRICK BINGI (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I add my voice to thank the committee and the members for the report. I want to interest myself in the recommendation of strengthening the Office of the Chief Government Valuer. Since we are talking about money, it is important that we look at revenue and preventing all leakages. Looking at the report, the committee observed that only Shs 1 billion has been allocated out of what was requested for - Shs 12 billion. In my view, it is very possible that we avail the Shs 6 billion as per the committee recommendation because what are we bound to lose if we get wrong valuations is much more than the Shs 6 billion. I implore the ministry to accept and avail the Shs 6 billion. Lastly, I also want to talk about delayed payments to contractors. There are arrears of Shs 453 billion to UNRA - In my constituency of Butemba in Kyankwanzi, we only have a few kilometres of UNRA roads, but unfortunately, these roads are very bad; the road from Bukwiri to Byerima, Kyenda to Byerima and even the famous Bukwiri–NALI Road. These roads are impassable. In my view, if UNRA is funded – (Member timed out.) 1.32MS MOURINE OSORU (NRM, Woman Representative, Arua City): Thank you Mr Speaker., By principle, we all agree that our 8269THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 20 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.roads are doing badly and the road sector needs serious funding. However, I have concerns and I need the committee to capture them. There are those roads in West Nile that have been earmarked by donors. For instance, we have Koboko–Yumbe–Moyo Road of about 105 kilometers. The World Bank is willing and has been waiting for the Government to clear the compensation process but the procurement has taken forever. There is also the Manibe–Terego–Yumbe Road; the feasibility study and the design has taken more than 10 years. You wonder what is happening and yet we have donors who are willing to come in to tarmac our roads; I just need clarity on this. Thank you. 1.33 MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke East County, Otuke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a few burning issues. Honourable colleagues, you know that in our country when they realise that development is coming up, those near the roads begin constructing or planting trees. I would like UNRA to ensure that we put a road reserve. This is one of the key things that this country has forgotten. For example, a couple of months back in Lango or Otuke, the Chinese went to survey roads in order to construct the proposed road from Lira; Alebtong-Otuke-Kotido. The community members started planting trees close to the road so that they could be compensated. In this country, we are losing a lot of money in compensating people during road construction. This is one of the key things I really wanted to raise. 1.34MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Sometime back, Hon. Sarah Opendi brought a motion here and we asked our Committee on Physical Infrastructure to investigate the Streamlining Management of Motor Vehicle Registration Project. I think this was around the 30th of November. Since then, the report has not come to the House. Now, they are recommending that Shs 72.6 billion be given in respect to that project, and yet we do not know its status.  I pray that this House stands over this committee recommendation of an additional Shs 72.6 billion, until that report is brought to this House. We have been told that that company actually does not exist.Secondly, hearing that UNRA is not entering into any new contractual obligations without payment of the contractors is worrying. We have heard the Prime Minister here before assuring some districts that their roads are a priority. What are priorities without funds? Why don’t you be clear and tell us that you have no funds, instead of exciting people? (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will just allow two more minutes for the acting Leader of the Opposition. MR MWIJUKYE: Thank you. Why do you excite communities? Mr Speaker, remember you were in Buhweju and the issue of the Buhweju roads was brought to your attention. You made some commitments and did your work. There was also a Cabinet meeting where the President said that the Buhweju and the Ngora roads are priorities, but the money is not there. I do not know how you define the word “priorities”. Sometime back, we censured a minister, but she is still in office. I do not recognise that minister, since I voted for her censure.  How do I pass money to the ministry to a person I do not recognise? We have not even had any communication from the Executive. I am at loss, Mr Speaker. I need guidance on passing money to the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, when there is somebody there that was censured.8270Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS & BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FY 2023/2024I have just been looking at the committee report which is signed by only seven members. Yesterday, we said if a report is signed by seven members, including those in the minority report, it is okay. However, these are just seven members and there is no minority report. all the NRM Members of Parliament refused to sign it –(Interjection)– yes, I have it. You can check your copies.  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What about the chairperson and the vice chairperson? MR MWIJUKYE: Apart from the chairperson and vice chairperson, all the other members - I talked about the members of the committee – (Interjection) – I will call you to give information but - (Interruption)MS CECILIA OGWAL: Leader of the Opposition, I would like to give you information that the majority of NRM, except the chairperson and the vice-chairperson who signed; the rest did not sign. More important, FDC, UPC, NUP and the Independents signed. There is a problem somewhere. Can we be told why?Secondly, on the tarmac roads in Uganda, can we, as a matter of fairness know how many are tarmacked in the north, east, central and west? We need to know because this is about sharing the national cake.Mr Speaker, you come from the west, and I know you are crying because your constituency does not have a tarmac road. Can we know how many kilometers of tarmac roads are in the west, central, east, and north? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Instead of giving information, our senior has asked more questions. Please, conclude.MR MWIJUKYE: It is very difficult to deny her information given her age and experience.My question to the minister and the chairperson is: Why should we give money when the report is not yet out? On that, I request Parliament to stamp its foot down and not provide money for a company whose existence we do not know. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I remember when I was the Government Chief Whip; I appointed most of the members on this committee and this is one of the most sought-after committee people fought for. My advice to the Government Chief Whip is that Members who did not sign the report without an explanation and have not brought a minority report should be dropped. (Applause)Yesterday, I talked to the Government Chief Whip and we discussed something. Also, as a leadership, we are going to take this up. If a Member of Parliament cannot sign a report, it means the Member does not attend committee meetings. The chairpersons are struggling yet you want to come and disturb them from here. We are going to start telling your constituents.I think we should begin to release information; buy space in the media and show Members’ attendance - say like, out of 100 meetings, a Member only attended two meetings. We might be forced to reach that level. Why aren’t you attending committee meetings? Yet, you are accusing ministers of not attending. It is a really big shame. I had not looked at this but I am going to discuss it with the Government Chief Whip. We discussed it yesterday evening and I have another meeting with him.Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Members who refuse to sign committee reports without producing alternative reports, means they do not attend House business. I am going to analyse all of this. Honourable colleagues - I do not have much time, please. On the issue of not giving money to the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, honourable colleagues, we will give them money; it must be appropriated.[Mr Mwijukye]8271THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 20 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.Honourable colleagues, sometimes people take advantage of a gap in the law. Article 118(2) of the Constitution says, “Upon a vote of censure being passed against a Minister, the President shall, unless the Minister resigns his or her office, take appropriate action in the matter.” It does not give a timeline and define the action. The best I can do is to cross-check with the Executive whether they took any action on the matter. Otherwise, we wrote and submitted the resolution of this House. The gap is in the law. Honourable colleagues, I request that we appropriate money since we have other ministers. We shall appropriate for the one called the “good one”. Hon. Nabakooba, you are considered the good one. (Laughter) Honourable chairperson, you will conclude. Do not mind; I am going to give you space. MS NALUYIMA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Isn’t it procedurally right for the minister or the chairperson to come back to respond and give us the way forward on the Kampala-Entebbe Expressway lighting and security features since its money is entirely outlined? And, the contract shows they should take care of the lighting on that road. Today, Wakiso people are experiencing insecurity due to that development. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I can see how you have passed from the kitchen to the main room. He has taken note and he will answer. Honourable minister, answer that quickly. Let us use two minutes each.1.45THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, the budget we are discussing is going to put a lot of emphasis on maintenance. It is not entirely true, like UNRA says, that there will not be completely 100 per cent new projects coming on board. That is the business of the Executive. The Executive will work with Parliament to identify some very exceptional cases and bring them on board. The emphasis on the resources we are giving is for maintenance.Let me just cite one case: There has a concern by my colleague on the road from Luwero-Kiwoko-Butalangu-Nakaseke. I am happy to report to this House that a contract has already been signed. What is waiting as the final stage is for the Solicitor-General to append his signature. Very soon, my senior or myself, or even a person more senior than all of us will be coming to do the groundbreaking. Mr Speaker, at one point here, my senior colleague presented a general overview of the road situation that was asked by Imat, Hon. Cecilia Atim Ogwal. If this House does not mind, we will again come back here and indicate the number of kilometres, the breakdown per region and what needs to be done. We will be very happy to do that. As far as equipment for the new districts is concerned, you gave some resources here but those resources were not adequate. This is why we are asking for Shs 27 billion. With the calculation that has been done by the technical people, if we received Shs 27 billion, that would enable us to tackle the 16 new districts. Mr Speaker, as you correctly said, the mind of this Parliament met very well with that of His Excellency the President, particularly on the Shs 1 billion per district. I am not the spokesperson of the Cabinet but since it is public information - His Excellency the President directed the Cabinet and said, “You are discussing this, but before you proceed, make sure there will be Shs 1 billion per district in this coming budget.” (Applause) When His Excellency made that directive, the rest of us had to just salute and say permission to carry on has been granted and that is what we precisely did. Mr Speaker, we would like to thank you and Members for the meeting of minds on this very critical subject. On what needs to be done, we have not looked at the nitty-gritty on how to channel the money to the districts. But this House seems to guide and suggest that it should go through the Uganda Road Fund so that there 8272Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS & BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FY 2023/2024is a structure and that is a matter that we do not –(Interjection) -  I have only one minute –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You do not have the luxury of time, honourable minister. Conclude.MR ECWERU: Mr Speaker, first of all, the road sector is very critical. I get embarrassed when I pass through the city and see these potholes with the water and some dry. We are going to work on the potholes.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. That is enough.MR ECWERU: Thank you.4.49THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Judith Nabakooba):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. Our issues have been ably captured by the committee. Mr Speaker, I have two things to emphasise: As a ministry, we need money to do our work. We are underfunded – that is what I can say. We cannot do compensation. Litigation is a problem. Even the functioning of our offices is a problem. So, we need money.Evictions? Once compensation money is provided, we shall be in position to handle the evictions and also pay off the landlords. Mr Speaker, as we speak now, we have landlords who decided to give us their land in 2014, but up to now, we have not concluded the payment for those pieces of land. Even subdivisions are very difficult because of lack of finances. If the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development could give us money, we would be good to go and energised to do the work and serve you.One issue that was not talked about is the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development (USMID). It is winding up in December this year. We had Shs 80 billion which was supposed to be given under this project. However, as we speak now, in the budget, there is only Shs 30 billion. So, we are asking that, if it is possible, let the Shs 50 billion be allocated to USMID so that they can conclude the project by December 2023 because we are told that there will be no extension of this project. Remember, this is a project that is helping our cities and municipalities as far as developing the infrastructure is concerned. Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. For KCCA, we are together on Tuesday, but you can have a minute if you want to say something.  1.51THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AND METROPOLITAN AFFAIRS (Mr Kyofatogabye Kabuye): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. The only information I can provide is that Salaama Road is not under any investigation; it has been cleared. As I speak, the contractor is in what we call “the mobilisation period and utility relocations”. On the roads committee, I wrote to Members of Parliament from Kampala, KCCA and the district at large. We are meeting on the 27th. My request, through you, is for the Members to come and we sit because every time I have issues on the road, only three Members turn up; Members for Kampala Central, Rubaga South and Nakawa East; the rest feel like they do not want to talk to some of us.I always select a neutral place. Even this time, I have decided not to be in our offices, but in a hotel. So, I request that you use your voice to direct those Members to come and we sort out the issue of the roads committee. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you should not have roads committee meetings in a hotel. Go to KCCA; there are [Mr Ecweru]8273THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 20 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.rooms there. Next time you call a meeting, give me – whether it is a blind copy; we shall work with LOP and he will ensure that his Members attend. We, sometimes, work that way when we have challenges. Thank you.MR KYOFATOGABYE: I welcome the idea.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, do you have anything to add?MR DA VID KARUBANGA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank you for allowing us to present this report. I also thank the Members who have given different views and requests; we have noted them.However, Mr Speaker, we would like the minister to bring the status report for all projects being undertaken – the status, the funding gaps and other challenges.I would like to respond to the LOP on the issue of the Shs 72 billion. The function of motor vehicle registration is under the Ministry of Works and Transport, although Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) has been undertaking that role. Now, the function has been withdrawn from URA. They are building a one-stop centre and the project is about Shs 55 billion – that is the construction cost alone. This streamlining of motor vehicle registration figure is not for the intelligent management system; it is for Ministry of Works and Transport to undertake the vehicle registration. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, I need the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, on Monday – I think you can do it in two groups because we expect a statement from the Minister for KCCA on the potholes.I need you to do a spot check of the affected areas so that you bring information and I compare with what the minister tells the House. We are now on programme-based budgeting; so, this budget is processed by this committee. Honourable minister, give cooperation to the honourable colleagues. Hon. Karubanga and your team, I will need that report on Tuesday – the facts you will have found on ground, as our own committee. Do that on Monday and, then, on Tuesday, we shall have the reports. I want us to debate this issue and see where the problem is. I want us, as Parliament, to play our role of ensuring that money is provided. Then, if you have issues of accountability, they, again, will end up here. It is a big shame; we do not want excuses of saying we do not have money. Even if you are to blame management, if management has no money, what will you do? We want to give you capacity and after, we shall see a way of engaging the Committee on Budget and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to ensure that KCCA is very well-facilitated on the matter. Honourable colleagues, I put the question that the report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the budget estimates and the ministerial policy statements for the Ministry of Works and Transport and Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development for Financial Year 2023/2024 be adopted. (Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The report is referred to the Committee on Budget for harmonisation, consolidation and they will report back here. Honourable colleagues, our Muslim brothers and sisters have gone through a very important month; they are coming towards the last days. You know they say the most important days are the last 19 days – and in Ramadan, this is one of the five pillars of Islam and a very critical pillar in Islam, where they care about their neighbours; they are very compassionate. So, this is the time – if you have a problem – to 8274Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS & BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FY 2023/2024befriend a Muslim brother or sister. They will help you. (Laughter) Some of us have tried to read a bit about it and how one can benefit from it. It cuts across religions and we get very valuable lessons from our Muslim brothers and sisters, especially during this month. So, we wish you a very happy Ramadan and Eid, honourable colleagues.House adjourned to Tuesday, at 2.00 p.m. (The House rose at 1.59 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 25 April 2023, at 2.00 p.m.) [The Deputy Speaker]N'1D.r*anDdtehfi:*LIBRARYOffice of the Clerk to ParliamentParliamentary BuildingKampalaUgandaI g APR i.trRE'.,;i'8ox 71t -l,)REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ONEDUCATION AT{D SPORTS ON THE MINISTERIALPOLICY STATEMENTAND BUDGEI TSTIMA?ES FOR THE EDUCATION ANDSPORTS SECTORFOR THE FITIANCIAL YEAR 2o.2i3124,Eh+*a-^-nt'oApril, 2O23LIST OF ACROI{YMS AND ABBR"EVTATIOITSAfrican Developmcnt BankApproprration in AidAcadcmic YearBusiness, Tcchnrcal, and Vocational Education and TrainingDirectoratc of lndustrial TrainingEducatron Management Information SystcmEducation Service CommissionFrnancial YcarGovcrnmcnt of UgandaHrgher Education Students' Frnancing BoardHrgher Educatron Scicncc and TechnologyInformatlon Communication TechnoloryLower Secondary CurriculumKampala Capital City AuthontyMakercrc UnivcrsityMtnistnes Departments and AgenciesMinistry of Education and SportsMinistry of Finance, Planning and Economic DevelopmentMakcrere University Business SchoolNational Asscssmcnt of Progrcss in EducationADBAIAAYBTVETDITEMISESCFYGoUHESFBHESTICTLSCKCCAMAKMDAsMOESMoFPEDMUBSNAPENBFPNCDCNCHENDPNCONTRPIPSNE+,National Budget Framework PaperNational Curriculum Development CenterNational Councrl for Higler EducationNational Development PlanNon-Govcrnmental OrganizationNon -Tax RcvcnucPublic Investment PlanSpecial Needs Education#+IUMIUNATUUNEBUNESCOUPEUPPETUPOLETUSEUVQFWBUganda Management InstituteUganda National Association of Teachers' UnionsUga.nda National Examinations BoardUnlted Nations Educational, Scientific andOr8anlzatronUniversal Pnmary EducationUniversal Post Prlmary Educatron and TrainrngUniversal Post O-kvel Education and TrainingUniversal Secondary EducationCulturalUganda Vocational QualWorld Bankifications Framework,#WM/lt1.O INTRODUCTIONln consonance with Articles 90 and 155(41 of the Constitution of the Repubhc oflJganda 1995 (as amendcd), Sectron 12(l), 13(13,14,15) of che Public FinanceManagemcnt Act, 2015 and Rules 146, l4?, 148 and 149 of the Rules ofProccdurc of Parhament. thc Sub-Programme on Education, Sports and Skrlls tsmandated nmong othcrs;i. Examine and commcnt on policy matters allecting Ministries,Departmcnts and Agencies (MDAsl undcr its purview; andii. Examrne critrcally Government recurrcnt and capital budgct estimatesand makc rccommendations on them.The Committce, ln fullillment of its mandate hereby presents this report for yourconsideratron and adoption rn respect to the pohcy statcmcnts and budgetaryestima(es for the Financial Ycat 2023/24 for the following (20) Votes.VOTE:VOTE.VOTE:VOTE.VO'TE:VOTE:VOTE:VOTE.VOTE:VOTE:VOTE:VOTE:VOTE:VOTE:VOTE:VOTE:VOTE:VOTE:VOTE:ot3lltr28132t@16516630130230330430530630?308309310312313Mrnistry of Edtrcatron and SportsNational Curriculum Development CcnterUganda Natronal Examrnations BoardFllucation Servicc CommrssionNational Council for Higher EducationUganda Busmess and Tcchnical Examinations BoardNational Councrl of SportsMa.kerere UnivcrsityMbarara Unrversrty of Science and TechnologtMakerere Unrverslty Business SchoolI(yambogo Universrl.yBusitema UnrversityMuni UnrversrtyKabalc UniversrtySoroti UnivcrsrtyGulu UniversityLira UnrversrtyUganda Managcment lnstitutcMountains of the MoonN3,!Y)VOTE: 612 [ocal Governments and Vote 122 KCCA2.O UEf,HODOLOOYIn compiling thie report, thc Committee revicwed and analyzed the followingdocuments:a) The Ministerial Policy Statement of the Ministry of Education and Sportsand the Votes under its purvrcw for the FY 2023124b) The National Budget Framework Paper (NBFP) 2023124 - 2027 /28;cl Report of the Auditor General ending June 2022.d) Annual Budget Performance Report for FY2O2I 122.e) Semi-Anntral Budget Performance Report FY2O22/23.f) The Supplementary Rcqucsts (Schcdulc ll FY 21022123g) Altcrnative Mrnistcrial Policy Statcmcnt from thc Oppositron on Education,Sporta and Skrlls Sub-Programmc.h) the National Development Plan (NDP) Ill.i) Uganda Vision 2O4O.Thrs report presents the Committee's assessment of the Sub-Programmc HalfYear Performan ce for F(2O22/23, Drafir Estrmates for l\2023124 and Pohcypnorities and rccommendations for the EducaLion, Sports and Skrlls Sutl-Programmc as notcd from thc Ministcrial Policy Statcmcnt tablcd for FY2O23l24 .3.O OENDER AttD EQUITY COUPLIAIICEThc overall gender and equity certihcation issued by the Equal Opportrrnitics forthe FY 2023/ 24 annual budget was rated ^t 670/0 which is an improvement from65.2o/o n Ft2O22123.The MoES improvcd from 73.1o/o to 84ol0, however, thcrc is a sharp decline notedin thc pcrformancc of the Unrvcrsitres in regards to matnstrcaming Gender andEquity in thcir budget for FY2O23 / 24M+wWI4Teblc 1: E(OC a.8crlmcat of Votca undcr thc Educetion, SLitli.nd SPottsSub ac for Gcadcr endulRc.nrlvcne;r fY 2(x1324.Votc l{rttrc i 2ot7l la 2Or9lm20frlrLVot. O13. MOE8 ?avaVotc 310- Llrr Uolec.ilt,votc 3o2. rf,h...r. Uniucrrlttvotc 312- Uarndr Mla{la.attnrtltutc61.646/o 55%votc 306- liuri uni?.riitt67.7Oo/ovot. 12i- Utrrdr lfrtloadErrE laatioar BolrdVotc I I l- Ilrtlond eurlculuEDceclopECat CaatcrVotc 3O5- Butltc.n Unlect ltyvotc 3O/a- KrrDho3o unlucr.lt,votc 3O9- Guhr ualv.6lt,VotG 3O3- Xrka.G.c unit .nittBurln.aa Ochool5eh 63.7@/o 526/ovot 3O7- xrbrlc Unlvcr.ltyVotc 30l- rlcrcr. Unle.trltf5ovoVotG 132- Educ.tioa &.elc.comlDl. oas5%?7q"65%sourcc: EC)C araaaaanaat Jor,oi|2123 ,427124? 3 16/.a4,k76 35'/o52.A76.35% s2",663.7O9o660/o600k6t%6lo/a63.20f}iosg06?9 62'%59 82/o155%aooh?aoh 7eh75v6 ?5.4tr/o 76h 339(, 640A6?6t.40t% 6t% ? toh 57V.,62-400/o 696/a 50,%.1q%?ot%549,m2u228t./o20r8/ 19400h719.640hao ttr/o??.IoPA39.4Wo69 406472%7orh53%500/654'/o58./o?ooa?0P4,64'%54'%6?Vos8%ss%7oqb720A79Vo603@h6? .7e/"?5 ?Ut62.4@/os2:%6AdA56oto55%A?o1,.?eh69.h68 95% 68o/o760 ?a.aovo 68% 620/,tSl0/6 ?q% 12g|30"630/0 629.59pn 69%640A420/"65 40Vo 6753,406 6?o/o6ro/,, 60.6o/oI64 2@o62.24|66A.4So/"VotG 3Ol. Soroti Urit E..ity6t/" 60,%GA ara ovo o off/o fftlovotc 165- USrLdr Brdnct. radTcchaicrl E .rrainrtlon Boaad629.votc 164- I{.tioanl cou.cll lor HithcrEducrtloaoh Wo oE"Votc 166. lt.tioml Councll of Spottre/" e/" ov!o oo9,r,o o0%,585?ah62/"5a% 55064.% 6? At Grria.,\sGt6 5.39%s66.1%54.O CONAIATENCE OF SI'B.PROGRT.UME OBJECTIVES WITH NDP IIIThe NDP tII whrch rs rn the fourth year of lmplementation has an overall goal ofrncreasing houschold incomcs and improvrng (he quahty of life of Ugandans".Hencc thc themc "sustain able industialization for inclusiue growth, emplogmentand wealth creatton."As a result of the programmatic dpproach to budgeting, the NDP lll as a planntngtool for the country for thc next five years is anchorcd on 20 programmcs. TheEducation and Sports sub programme is under the Human Capital DevelopmentProgramme as programme head together with Health, Cendcr and Water sectorsand under the Digital TYansformation Programme majorly in regards todeveloping and trarning the right human resources objective 4 under theprogramme which focuscs on cnhancing productivity and social wellbeing of thepopulation.HCDP also contributes to NDP IIt objectrves I enhancement of valueaddition for growt h and 2 which is strengthening private sector capacity to drivcgrowth and create jobs.4.1 aa&tc of thc Educetloa, Sportr ead Sldllr Sub-ProgrrrDIncThc Education, Sports and Skrlls Sub-Programme rs mandatcd to;a) Improve equitable access to relevant and qualrty Education and Training,bl Ensure delivcry of relcvant and quality Education and Trarnrng:cl Enhance e{Iiciency and cffectivcncss of Education and Sports servrcedehvery at all levels.4.2 Thc Objccttvc! of thc ECDP Progrrmmc .tc to:a) To improve the foundations for human caprtal development;bl To produce appropriate knowledgeable, skilled, and ethical lab<lurforce (with strong emphasis on science and technology, TVET andSportsl;cl To streamline STEI/STEM in the education system;d| To improve population health, safety and management;el To reduce vulnerabililr and gender inequality along the lifecycle; andI) To promote sports, recr€auon, and physical education.4.3 To echlevc thcrc, thc Mili.try hes rct thc following kcy obJcctlvce;(al Ensunng unrvcrsal and equitablc acccss to quahty basrc cducation for allthe children rn Uganda;(bl lmproving thc quality of educatron at all levels in t]rc country;(cl Ensuring equal access by gender,district and sial nccds at alllevels ofeducationi and'r(IX+#+W\\l\$tt6(dl Building capacity <lf districts by hclping education managers acqutre andimprove on thcir knowlcdge, skills and attttudes to bc ablc to plan, monitor,account and perf<rrm managenal functions.Table 2: The kcy rcrults undct thc Educetlon, 6Port. end SkillrDcvclopment Sub-ProgrernnG to bc echlcvcd ovor thc next frvc yclraatc:teblc 1:Rc.ult ArcrtBr.clhcfllL?tLa 202321 2O24l2Alncrcasc quahty adjuat€d yeara ofschooh 4S 6 7lncreasc avcrage years ofachoo 6.1 8 9.5ulncreascd proportton of labourforce transltroning into deccntcmcnt nt 34.5 t9Insrc.asa pcrccntate of emPloyerssatlsficd wlth tralntnt provldcdTVL"I' rnititutions (%t 40 65Incrcase ratro of sTEl/STEMuaics to Humanttlcs 2Slmprovc Uganda's ranktng tnNrche sports (ltootball, Athlctrc6.Netba.ll. Boxin Ru('tc.FootballNctballAthlctrcaRusbLgatrto: I(DD z, 2O2Ot2r -2O21Asl84.3 Thatcy tnplcncntatlon rcfo"n. rcqulrGd to fully lmplcmcnt thlrprogremnG end redlzc GrPGctGd SOab ln thc ncr(t fivc ycarr:Fast-track the legal and policy reforms required forcurriculum synchronization and implementation as well asassessment/examination acrosa the entire educationsystem. thts ls olng,oT.rg and. tw sub-progtaar.me icntaking progress.Introduce a minimum of one year of compulsory TVET trainingimmediately after A'levcl beforc enrolling for furthcreducation to bc dclivered through a compulsory NationalService programme framework. ?hls Pollcg l, get to b.knplcmentcd.Establish and implement a National Central AdmissionSystem for hrgher education and link higher cducatiot:2or2oI 2@22t 2UrL225 5.3 463557.336 35683540583.5I3.S?4t??6443:55752.6 48.43:57796t666IE9724?o46i 415 4K *p {, ,w$,s7admissions and financing to thc critical skill needs identilicdin the Plan. ?hts Policg is get to be lmplcnre,^tcdLink allocatiorr of scholarships and loan financing to criticalskill needs identifred in the plan. thls Pollcg lc parclg bclnglmplemelntcd.-Put in place a mechanism that provides opportunities forshort working visits to the country's highly speciali-edprofessionals abroad to address the acute stafflng needs.This Pollcg t get to be lmplera.e ted.Establish regional sports-focused schools/ sports academies tosupport early talent identification and development, and thetraining of requisite human resources for the sports sub-sector.thls Pollcg hrra ^ot gct bcc lmplcmcntcd due to tzlrtdlagchallcagcs.llort of thc Policy lntcnrcntlone erc crltical to thc Educatioa and, Spottrend Stlllr eub-progrannrc horcver, thcy hevc aot bccn edequetcly fundcd.4.4 Budgct Stntct5T lot FlI'i2O23124l Kcy Stretcgic Scctor IntcnrcntioanUn&r Educatlon ud Sporte.The Budgct Strategy for the Economy n FY2O23|24 is the same as that of theprevious year; 'Frrlt /fionat:lzatlon of tlu Ugaadan Eco ollrrg thrl,ughlnrlohnment ol Rural frourr,holdc lnto comnerclal Agtlcltltrlre,Iadustrlallzatlon and arlcct ccccgg.'And this is to bc achicved through the20 programmes as highlighted rn the NDP IlI.The Education Sub-Progra-rrrrne will focus on thc following arcaswhich are guiding the planning and budgeting proccss for FY2023/2024:i. Developmcnt of a complete Nati<lnal VocationalQtrali frcations Frameworkii. Promotion of Scicnce, Technologl, Engineering, andMathematics (STIIM/STEI) in Education, Research, andincubation to transform it into goods and scrwices fornational growth and socletal well-berng.iii. Enhancing tl.e capacrty of the Skilling institutions to copewith thc growing dcmands of thc world of workiv. Improved data managcment and evidence-based planningat-#ME5*an upgrade of EMIS to include tracking enrolment, drop-out, and retcntion, and uniquely identifying learners,teachers, and institutionslncreascd uptake of thc digitalization strates, in theprogramme through roll-out and maintenance of systcmssuch as Tcacher Effectrveness and Learners' Achievementssystcm (TELAI, E,- inspection, Tcacher Managemcntlnformation S.vstem (TMISI, and E-learningImproving the overall staffmg lcvel rn the Education sub- vl.vll.PrograrnmeInfrastructure developmcnt and equipmcnt fmedrca]schools to meet intcrnational accrcditation.ovt ilr!:.95.O BUDGET PERF\ORIf,AITCE F'OR HALF YEAR W 20,22123.5.I THE IIUMAN CAPITAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME HAI,F YEARBUDGEtr PERFORIAITCE FOR THE FY 20!2123,Trblc 3: Thc llunaa caplt.l DcvclopnGnt PtoSr.mma Hrlf Yclr BudgctPcrtora.lncc Inclurlec of A,rcer. fot t12O22123 tn (USh! BnlSorrc3r 83nta larwl ,vdget Pcttona,anc. R.porl ?f 2O22f23.As shown in the Table 3 above, the overall approved budget for the f.ll 20122123under the Human Capital Development Programme amounled to USht 9,115.24Bn (Inclusive of Arrcars) out of which USh! 4,384.648n(48. f 9%l was rclcasedand UShr 3,43?.47B.n l7&.&ohl cxpended by 3Oo' December,2022.The breakdown of the release of USh.. 4,384.64Ba under Lhe Human CaPita-tDevelopment Programme ie as follows; UEhe 1,758.O184 (S1.92%l catered forWagc, UShr. I,O"3.8584 (45.62%l for Non-Wage, UShr.229.78Bn (2O.39%l forGoU Development and UShr lr29?.368n (58.3?7ol was for external financingrespectively. The absorphon rates for the recurrent and developmcntcompon€nts were at 94.14o/o and 49. I Oolo respcctively. Thts was on account ofL}J.e 97 .O4o/o and 72.839o release performarrce on Wagc and GoU componcnts.Funds for Arrears was released aL 99.78 percent (USh25.6aBnf out of anapproved budget of Uah25.?Oba, however, only (UBh 2l.ESBnf was spent, hencerepresenting an (85.21old absorption rate.,6.21 I?t.&h"4'tar.td,il..lt\ ';"r- ' 1" "' IArDm{.DrdasnEto}l.l2;3,.;Iti.r..8" ,oilaa Dcc: i' .-,r,.gt,r..tF!t ryllri'D.G* auda tnal.araata alrtltaD.!t,4LL....tl.!tWage 3.365 87 1,758 Ol 1.705.9r) 5t 92 so 39 97 04Non-Wagc 2.39 08 I,073 85 e.ie se I45-6_2 40 78 89 3994.1472 83Totd Rccu.rcntOoU DevtS,?39.9.t 2,t3r.t5 2.663.17 i49.3420.3946.4414.E5 l,l27.lo__229.78I ,29? 36167.36Ext Frn Dcvt 2,222 49 582.40 58 3745.5926 20 44 89lotd t ct .i a,gre.co t,s2?.14"19.2622.* 49.1O7i.36 Totd Rco+lrct t 9.Ot9.44Arrcarr 25.?0/ti339.m 3t.lls.62 4?.9699 ?A37.S485 O.1 25,64 2r.85totrl BDdrct 9.115.24 .1.344.6.1 3,.13?.4?3A3r.aat.toaa.lol?.', LGnld totrl 9.1r5.24 4,3a4.6/] 37."t 7Q39o.oo At 000 o.o0 0.00 000 o.oo!otrlroda*E3tuabalrrrraVot9.OtO.ta a3!eIr 3./t16.52 1A,96 .3?ta ,r.1*+b10Tablc 4: Sub-Progremae - Fineacial Perforrnaacc ae Pct Votcr forFY2AZ2|2S rt Hrlf Yc.r. UShr Bn.ott {toEstt1. Ncoc122-XCCAI2t.UNEB 126.?3rt2 -EsC 1,1 468.2.9147t64. itcHE73165. UBTES166 . t{cs30r.irut(&l 493OGiluniUnivartivl0?-KrbrleUnivs,rity30t-So.otiUniYG.lity 65 489,( r069 95?3403.'t33 19 1.,435 90 'r..35 90VotaoApe.ov.d Budgotta,dfirnSR.L... h, EndO.cte.at lyad O.c* g{dgrt!a qdlrt'rlR.bar8!..i i.Laa.d tF.lt651 2S 235 36 135 183 11 57./z2 125 9.58 e-t 75,r3 30 11 17 95 7?72 67:ro.68 55/t0 9431 85 t3-95'r48!t 2569 87 65,185.12 11737 48 30 9'l10 805 6 38? 5 859 3225 23 5833 733 15 1',t3 15 05180 1162 9g 5917 812 rO /t@ 18 40838 s0 rm00369 35 185.22 165 1850 r5 4172 8S 18302.IllUST57 ?96 2811? 26 t4822 1521 gt E230!{ua:l t 0? 3'l ,lg 061 a0 61 13?2 15 72 Il0,(.l(yrmbogoUnrvcrsrty138 666 eo 5526865E 09 4e6305.Eu!rtsmaUnieat!rty60 06 25 88 22 754i|.09 370a 87 9125 12 1r 958 99r47 60 3e,a5 82 8763 2(X 26 495 20 76311 g232 85 te 1721 lfi 'r I 539 7 55646 6'l 30 52309-GuluUniverllty78 051 3.a 531 32 1g4.21 41 6312 e4310-LlreUnivc6ity27 021 16.51E 11-5766r.24lt2.umr 35 632 18 82 12 37823l l.lloX 20 183 10 1650 ,a6 25,10 50 34L6..501.t5013 74 .15 100 00Yr+S JtrN#11Gnnd Totd 6.134,7r 23?1.4' 2.1t3r6 ai.t8our6: SGai Aallrrl BEdtct PcrforDrnac RGEo( fY 2O22l23.The Tablc 4 abovc, shows thc budget performance for the Votes under thcEducation, Sports and Skrlls Sub programmc for the FY 2|d22 /23 as atDecembcr, 2O22.Out of the approved budget of Uah 5,164.78BL, only Urhc 2,3? L.E?Ba (45.5ololhad been released and UShs 2,185.26bn was spent thus representrng a 92 13perccnt release performance.Most of the votes had a rclcasc pcrformancc of over 90olo, Minrmal performanccwas noted under Mts of thc Moon Universrty at 50.34olo largcly duc to the factthe Univereity was new and had not yet formed the contracts Commrttees toeffect procurements and 57.44o/o under thc MoES whrch was due to the UShs9obn alloeation under the Ministry for Scicnce teachers that was meant for LocalGovemments and delayed procuremcnts.Tablc 5: Helf Ycer performencc of thc Minirtty of Education and 8portr forth.c W 2O22l23.U8hs ba.CoU DevtExt Fm Dev't45.592't3h.t)iJEodactCrt{oitAproiodtrd3at rrtztzti2analcrratt aadpco,A&|,2tFlt ttcadD.cr2O22%lndt tn !.rxd% Euda.ttD.nt%Rclcucrti.rtrrdlt,a*ntR:olrodlEdtct12.60 t24.60 131.84 3r.r5 I ls.70 2.5.OO 12.60 WagcNon-Wagc 261 64 245 10 92.5? 37 .77i2.07tot ,'Raclllra!tt26.?278.619430 2t.4132.O72a.61 369.5e 898.{8 Ng.1?t0 1.70 105.26189.92 189.923A 62 I 14.8 tI?3.03 [ 2s.8037.9738.45totrl D.e 29r.63 296.16 111,66 40.61 ta.2Et 4.56r3.59r3.93 13.9314 56l3 59lTot l'EC+DEY661.32 644.66 246.4? 134.92 3A.39 20..fO 20.40r00.o0 [00 00too.oo 11 00lr0oI o0 Altcrrrtotd Bndtot 6,l-32 699.66 246.3?I l.o01.15.92 36.64 2t,ro 2t.zo2,..70 2L,70 Gnad totd 572.32 699.66 246.37 1rts.92 36.64o.o0 0.00 o.oo AIA o.oo o. oo 0.00 o.o0aoarLtt&if Votr3.i.92 35.69 20..rc 20.1 66\42 6Ar.66 24l..4?#+JfrcUalryArraa6Sonrcc: Ocrnl Aaoud Bud3ct eG o.[lncc Rcpott Fr 2OPl23.ln the Table 5 abovc, the approved budget for Vote 013 for FY 2022 / 23 was UGX661.29 bn although this has been rcviscd upwards to UCx 68a 64bn through asupplemenlary budgct of UGX 27.35 bn for instructional materials (UGX 10 bn),Mucation Pohcy Review Commission (UGX 3 bn), enhancemcnt of wage forscrentists IUGX 7.24 bn), Ndejje University for universtty games (UGX 3.8 bnOand Educatron Management lnformation System (UOX 3.3 bn).By half ycar, UGX 235.36 bn (350/o) out of the approved budget had been releasedand of thrs 57% (UGX 13S. 18 bn) was absorbed.Thc Committcc notes the under absorption by the MoES as hrghlightcd in thetablc above, whcre out of UShs 235.36bn that was rclcascd by end of half yearonly UShs I 35. l Sbn was spent and the undcr absorptron was largely under thcwagc component wherc UShs 90bn meant for enhancemcnt of Science teachersunder the Local Govcrnments was allocatcd under the wage component of theMoES, though the MoES rclatcs the under absorption to procurement relatedpayments whrch were not completed as suppliers had not yet submittcd theircompletron certificatcs.Tablc 6: Sub :ub-Progrrnma llarrcial pcrforaencc undcr thc Mlalrtry ofEducation and Sports lot 7ii2or2l t22 pAhr bnlttl ' R&rr..aDa.t22 6A3Dort. t PhrricrtE{ucatlo.Pollcr, PLlnlnt tad8u&rvlcc. 45 S79Brllc rld EccoadryEducrtlon t9 2aOurlltt .nd tt.ndrrd.1.668TGChalcdEducrtlon rndVocatlonIaEbart fraarrmaaADDrotr dhdt t (?rnln,narbadhda.tpl22lrol-t ...Lb.r.AIt tlriDac,NIEldac.D.rt itGa DacNEI ,tt olflda.tt.Larai!a aE(. taD.!to 626o 142cttcctCouarcllotPlaccaGnt(hidrncc,rndHhh.. Edncrtioa 20.006 t7 2t9? t.? -8. -23 6216.32034 556 4 332.io t3?128495 0861 3686 07r 5.l r8o.a?2I 23 66484.9332ta 4?2l5.l lEo.87284 692208 513I 13 664 46 363 41.58+ 3$7 4 3A?3S.60+9 ?9.38 02 3462A?2tat?o90 95z 58.89re#+ -.J1.5 17s23.9etDrc?..i.lid6f.:ory*1,6l .iLdttd:rrdilqtf:fr141[.,Lb.t db, llaDaa.Ntr'.:rutlt.Frt t,.aa Dacxb,LolBu.|t'laLaaaa*lrdtt.F!t.l. RalaraaarFrtSpocl.l tr..d. Educrtlon241 .O97 24E 3439?.4t2 57 6rJ440.573.8?4 3 474 1.0s2 6.3 2.',! l qo 244 27. t5&urc.: Scirl Allrld BudlGt tCrforEuc. R.po.t ff 2oil2l2:1.As shown in the Table 6 abovc, Physical Education and Sports, QualityStandards and Highcr Education Sub sub-programmes performed exceptionallywell at 95.O8olo , 9O.95o/o aad 86.070/o respectrvely. Tcchnical Vocation Educationand Trarning performcd averagely at 58.89olo due to late release of funds for thcsecond quartcr and thus planned actrvitres could not be implemented, tsasrc andSeconda-ry Educatron, Special Needs Education and Carccr Guidancc,Counselling and placemcnt Sub sub-programmes performed below averagc at4 I .58o/o, 23.19!/o and 22.68Vo respecLively.frblc 7: Supplcacntary Schedule llo.1 for thc Educetion Sportr end Ekllh8ub Progreoac t:t 2O2212A, UBhe ba.RccurrcntOcvclopmcnt l5 o000:.r'.i2t.9 27 34 27 34 152.340 245 o 05 9SS 329Ol33[oEgRccurrentDcvclopmcntDevelopmcntRccurrcnt11I:I{CDC393.48245r8.23L26 24.225t2 0oo0oo? o oo709 39? o oo70000 0 ?2,9_ooo79.39t32:ESC30l:f,U8f,RecurrcntDevelopmentDevelopmcntRccurrcnt3O1: UK353.28t448o36 r.^:8--144a03.O2 1.660 s6.71 I 660o55.05l5a,tsEs,{tr143o?:thbdc UIIIURccuirentDcvclopmcnt3I3:foMURccurrcntDevelopmcnt53.43l532 243.21 56.64 3.2r 6.01o.o0000r09 5 41 5.9 I l.3t s9Sou.c..'SuppLrrcaaary '.h.dul. ,1o., a d, edda.da , A 2 fno22B3Thc Tablc ? tbovc highlighte thc lupplclrcatrry frradirg for the EBSSP forFY2(Y|,2125 under Supplcocntary Schcdule No.l .nd eddcn& I & 2.VOTF.O13 MIMATRY OF EDUCATIOI{ AI{D SFORTAUShr 3.8ba as a GoU contribution for the upgrade a,ld reconskuction ofNdejje University Sports Facilities rn prcparation for the Eastcrn AfricaUniversity Games 2022. Ndcjje Unrvcrsity won the bid on behalf of Ugandato host the 12rh cdition of the Fedcration o[ Eastern Africa Univcrsrty(FEAUS) games that took place in Decembcr 2O22. T}:.e Univcrsity wasrequired to upgradc its sports facilities to a standard befitting of the hostnation.UShg 3.OOObn was requrred for critical actlvrties under the EducationPolicy Review Commission. The Commissron was constitutcd by theMinister under l*gal Notice No. S of 2021 and had not been allocatcd abudgct sincc inception and was re\ring on facllitation from Statehousc.Uahr 3.3(X)bn was requircd for thc rollout of the Education Managcmenrlnformatron System (EMlSl.Urhr lO.OOhn was required to clear outstanding commitments for thcsupply of rnstructlonal materlals for primary and secondary schools.voTE 111- NATIOnAL CTTRRTCULUM DEITELOPMEI{T CEnTER (ltCDClo Thc Cenler was allocatcd an additional UBhr 6bn for thcPrcParatoryvities of the rcvicw and rollout of the A 'I.cvel curriculum. Parliamentapproved a compctence-bascd curriculum for the entirc secondarycducation, implcmentation for O'l-evel started in 2O20 and the hrst cohortwill sit their exams rn Novcmber2024 and transit tocvel thcrefore rc.s XJM;--{t15rs a need to ensure that the A level curriculum ts reviewed and ready byDecember 2024.Votc 3O1- M/u(ERERE UI{TVERSITY lilUKl. UShs 8bn was allocated for krck startinS the renovatlon of thc halls ofresidence starting wrth Lumumba and Mary Stuart be approved.VOTE 132 EDUCATIOT SERVICE COMuISSION. Rcccivcd UShs 7,2OO,O00 to cater for wage shortfalls of sctenttsts tnEducation Servrcc Commission.Votc 3O2: }IBARARA UIIIVERSITT OF SCIENCE AND TBCHIIOIIX}Y IMUSTIo Received UShr 1.66oba as NTR for payment of living out allowances fornon-residcnt govcrnment sponsored students, managemcnt of 3r'l-semcster examinations that resulted from the COVID-l9 pandemrc andpurchase to rcplace the agmg bus to facrlitatc the students' outreachactivihes.VOIE 30'i7: XABALE UI{MRSITT. The Univcrsity secured a supplementary <lf UShr 3.27bn as NTR forrepairs and renovations of old buildings, the printing of cxamtnations,facilitation of part-time lecturers, purchasc of laboratory cquipment,purchase of a generator to light up thc Untversity, installation of sccuriqrlights, installatron of three-phasc powcr at rnnovation and incubattoncenters and facilitating stalf recmltmcnt processes and other Counciloperations.VOTE 313: UOUNTAINS OF THE TOON UITIVERSITY. The Univcrsity secured a supplcmentary of USh. 5.90bn as NTR, berng anew Univcrsity, thc University has got infrastructural challcnges hcnce thcUBhe 5.9bn supplementary in addrtion to USht 5.41b4 dcvckrpmentbudget allocated. n flt2O22123. Out of UShe 5.9bn supplcmcntary UShsl.650bn is non-wage recurrent ftrr allowances of part-tlme lecturers andarrears hence a total devclopment budgct of UShe 9.5bn.t6KE|r PHYSICAL OUTPUTS AT HALF YEAR FT 2.0,22123Ol3-Mlntrtry of Educatlon aad Sportr. Trarned sixty (60) Head teachers oa general Early Grade Reading (EGR)methodologr and pedagogical leadership in Kalaki distnct.. Procurcd 6,052, l0o copies of textbooks for Senior Three and Scnior Fourfor thc tower Secondary Curriculum for both Private and GovemmentSecondary Schools and 53,0OO Practical Science Students Manuals booksand 4,OOO Teacher Practical Manual Guides.. Established vrrtual laboratorics in 25 sccondary schools. Drsburscd funds to facilitatc the operations of Bunyoro Unrvcrsity andBusoga Univcrsity Taskforces. In addition, subvention was also providedto cater for operations of Uganda Petroleum lnstitute Kigumba (UPlKl.Assessed, marked and graded 53,397 (31,445 Male and 21,952 Femdclcandrdates under the modular and full UVQF 1-3 levels in 61 occupationse Conducted decentralizcd admrssions across six (06) rcgronal centcrs forDiploma awardrng lnstitrrtions. Stx (06) institutions signed Memoranda ofUnderstanding (MoUs) wrth industries to promote Work-Bascd Learning.o Rolled out the Teacher Effcctivcness and Leamers' Achievement (TEI-A)system to thc Eastern part of the country covering all GovernmentPrimary, Sccondary and Certrficate Awarding lnstitutions.o Rolled out thc e-inspection system to all One Hundred Seventy-Seven (177)Local Governmcnts. Commenced the national rollout of the EducationManagcment Information System IEMIS) in Novembcr, 2O22.1 1 l-National Currlculua Devclopment Ceater. Draft Alcvel Curriculum Framework devcloped.. 2,546 teachers and Master Trainers from Wakiso and Kampala Districtsonentcd on the S.4 crontent and asscssment modalities.r 590 Center Co-ordrnating Ttrtors (CCTS) in chargc of Kiswahih and DepugrPrincipals orientcd on the revised Kiswahili curriculum.. Thc outstandrng debt on the Printery clcared.122-l<aa4.L Capital City Authorlty IA totat of 134 cases were rcgistered, of which 7 wcre new cases reportedagainst KCCA, 6 Cascs wcre concluded against KCCA, 6 cases were infavor of the Authority, 2 cases were scttlcd by consent, zero appeal casesfrled, 2 cases werc withdrawn and I case was dismissed.x+s#JIt7J.. A total of 12 statutory notices were rssued to various entities /rndrvrdualsfor reminding thcm of thcir obhgations with KCCA legal Advisory andContract Preparation.. A total of 18 legal oprnlons were preparcd for the Authority. A total of 8O Contracts, Agreements and memorandums of understandingwere signed Law enforcemenL KCCA Enforcement Team.. Carried out 160 Operatrons in the City whcrcby 236 Premiscs wcrc scalcdoff, 233 culprrts were arrested, aod, 29,292 impounds were made.. A total of686 cases wcre reported and registered rn the pcriod undcr rcviewand of which 35 were drsmissed, 346 were convictrons, 2 cases werewithdrawn ar..d 275 werc still ongorng cases.. A total of UGX 18,440,000 was generated as hnes from the offenders whilethere was no acqurttal cascs rcported.o All polrtical leaders in the City parnclpated tn thc plannrng and budgetingconsultative mcctings tor FY 2O23 /24 both at the Authorrty and Divisronlevel.. A total of 17 authonty-level Engagements were held of which; 2 wereOrdrnary Authority Council, 4 were Special authority council meetings, 9standing committees, I was a Busrness committee mecting, and I lotntcommrttee mecting.. Conductcd monrtoring vlsits in I0 s€lected Gov't Aided schools to assessissues [aced.o Held a total of 34 Division Urban Council Engagemcnts of whrch 5 wereOrdinary Drvision Council Meetings, 6 Specral Division Council Meetings,l0 Standing Committee meetings. 9 Busincss committccs and other 4committee mect-ings.128-Ugeadr Netloael E:remlaatlonr Boatd. 8l l,8l.O candrdates sat for PLE.. 16O9 PLE drllerently ablcd candidatcs supportcd with spccializedassistance including amanuensis and large print cxamination papers.. 3,330,96O PLE Examinations question papers printd.r 3,330,960 PLE Examinations script papers marked.. 64,120 conracted professionals hired for thc conduct of PLE.. 6,113 examlncrs hircd and traincd in scoring PLE.o 51,12O Contracted professionals hircd for secondar5r field conduct ofexaminations.. 13,132 examiners recruited to mark UCE & UACE.c 9,425,460 UCE & UACE examination question papers Prinrcd.. 6,054,1E4 candites' UCE scnpts marked,LNr+-18. 268 staff members' salaries Paid on time'. Ol research report produced.l32.Educ.tloa Ecrrlcc Coanl:eloa. Appornted 182 pcrsonnel, 108 males and 74 fcmales.. Confirmed 1,28I personnel 896 malcs and 38S females.. Regulartzed appointmcnt of 13 personnel, 8 males and 5 females. Crantcd study lcave, 13 personnel, 5 males and ll fcmalcs.. Redesrgnated 19 personnel, I I malcs and 8 females.. Drsciphncd 4 personnel, 4 males.. Handled cases of abandonmcnt ofduty of 5 personnel, 5 males. Dismissed from Pubhc Scrtcc, I personnel, I male.. Reinstated into service I personnel, I malc.164-Nrtiond Council fot Highcr Educrtloar Monitorrng of institutions.. 285 Programmes were accredlted.. Rcvrewcd and approved thc NCHE Human Resource Policies andProcedure Manual.. The Council and Committecs met and considercd Council busincss forQuarter one and Q uarter two. This includcd thc budget performance forthe second quartcr.. NCHE revierved and approved the ncw Pcrformance Appraisal Tool forstaff.o An M&E Officcr was recnrited to strcngthcn the M&E function at NCHE.. NCHE rssued a request lor expression of interest for consultancy servtccfor design and construction supervision of its proposed H/Q BurldingAccordingly, a consu.ltant was appointed to kick start the projcct and wcare walting for relcasc of funds.. 233 Assessors trained.. Instrtutional facrlitrcs accredltcd.. The Annual Higher Educatron Conference was held at Hotel Africana,Kampala. I l. The Annual lligher Education Exhrbrtron waa conducted atUMA Show ground, Kampala.. Data collectlon on the State of Higher Educatron rn Uganda for 2O2O/2acadcmic ycar was concludcd.o 24 Mrnrmum Standards for programmesr 16 Mrnimum standards for programmcswere dcveloped.M#[-AM N19.-i{t. 60 l.ocal qualifrcations were equated.r 223 foreign qualfications werc cquatcd.165-U3en& Burlacu Tcchnlcel Exemlaetioar Boardr Held validation workshop with t l5 principals and industry representativesfor 16 diploma and 15 National certlficates of Busincss HumanitiesProSrarnmes.o 23 business education programmes modularized for assessmentCertificatcs.o During thc qua.rter, UBTEB rc$stered candidatcs 86974 Mate arc 57758and Femalc are29216. 14 Industry verifiers deploycd to monitor technrcalcertilical.c practical assessmcnts. e. 3O institutions were monitored and1651 tcchnrcal vocatronal drploma candidarcs wcre assessed by 46assessors from training instrtutrons.. Deployed 162 area coordinators, 771 reconnoitcrs, 516 sccurity officers,463 center supcrvisors.. Conducted assessment of realJrfe projccts tor 3?94 candldates trom 24institutlons by 45 assessors.r 25 rndustry represcntatives undertook the inspection of real -lifc proJcctsfor 2103 technical vocational diploma candidates in 32 instrrutions.. lnspccted 1478 rcal-life projccts of training with production for 15854tcchnical certificate students from 53{l institutrons.. Pnnted 928 Transcripts, and rgsued 9149 Certificatcs for candrdates thatacquired fulI competences.r 97 Staff ISO trarning awarcness done,. ISO rmplementation committee appolnted, m. ISO intcrnal audltorstrained and ISO Intcrnal Audit conducted,r Quality Management Systcm (QMS) manual dcvcloped.o Pretesting of data collection tool is planned for January 2O23.o Procured 200 pieces of examinations packing bags.. Environment issucs, the Board held; consultativc mccting EARNEDprojcct on the rmplementation of ICT Blcndcd learning and asscssment inAgricultural modulcs.o Gender issucs, the Board conducted; -215 SNE candidates regrstered forassessment. -SNE ISO standards dcveloped -10 lnstitutions with specialneeds studcnts inspected, -Examinations conduct of SNE studentmonitored. -Webout sensitisationsite information designed in acsible formats. Carrred/-"of cand{lI)g(_rdates at Naalya S.S.S.166- rtloarl Couacil of Sportrr 59 staff werc paid salanes at NCS.. 59 staff wcre paid NSSF at NCS.r 36 staff reccived graturty at NCS.. 3 NCS council and committee meetings held at NCS.o 3 MOTOR VEHICLES, f MOTORCYCLE and I generator maintained atNCS.o 3 monthly bills of water and elcctricity paid at NCS.. I BFP confercnce held at NCS.o Associated NCS propcrty managed.o 335O footballs, 400 Nctballs, 4OO volleyballs,250 Basketballs, 76 Footballuniform, 20 Nctball unrform, l0 Basketball uniforms, 50 trophics, 40boxing glovcs, 30 boxing punching pads, 5O football nets, 5o stocktngsand 50 branded nctball brbs procured and distributed in drstricts ofUganda.r 2 national sports associatrons/ fcderatrons subscribed to internationalsports bodrcs. 46 natronal sports federations/ assoclations supported (ormplcment sports activities30 l-MaLcrcrc Uaivcmlty Kempder With continucd Governmcnt support, the universlty managed to gothrough thc half FY during which it cnsured timely paymcnt of staffsalaries;r Held 6 regular meetings of Universrty Councrl and 44 mectings of the sub-committccs at whrch it approved 7 policies and one affiliation.o In order to ensurc better connectivity scrvices, subscrlbcd to NREN for theprovision of Internet bandwrdth currently at 2Gbps.o Facilitatcd thc mainrcnance and reorganization of Makererc Unirrcrsity e-Leaming Environment (MUELE). Settled thc university Utrhty bills andproperty management expen seso Rccrurted 183 staff, renewed contracts for 3O staff and Awarded Postretiremcnt employment Concracts to 2 Professors, 13 Associate Professorsand I Chtef Tcchnician whrle 9O staff were conlirmed.o Promotcd 10I members of staff and dismissed lO etaff.. Admrtted 9,3.iO (35o/uF, 650/oM) students of which 5,607 areundcrgraduates govt & 3,600 privatc) and 3,743 are gradua (2OO?(tJs2,atudcnLs..Y, tsJI. Facilitated 46 staff involvcd in PUJAB activities & 96 staff involved inBachelor of Laws pre-entry cxams f.or 2022123.. Held l5 Senate and its sub-committcc mcctings and recommended 9 newand 6 revised policies, re-instatcmenL of 3 acadcmic programmes, reviscd8 academic programmes and approved 8 new academic programmes,award of 2 professor cmerltus and t honorary f)octor of scrence.. Held an Academic Public Fair at which 4,649 acadcmic transcriPts &certificates werc issucd & 1,990 certified.r Under MakRlF, 865 Prolects have been supported, 457 have closed out ofwhich 40 projects, and 137 projects had products, 292 policy bnefs. 4O8projects are ongoing.o The unrversrty continued with the construction of school of law building;thc maln campus perimeter wall; finalizcd renovations at PhyslcsDcpartment building and Torlets at Llvingstonc Hal[. Rcnovated two blocksrn Mitchell Hall (at 98olo complete. Conlinued with the re-construction ofthc main administration building up tentatively on thc second floor.3Oil-[berere Uaivcreity of Sclcncc and Tcchaolopo 14 wks of lecturcs and 2 of exams for 5,581(35.7%F) srudcnts and I studyTrip for BME, PEEM, EEE, BPSM, BAF & BBA conducted.o I QA training f<rr FAST Staff & 2 QA meetings for FCI & FOS hcld.o FA for 538 (3loloF) BSc.Ed & FOM CoU studcnts & 12 External Examincrsfor postgrads'paid. 3 Seed lnnov. Grants; 4 Faculty Res. studies & 1 microjunior rcsearch grant awarded.. I wk scientific writing wksp for 24 innovation teams & & 2 Res. wkshopsheld. [5 research projccts tcams facilitatcd & I innovation week for FAST & FCIconducted, I piloL survey of e-Farm rnnovation done. Community twinningfor 65 students; 8 wks of lndustrial Training for 1,099 (24%F) studcnts,Field practicals & farm placements for 21 BSAL studcnts; domiciliary for44 Nursing for and 9 MLS students placement at Nakasero blood bankdone.. 2 Internal audit reports done. I proc. plan prepared & implemented.o Frnancial statements, Q4 & annual reports for FY 2O2l 122; I BFP& QlfY 2022123 Budgct pcrformancc rcPorts prcpared & submitted.o 5O,000 exam answcr booklcts & 360 dailies for library procured.. 3 Staff traincd 4OO stafl apprarsed.r Salaries for 573 (35.7%Fl, 24 short term contract stafT & scrvicc providerof AIMS paid.. Graturty for AR, UB, DHR & DvC (Ftl6Al paid. {+#*M77. 2 QA Com. Mectings held.. 149,431 6 units of clcctricrty & 32,218.6 CC of watcr paid for, 8 vehicles& 2 Lifts ln FAST maintaincd.. Subscrrption to IUCEA, ACU & CUUL for e-rnformation rcsourccs done.1,387 software Llcenses procured & installed.. 12 hectar€s of compounds & l4,3oosqm of bulldings marntaincd &clcaned. 2 Council, l5 Council Com. & 2 scnatc meetings held & 2 Policresapproved. LOA for 620 (27.5F1GoU students pard.o Conducted HlvAlDs, Gcnder & Specral Needs acttvities (Blended commem.of International AlDs day & for pcrsons with disabilityl.o Counseling for 221 137 .9o/o F) Students, Staff, Parents done. Participatedin EA Gamcs at Ndejjc University. 32 Students Leaders traincd.303-uUBao A total of l27aO sLudents were reglstered for acmcstcr one 2022 | 23 as alcnd of Dccember 2022 This was affccted to havrng no lirst year studenlsfrom high school as there were no exams donc in 2O2 l.o Thc school supervtsed 363O number of internship with diffcrent entitieswhich were botJ: public and pnvate.. Offered MUBS Scholarshrps to by tuition waiver to l0 first class studcntsand 2 disablcd persons.o Paid living out allowances to 73 year one 2022123 Government sponsorcdstudents.o Facilitated tl3 mcmbers on School staff development programmes (60Academrc & 23 Admin. staf!. Reviewed the MUBS Human ResourccManual for bcttcr service deltvery.o Conducted 6 Council/Board meedngs includrng sub-commtttees. Had aRetrcat for Appointments Committcc to finalize the manual reviewexercise. Recruited 155 staff in school service.. Pard condolcnccs to 16 who lost their dear ones and cxtcnded medicalrefund to 21 staff.. Pard emoluments to l39O members of staff. Ttrcsc include 2O memberswith disabilitres. Thc Schoot Health Center conductcd 9 tcsts for COVID-l9. Collectcd 152 Units of blood during blood donation cxercisc.o Hcld 3 zoom lecturcs on mental healrh and carried out HIV/AIDStsand medrcal examinatron toIfirst year srudents.I#+...a-^l'/i$23aSupplicd drugs to all Campuses equivalent to Shs l4m. Procured anAutoclave machine for the Hcalth Centre. Procurement of 165 chairs ts on-going.SO4.KFrrbogo Unlvenltyo 642 clients offered counselling services;. Tvrcnty one (21) Peer Counsellors supervrscd;. two open Anti-Suicrdc Campaign drives werc organizcd;. One Mental Health campaign drive organized;t 45o/o of lirst ycar students oriented,. 25 members of staff and 1O7 student mentors allocate d mentees;. 2,6?5 first year students mentored;o 658 female and 670 male studcnts accommodated of whom 38 arestudcnts with disabrlities;r Meetings with privatc hostel owners conducted;. Marntenance rcpairs and fumigation completed in Shalls of residence;r 85o/o of studcnts on campus feed from University cafeterras;o Quality affordablc catenng services available for studcnts;o Meal and Living out allowances for 2,356 continurng students and 576fresher's pard;. CIPS annual subscription f<rr six PDU staff pard;o Audit reports on prcparation ofAnnual Financral Statcments for FY 2022-23, procurement of Goods and services, Students (iuild Activities atcxecutron lcvel.3o5-Bueltcna Ualvcrtityr The overall number admitted in 2022/ 2Q23 academrc yeac s 2,341 1723Females and 1618 Males);. 4653 were enrolled of which 1330 were female;. The senatc Considered draft policres and short courses from the library;. Approved proposal for cstablishment of two departmcnts and Bachelor ofPharmacy program at the faculty of health sclences, Approved proposed 5reviewed programs from thc faculty of engineering,. Considcrcd Proposed Bachelor of Engrneenng in Mechanrcal Engineering,Approved Academic 3 programs and short courses from marrtime lnstitute,Approved proposal on the regulation of university graduation gown,Approvcd Proposed Busitcma Universilv compassion Scholarship Scheme,Approvedkthe proposed semester datcs for thc FY 2022 / 2023;,HJ\L24. 10 programs were accredrted,. 58 publlcations wcrc made rn recognized rcviewed journals:. l0 MOUs wcre signed berwecn Busitema University and the ConfuciusInstitute of Makercrc Universrty then Wagagai mining company LTD,International Unrversity of East Africa, Fundr Bots, Partners CollaborahveAgreemcnt betwccn Jomo Kcnyatta Universtty of Agriculture andTechnologr and Kenyatta University tn Nairobi, Cyber School TechnologrSolutions, Cannabis Heatth Equity Movement CHEM Global Soluttons,USA, European Union Erasmus+, African Technolory Policy StudtesNetwork, Makercre Unrvcrsity Collcge of Health Sciences;. Gender, HIV clubs wcre supported drrring quarter FY 2022-23. 8.216govcrnment students wcrc accommodated and fcd of whtch 64 were femalcand 1618 Males);o 150 Journal Databascs subscribcd ro;3O million e-book titles procuredand subscribed to;. Subscription to MyLOF"T done;. Ask the Librarian/ Chat Refercnce opcrationahzed;. Library Website updated and expanded;r 856 research reports digitlzed and uploaded in the institutronal repository;o Quartcrly progress Budgct Pcrformanoe reports produced and One Assetregister updated;. Payrnents were made towards Mbale Lecture Complcx and other expcnses.3o6-Muni Unlvcrtityr 833 studcnts taught in all programs in the quarter (246 Femalc and 587Male);o l1 weeks of lectures and asscssment conducted I semester cxaminatronsconducted (Semester II) l2 peer-rcviewed publications produced (Facultyof Agriculture-2, Faculty of Health Science -3. Faculty of ManagementScicncc - 1. Faculty of Scicncc and Faculty of Techno Scrcnce - 1);. A two-day stakeholdcr workshop on Regenerative and Inclusive foodsystems was conducted (8th - 9th, November 20221 at the UnrvcrsityCampus;. 9 Academrc Programs accreditcd (Mastcr of Pubhc Health, Master ofScicnce in Bio-diversrty conservation, Mastcr of Science m Chemistry,Master of Scrcncc in Computer Scrcnce, Post Graduatc diploma in HumanResourcc Managcment, Mastcr of Science in Artificial Intelligence, Master, Master of Buslness Adminisration and Bachelor,!xof Tourism & Hosprtalityof Educatron-Secondarvl#aJ.-Ja-\-'','f,$25. One week Orientation organized for first year students;. Living out Allowance paid to all 94 registered first ycar students forFY2O22-2O23 Trained 63 (46 Male and 17 Fcmalc) first ycar students onthe available functions, facilitres, serviccs and resources in the library. 776 patients managed (312 female and 464 male) in the Universrty Clinic;. I Univcrsity Council mccting;o Held 3 University Councrl commlttee meetings;r Held I University Senate meetinS;r Held 2 University Senate committee meetlngs;o Hcld 4 Top Management Mectings;r Constructron of Adminrstration Block Annex - on going at 2 llu Compleuonof Hcalth Science Laboratory Building- on going at 4lo/o.30?.Krbelc Univcnltyr A total of 4744 students (2979 MaJe, 1765 Female) enrolled, taught andexamined for the academic year 2022 /2023;. A total 61I Articles/ Disscrtations, Books/Journals uploaded onto KabaleUnivcrsity Drgital Repository (KABDRI and 26,215 users acccsscd KabalcUniversrty Dryital Repository (KABDR) from t85 counries;. A total of 235 (l5o males & 85 females) academic staff completcd 6 dayscapacity building training in: Research output mana8cmcnt, Turnit-inTrarning, Usc of Library and e-learning resourcesr Effective and effrcientuse of the AIMS systcm; and Markcting and digital communication, skillsand strategres;. A total of 38 PhD students (22 Male and 16 Female) superviscd on proposalcompletron and strll ongoing;. A total of 10 articles published in peer-revrewed lournals reported to theDircctoratc of Rcscarch and hrblications;o Blended NCHE exhibition participated in wrth thc theme enhancement oftcachrng, learning and Assessment with ODEL rn Hrgher Education hcldin Lugogo showground, Kampala- 22nd- 24th September 2022;o A total of 30 farmers (10 males and 20 females) from Kabale and Rubandadistricts complcted a trainrng on sustainablc soil and watcr conservationusing farmcr ficld school approachl. Practrcal teaching in agriculture and envrronment sciences for 243students (145 malc and 98 fcmale) at dcmonstration gardens and incommunltles conducted;rP+26. A total of 127 (Fcmale=S9 and 68 =Malel stud€nts carried out intemshipfor Dcpanmcnt of lnformatr<rn Technologr and Computer Science andLibraqr lnformation Science;. A total of I03 (48 male & 55 femalc) Business Admrnistration studcntsconducted a community outrcach on entrcpreneurship, innovation andstilhng rn Kabale Municipality;. The universlty startcd e-[carning outreach ^t Kieczi High School;. Mathematrcs outreach conducted at Kabalc Brainstorm High School andthrec (3) secondary schools participated.30E-Sorotl Unlvcrrlty. 387 studcnts of both SHS and SET taught and examinc;r 9 Rcsearch papcrs published I9 fundrng proposa.ls devcloped and awardedunder SUN rcsearch grant fund 19 SET Staff trained in Pcdagog skills (2F and 17 M) I programme submittcd to NCHE for accreditation (Bachelorof Scrcncc in Physiotherapyl 44 students on clinical placcment for bothMBChB and BNS, (l I F and 33M) in Soroti Regional Referral Hospital 58book Trtles compiled under procurement Quarter One;. Internal Audrt Report produced and submitted to Omcc of lntemal AuditorGeneral (OlAGl Preparcd and submittcd adlusted Frnanctal Statemcnts fort\ 2O2t 12022;. Staff Paid salary and NSSF for 3 months 46 new staff rccruited;. Preparcd Ql Progress Report for Fy 2022 / 2023 and submrtted to MoFPEDand other line Mrnistries I Budget conference held attended by 5O staff(13 F, s7 M);. 3 monthly procurcmcnt reports prcpared and submrttcd to PPDA 102 hardcopy documents delivercd;. 1 Councrl meetrngs held, attended by 24 mcmbers (6F, l8M) and 8 councilcommitt€e meetrngs hcld 3 policies approved by council (Proposedlntellectual Prop€rty Pohcy, Fccs Pohcy and ldcntification Pohcy);o I Curriculum approved by Council (Bachclor of Scicnce rn Physiotherapyl24O studcnts sat for Examrnauons (69F, lT lMl;o One curriculum devclopment workshop held {HEC);. Paid Lrving out allowance to 175 (128 M, 47Fl students of year I and ll. 4 Buildrngs, I I Vehicles and Machinery maintainStudcnts and staff trcated and diagnoscd;99(260 F, 239M)s PaI[M27<_.ll250 staff and students vaccinated agarnst Hepatrtis B (second dosc)Initiated and awarded the procurement for supply and installation of Anti-virus softwarc;lnitiated supply and installation of network rn the new offices and supplyof telerrision for the students Initiated and awarded the procurement [<rrsupply of thc CBC machine for the Medical Centre Procurement for ICTLaborat<1ry equipment initrated under SET.3o9-Gulu Univcreity. I full council meeting and 7 Councrl Commrttee meetings held;r National budget conferencc for FY 2023124 attcnded;r Provided monthly rnternet bandwidth of 133Mbps;o Procured 63 volumes of tcxt books;o Annual performance Report for FY 2O2l122 prepared;. Uganda Vice Chancellor Forum, AICAD and lnter-Universrty Council f<rrEast Afrrca subscribed to;o Acquired addrtional 187 890 acres after compensattng 120 Project AffectedPersons (PAPs) brtnging the total number ofacres acqured to 462.88 acresout of the 786.4 I acres earmarked;. Recommendatlon for award of contract for design and constructionsupervision of a Multi-purposc buildrng approved;. Tcaching Hospital and Scnate burlding Preliminary design reportcompleted; and;o Bus body rebuilding of motor vehicle UAK 482G commcnccd.310 .Llre Uaivcralty0.8 Km of new road opened, l L3Kms of mechanizc'd roads maintained,17.2Kms of roads on routine maintenance. All thesc arc to provide accessto all uscrs;lO (ten) Committcc mceungs of thc council held, 10 (ten) managementmeetrngs held, f0 (ten) top management meetings held. Managed Payrolland Data capture of 266 (10S female) staff, recruited thrce staff two (2)mate and one, (l) female on replacement basis Coordinated prcparation ofRecruitmcnt plan 2023 /2024 for submrsston to Mnrstry 102 Malc and 65female apprarsed;Prepared and submrttcd Financial Statcments for FY 2O2l 12022, Auditsdone <rn above Accounts by OAG; Warrants forprcpared;Q2 for FY 2022/2aa3+x#+(-/288 Contracts Committee mcetlngs conducted, 22 Bid Documents Evaluatedfor 6 different seLs of Procurcmcnt proccsses; Annual Procurement Planfor Flt 2022 /23 consohdated & submitted to stakeholders; AssortcdContracts Awarded, Supervised, Monitored and site meetings held; 7Monthly Procuremcnt reports preparcd and submitted;Fourth quartcr Budget Performance Reports for previous year and Qtbudget performancc rcport for thc curcnt year prepared, submitted andapproved, Project proposals dcvcloped & submittcd in IBP and is approvedto prcfeasibility stagc, Higher Educal-ion Sector Budgct Working Groupmeeungs participated in, Developrncnt Commlttee Mccting attended, MultiYear Commitments mceting, tor FY 202312024 attende;Quarterly Audit reports prepared and submitted to AG/OAG; I AnnualWork plan submlttcd to LAG and Verification of all dclivcrics for Ql andQ2 done;Construction of administration block is at 50o/o physrcal progress, intcrnsdoctors' residcncc at 8l% and diet kitchen work startcd at 15% by NECconstructors;Procurement of furniturc completed and delivered, medical equipment isat ?Oo/o and. the vehrcle of thc office of the DVC at solicitors general.oa312 Ugrndr Maaagcacnt lartitutc. Received 8,314 apphcatrons, admitted 5,830, registcred 4,O8O particrpants(52 Femalef all branches - Culu, Mbale & Mbarara, Held 0 I (one)graduation ceremony;. Procured l0o7o stationery for examinations;o Coordrnated 7 senate mectings, carried out oricntation of new partlcipantsfor the 2022/2023 academic year at all branches;. Proccsscd error frec cxaminations for postgraduate Diplomas for firstsemestcr (evenrng and r*eekend programmes) for 2O22 /2023 academicyear and sccond semester examinations for Postgraduate Diploma inJournalism (2021 / 20221;. UpdaLed thc quarterly pafoll regrster and processed salaries, gratuity,NSSF for 198 staff. lmplcmented 100% thc rnsurancc schcmc activrties.o Coordrnatcd 1000z6 of the compensation to Staff who got injurics in thepcrrod;. Paid wages to ovcr 20O tcmporal/ and part-time staff, coordinated I0O%capacity buildrng inrtiatives in the period, Renewcd contracta for Imembers of slaff 17 40 male) for all UMI branches -and Mbarara;.#e,Hs:. Held 0l (one) International conference; The 3rd Blended InternatlonalConferencc on Governanc,c and Servicc Delivcry in Dcvcloping Economies.. Publishcd (thrce) Publications in various journals.o Gencrated 0 I (Onc) Policy Brief;o Coordinated 30 proposal defences for Master's Students;. Prepared and submitrcd 03 monthly reports to the PPDA & 0t quarterlyperformance report to the management;. Coordinated 18 evaluation of bids and O9 contracts commrttee mcetinBs.. Procured l00ol, all works, aerviccs and supplies in thc pcriod313 Mouateiai of thc Mooo Uaivcnityo Payment of salanes and NSSF 183 staff;o Prrnting of749 trangcripts & Certificates, 749 students graduated;o There was also an upgrade of RENU Band wrdth from 75 MBPS to I3OMBPS and also two meetings held of the Committee of graduate studrcsand research;r Teachin8, lcarning and asscssmcnt of 2152 (Male 1186, female 966)students was done;. Councrl and Council Committee formed and orientcd;o 2 Council 2 Appointmcnts Board I Audit 2 Finance, Planning andInvestmcnt 1 Student Affairs I ICT, gender commt(tee mectings hcld, 2pohcies & guidelines dissemrnated to university staff & other stakeholders.o Administrative departmcnts efficicndy and effcctively coordinated,Accounting Officer was facilitated to attend meetings with MDAS.o Unrversrty Budget framework paper 2023-24 was prepared and submrttedthen I budget confercncc workshop to present Budget guidelines anddocumcn(s for 2023-24 hcld for 36 partrctpants#+ @-306.0 HTTMAN CA,PITAL DEVELOPMEITT PROGRAMIIE BUDGETESTIMATES FOR Ftt2tZA I 24TabL 8: Proporcd But E tlm.tcr for thc nCDP for thc FY 2023/24.UShr bn.(3- rlRClrtlYGCbeaSc-70t71.-17 0-5.4-9.2.2.SGoUExtTotrl D.r'tllcno ltantNDP CostrngRudgct vs BFPVarratrons% Chra3cI ,O7?11,145-2,139 40 -2,362-r0.6 -19 2 -26.9S./.t cct NDPa3, Aap.oc.a, B,!dg.t B.tTmqtct fl 2O22t23, A^ ual El4dc.a E.a,,t 4t . Ffr2o23/2a.As indrcated in the Table 8 above, In the FY 2022123, the HCDP had anapproved budgct of UGx 9,O90.obn out of which UGX 5,739.94ba wasrecurrent and UGX 3,349.6Oba was for dcvelopment ln thc FY 2023124,the proposed budget is UGX 8,783.24bn thus representing a deehnc UGX306.76bn, this is on account of a dechnc in non-wagc recurr€nt, CoU, andcxternal financrng by UGX 49bn, UGX 292.33bn and UGX 27O.O3barcspechvelyThe Recurrent Budgct is projectcd to increasc by UGX 256.O7ba from UGX5,?39.94ba approvcd in l"{ 2022/23 to UGX 5,996.O1Dn in the FY 2023/24.This rncrcment is on account of an rncreascd wagc bill of UGX 3ol.97an.On the other hand, the Development budget is projected to reduce by UGX562.3?tn from UGX 3,3r$9.60tn in the FY 2022123 to UGX 2,?87.23bn in theFY 2023124. Thrs rs largcly due to pro.;ects thaL have been cxitcd from the PIPand under funding to somc already on-going infrastructural devclopmcnts at theenti(ics and Unrversitics and this wrll delay completton of works and hencedelivery realzatron of quality service delivery.Budgetary allocations to thc programme fall short r:fUGX 2,362ba hencc a 26.9 percent shortfall againstthe NDP III allocations byA!!udBcdtctE.tlDrtoaBrdgct Ff2,0f23l2.ltlVtrlrtlo!ton BFP radAaaBdBldtctE tlErt .t3-2130r 97-46-2?8 35338CrtctotyWa3cl(on-Approecd Buda.t2422123 ltlPrcpor.d rtBFPFv202312.t2t338s 8? 3,966 l92,35+i 1 ,9?Ototd RGG .o1834.773.687.-64 -_2,3082s6.O?-292 3360.24-t?o 79-2?O.O36"39.91I127 .to2222 49593S.??1o05.5620,64.279006.603,3{9.60I3,069.44I ,952..+6 .l1l.6l-662.3? | -2A2,6t 2,?e?.238.?8e.24 -3116.?6 -2r2.d6 GRT'TD "OTAL11,1.16ta 1O,1676#targe tsffi31c.tctory.f,DDrorcdlrdtct2erua(^tDnltEatlDrtorforta?/y,al24(qAhrohtcchr!!.(r-atRshtlY.Ci.n&lBAl/^rl@Pro!orcicrtlEatcalot?tru2al23Prot o.Gdarthrtcaforra2(lr26l26ProDo.cdo.tiDrtctfort1IN26l27lfr!. 3,095.39 3,3 rS 60220 22?17.426 733,7t\9 (ra 3,981.59f,o!-Prtc |,281 1.225 -33. l71.401 251.695 23 r .990 29-264.AaOra totd R.G 4.353.2/t 187 0543a.a2?.99 s..T94.!? 6.9?r.teColJ 612 Lr69 462 ?43 - r49.33 -24 4541, r2 s99.09 691 l8Ext r89.92 25lJ.367 50 45318302.U) 94.27totd Dctrt 801.9t9 ?t3.1160't,t6 59l.lt-aa aa- .lt43.2ro o AltCr'a ooo o.oOrud lot l6.l?t 5,2!i3.39 9a.L? 1.9s.6?1.20 6.19i2.23 6.663.066.1 BIJDGEf EATIU,ATES F'OR TIIE EDUCATION SPORTA AilD SIULTS SUB.PROGRAJf,IE rOR THE W 20/23124.t bL 9: Thc proporod Budget E tltLatci br thc E88P for thc N 2023124 anANTEFrtod.Ush. bn.Ploporcdcathrtcaforfltto2?12,4250 3l2494 0C74..51936 3e936.36?.t?s,ourc.t &rptoEd Btrdtct D,,,.lnal'o. fi 2da2/23, ,}'o,ll, Arl,|,ual Budgct E tar at . ffi|Asf2a-NPED.Table 9 above hrghlights the proposcd draft estrmatcs for the Educatron, Sportsand Slolls Sub-Programmc for FY2O23 /24 and the Medium 'l'erm ExpenditurePeriod (MTEF).An tncrease was noted under wage componcnt and external financing andrcduction in fundrng noted under non-wagc and CoU development, thrs wrllimpact negatrvely on the opcrations of the sub-prograrnme and completron ofdwelopment projects. However, increased fundrng is noted rn the MTEF periodIt's al6o noted that rn thc medrum Term rn the last two ycars of FY2O26 /27 and,FY2O27 128 there rpill not be any extcrnal frnancing for the sub-programme.4e*M,is()z'-/326.2 Budgct E tlmrtc! fot thc Votcr ln thc Educetloa sPort. end Slllle SubProgranac for the Ft 2o,23124Teblc lO: Dreft Budgct E tttrrt.r for thc Votct tn thc ESSP fot thc Ff 20.23124.ushr bn.D.rftAmudht&tcatlantcaF?ChltG(.-3/3.I@tt74-22 2-o 13lot-o 120g30r.xuK 3-2302-MU8T o2L o43 o-25?912to-TABALE 3.A3.,4.6OROTIufltv 23 98 2309-Ot LUUNIl/ 63.6 o6310- L!R.^UTIV 273 294 I E.4312- Umr 15 6-0 lasourcc: ADproo.d Eudtct tA 2O22123t NBFP, 2orl3/24, MPA 4 rad Alrurl Budt tDrr{lAalqrl.atltnrtctVrmfPaa-ll2tlD ludlctCr[ ChculrtF9,M7tAt2txPaE thatcrrY2{yrsl2/]tSlI{BF" lrrrltcrtlDrtcafl2oztt2atll V(,TES.ol3-iroF8_t I l-f,ctrcr22-r(QLI2t.UI{EBr32-E3cl6a-I{cttE166-rca165.UBfEB304.KTAMUNIv305.BUSIT306.furlrurw!rc3.22 4e6.6433 s26:r.49136-9 t3r79.93 34?A d) 3ao? ?o 3607 09620 523.362E6128 253I l.8l| 4.?630 287t? 39356 3258 513t05 Et53 9725 9.158 06584 tO 482.5350 2lt23329.134E.9358.27t28.39133.49tt 9slo5.att4 ?454.?230.5736?.t9t74- 186 88oo 219.4 to,ol-o.22-o 07o.l2-16 43-0 t4-o.29669 4155 9523 5949 07144118314 8130 ?g17 39358 4asa.5ltos 8t136 9t34 4'25 92t28.55358.08r l.&125 9314.?653 9830 29136 gtt?4356 3258 5lt05 8t43332t823 q)63 1623 9q53 1629 8036-3S38 1424 4763 s535.2842xa g7o.49-32q 1-o 0ss.r3?.9A567 35 3332.2436 3538 1462 A623.o48 2.O+rta9a Cirna.77,1.100-24-1 2-o.29-l I 3101-o5-o7OI26o4o-257_O12.4- tol.57tl s70o.13 93o2a.o r6-0 020 12o2.2-3.+23.2429Dr.t ArlurlE tlartc Vr-0.08 o3929.2 548313-fo u15.6It I5.6?-0 0?LGSISO r.tsot -46 2qa_6?GRAITDNOfAL -'..62 213.42Ad*o,ff 3394The Table lO above show the draft estlmates for votes under the ESSSP forFy2O23124. Thcrc is a notablc reduction in estimates in the draft cstrmatescompared to the ceiling at NBFP fmm UGX 5,748.93bn to UGX 5,253.39bn hcncea reduction of UCX 495.54bn and this was noted mainly in the votes ofMoES,NCDC,UNEB,NCHE,UBTEB,Kyambogo & Gulu Univcrsities and [acalGovernments.Some Unrversitres like Ma.kcrcre, Lira, Mountatns of the Moon, UMI and Kabalcreceived some increments in the budgetary csLimates compared to NBFPconsidcrations.ln the 2ad BCC, it was clearly communicatcd to the Accountng Officers that inthe FY 2023124, there are no provrsions for new rccruitmcnts acrossgovernm€nt, and thercfore no VOTE will be authorizcd to recruit new staff exccpton a replacement basis u,lth evidence that posrtions to be l-rlled have provision rnthe budget for FY 2023 /24.Teblc 11: Trcad Allocetlotl to thc Educetlon end Spoits Sub Prograrnoc for thcpr.t th?.c 20 I 2L, 2O2 L I 22, 2022 I 23Ughr bn.-t 4l..i 3X)RchUecCirlac(d-c l/ cr roo--% volr88FT2o'l0l2llrlrr202tl22tbtITN*Zl2J,lclFT7U,3l21ttlAb.olutcclr.tc ld-clol3-xoEa 601 364 536 905672 X2 482 53 -la9 ?s22 t2 5.324223.3-32 740 20847.44912 1624A a8g?2 6?t26 73 128 394893I 18-23 ?41.66 124-urEB11l-ict c122-rocAt40 t 45 146 445-l? 3l3l2 gl8_r:!a-Ece- . _-l6a-rcEE og 378lo l8t4 4519 8195t4 7433 73 30 57 ltts-ultci o3195r -9.46425647 At359 35t? .4367 A9-3 16.t 4630.4-25-5 073{t l.xur166-ic8363 736o r8 359365 06t -04t63 57 4a5s? ?a100.54930r.xrraa303.rrra8304-Krlurtvto? 32136.0I!058tt33.4958 72 O.94-1.5r-4 52 r40.600s? 49797 6asr37.3858 2? -3 28305- arramUIIV 5l s45 s3 s466l ssrH+34-5.33Rchtl"cCtrat.(d.cl/c.l@-v(ytFa-o 29)3 7A 26 ?0625.2063.2040 ol8 +t.2+824.47 20.207 ut 33824 ?6?8 05 548 5? ?6? 63. SS35 28 2? 8t2 28.559 27.O236 334 35. r4335 63 42 02176.?lrr23 .3903"oo.o9 r2ra3r39 20 943 5240-0036 r3574rr2o.21FT2020-l4-s -la 63O".(ABA.LE3()a-8oR(}trurtv309-GrrLUuxn3lo. tlRArrl{IvUT312- Uf,ll0 8ORATIDr0r Le26 30,6t6 6.39-4 ll.683478 6038 07 1933J9 4l.str AbrolutG2t73 G306- Urllur{lv 29.13 393 ls.660.2 -2-92 -46-12313-ilo!n.lrl8ou-.c.: Approecd Budgct E tlartct fa 2(}lol2l, N2Ll22. "tl 2.022127 'otl IttrG Bua!.t E tl6.tc.71t 2Ur3121.In the Tablc 1l above, thcrc has bccn a noticeable fluctuatron ln the relativechange of budgetary allocatron to thc Education Sub Programme for the pastthree financral years that is to say from the Fl 2O2l12022, FY 2022/23 and theFY 2023 / 24 respecLively. Consrdcring the Grand total, over the years, the budgetallocatron to Education, Sports and Skills Sub-prograrnme has been increasrngwlth a noLable increasc undcr thc Local governments, however some critrcalvotes under the sub-programmc havc bccn cxperiencing huge budget cuts,therefore there rs a need by MoES as supervising cntity to cnsurc rationalizationof funds allocated (o the sub-programme.Irctatled, allocatloas to the ASSSP gittarr?4d as anncx 2.356.3 Drrft Budget Eetlnetca for oF.S Sub sub-Progtellmc! Dcptrtmcnt!totFa2O23l24Tablc 12: 8ub 8ub-Progrrnrnc uade r MoES lndlcetlng ellocatlona fotF12O22 | 23 Ys fl2o/13 | 24. UBhe Ba.Drrft Ertlcrtc! IA2r)23 I 21cou Ert FEldr Totrl11633r63.r8122.43,vrrirlccbctrccawN22l13rndFr202324-() oo931 64-tt 26- l3ll.9a4q 52-o 3r- r 18.6763ltTcchalcrlVocatlo.dEdircrtio[ rlrdtFcld IlccirEdtrcltiot l-16at 1.533Sourcc.. Daq/l artl,'^ate. irrtd. ?ECt ca'latlz.tl,,r,'-Table t2 above highlights funding for fr12O22 /23 against FY 2023/24 f.or LheMoES sub sub-programmcs and highlights the budget cuts notcd in the Policy,Planning and Support Scrvices and Technical Vocational Education and Trarningby UShs 138.98bn and UShs ll8.67bn respectivelv.Basrc and Secondary Education and Higher Education have an increased budgetof UShs 49.52bn and UShs 3 l.64bn respectrvely marnly due to developmentprojccts271-190.78}FH-+t| 224o 472 0o 872 0.1t63 og66rA?t'roec( flf 2UAU23GoUErt Fuodr lotrlHtttzottL,2tEducrtlorCarccr, Ouldrocc,C.ou n..llln3 APLccacntI ApErovcd84 6S 40 ss75.38.1 86EDort. rqd PfFL.LEducrtlo!75.03t 5.12 0l5 12 386 o61.64.a83lls96 204.61 o208.61 69 63 o 69 63Poli.yr Phnnf.t OBrtlc udt.co.drryEdncrtion.SGrYlcca80 4833 19It366 42 74120.44408 0 4.0tr Ourllte O Etrldl.fu 4Jg o4.39t27 73430 39190 4394 02t47.O7024r r0387 4 6??536.90:I- 3.E74t2.39 67'i2.Xt 2|:ll. t6367_88l1654 55_0.2no.37 189.92lB36?.O OBSERVATTOI{S AITD RECOMMEITI'ATIOI{SVotc O l3-ltllatatr5r of Educltlon aad Sportral Budgct Cut.Thc Committee obserues that dcspite recommendatlons earlier made by theCommittee at NBFP FY2O23124 approval in regards to the Ministry of Educationand Sports tloyo budget cuts especially to thc aubventrons, the MoES budgetaryceihng has not been adjusted to catcr for these budget shortfalls and thcfollowing are hkely implications. The loan Scheme has accumulated arrears inregards l.o payment of turtron fees for contrnuing students under the schcme andthc Board will not be able to admit new bcneliciarics in the coming financtal yearot 2023124. The Health cxamrnatrons Boards of UNMEB and UAHEB wrll not bcin positron to eflcctively dischargc thetr mandate of assessment of students givcnthc 80% budget cuts. The Uganda Natronal Commissron for UNESCO(UNATCOM) wlll not be rn position to pay Annual Subscription to UNESCO ANDICESCO and implement lts ecovlties. Overall the subventions under the Ministryhad a budgct cut of UShc 17o.9Sba.Rccommc,,.do.tlott?hc commltl;e. tc.p,m:mG&ds that TFPED ,,c,lnttalt,,s tE budgG,s ol tEsubocatloas uadar tlrc lf,oES bg ttr lr9tts 77O-95b^ thal utas clt JoreIIeGj,;Tt c implca?4,ntatlon and dlschange of thelr naadatcs aa e,[ittlrg'gcd lAthc acts tlclt b?ottght tham lato lorcc and t tc IIDP IIIbl Gr.nt Aidtag klmer5r rnd Sccon&ry SchoolrThe Committee notes that the Ministry continues to receive numerous requestsfor grant ardrng of both pnmary and secondary schools in parishes and sub-countics without primary and sccondary schools respectrvely. Howcver due to nobudgetary allocation towards grant aiding of schools, no new schools will bcgrant arded n FY2O23/24. During NBI.'P, thc Committee was informed that theMrnlstry ucsts across the country for takeover by Government,re**ffi+# 3? s'li'of community and NGO schools as government grant aided primary schools. Theadditional estimated cost of thc takeover would be Ulhr.1lom per primaryschool and UShe 4(X}n for takeover of a sccondary school. Therefore for grantaiding 10O Primary School.s, the Ministry needs UShl 11br and for 100sccondary schools the Ministry needs UShr 2Ota for grant aidtng 50 secondaryschools.The Committce further obsenres that U.hi 6.8obn that was appropriated forgrant aiding/codrng of 28 pnmary schools and 37 secondary schools at U.hsl6.8tbn in thc FY 2022123. Howevcr, thesc funds taere not released.RccorrrlatelndatlonsThe Commlttce l,ecolrtt E dt thc tollowlag:L rr/,a,llatcs lts rl,colznrnendation tor thc telcasc of Ushs 6.8Obtn thaiuo.s approprlatad. Jor graat aldlng oJ tlrc 28 pdmary schools and,Ustts 75.88bn to" th. 37 *coadary schootc la Dl 2O22/2(n3.ll. ttta,t U?PE,D anntls llshs. T 7bn tor gtaatald:lrtg of lOO prlnaryachoob h rY 2O23nO24lll t tart NFPED a,rnttc UShs 2Obn tor gsant arldlrtg 5O sccondary schoolsqctrara thc cou;,rtry la FI 2O23t2O24,cl Rch.billtstion of Tredltioanl Socoadery SchoolrThe Committee observes that there are a number of tradltional schools indrfferent parts of the Country that are grappling with both dilaprdated andinadequate infrastructure due to incrcased number of studcnts and urgentlyneed govcmmcnt support rn order to meet the basrc mtnimum standards ofqualityeducation, most of these schools are religious founded schools.Rcco38Thc Commttbcc recommetds tlroi Usrtt 75ba bc allocafz,d. caah finalnclalgcar touardt thc rclmbllttdlon ol thcsc oU trqdltlolaal schools hr otdctto ca,sur.c dcl:lacry ol qualltg cducrfioa scntdccs coratry uldc.dl Sdrry cnheaccmcnt fot Arte TcachcrrThc Committcc obsenres that the presidential directive of enhancement ofsalanes for science teachers has greatly demotivated their ArtB counter-partsand this dircctivc has also brought about supervisory challenges wrthrn schoolsespecrally in instances wherc by the head teacher is Arts based, this means thatthe scicnce teacher earns more than the head teacher. The Arts teachers hadbcen promrsed a salary incrcment in the subsequent years howcver, this has notbeen provided for in the budget estrmates for fY2O2312O24.Rccomne'n,datloaThc Cotnmlttec tccommernds tttal MoES oonrldcrs enhanclng sa,la,dc, forall tcaclrcre in a pha,,*d. mc,rl, .t utlth spcclal consldcratloa lor head-tea,ch.ta aad tltclt d,cputlcs eatra,lng lcc, t 6a Chc tcachirzg sto.tf uaderthclr supctalslon,cf Rccnrltncot end dcployncat of tcechcrrThe Committee notes with concern the existence of a sta{Iing gap of 43%accordrng to research done by ESC whrch has impacted on the quality ofEducation. Thc Committee further observes that about 4,00O teachers wercappolnted by the Education Service Commissron on necommcndahon by th€Mrnrstry, however despite the shortfall of tcachers in secondary schools, theseteachers havc not yet bcen deploycd due to lack of a commensurate wage bill atthc distriets. Thc Commrttee was further informed by the Ministry that ar lcast3,O00 additronal primary teachers are needed in order to improvc the Pupilteacher ratio in the least staffed primary schools and this is esmatcd to costUahr l22bn.re,P*-f-@ws39RccomtnendatToaTrl€ Cornmi,,cc not s thc nccd to addte's thL utg,,ntly aad, tccommatdsth4, il?PE,D 4lloc{t s an addltloaal UStt 722b^ fot deplogmcnt oI tha4,OOO sccoadary tc(rcr?Grs ahzadg appolatcd. and UShs 25bn Jorrccrtitmeat of aa addltloaal S.OOO tca,cttcrs for prlmary scltools.0 Full Iaplemoatetioa of thc Tctchcr'r Schcmc of ScnriccThe Committee was informed that the Scheme of Service is not fully implementedand thrs has affectcd thc motivation and retention of tcachers. Tcachcrs whohave upgradcd have not been promoted, have stagnated at Assistant EducatronOllicer level for too long and even the ones who have been promoted to SeniorFducation officer havc not bccn dcployed. There rs need to increase the wagc billof thc sub-programme rn order to promote these tcachers to lmprove thelrmotlvation and retention in the sector.The Committee further observes that thcrc is need to promote teachesrsccondary school that havc upgraded to degree and masLcrs level but havc notbe promoted to Asiistant education offrcers and cducation officers totallng to1,446 and woulkd rcquire Ushs 3.55bnRcco,fiu'?dndatloThe bmmltAcc tccomtacad,s tftat foES llascc utlth NPPED to prorddc Jotthe ncccssary uage blll a ntouatlag to Ustts 6.7o8bn to ltrqrlemcat tlrcSchcac of Serulcc ln the Mucatlon SUE sub progtammc.gl hrdcquetc Stelf Hou.lag acros Educatlonal lnrtltutlotr!The CommiLtee observcs that there exrsts rnadcquate staff houstng for teachcrsand lutors across vanous Educational lnstitutions in the Country. Thts hasconsequently brought about issues of absenteeism and other teachers fall torcport to deployed schools especrally in Lhe hard to reach areas duc Loof40(.)1q+tstalf housing. Provision of StaIf housing at schools and lnstitutes greatlyenhances tcacher rctention espccially in the hard to rcach areas.Rccor,tfi?G,trdatlottThG Comrnltcce rccommetds tttE;t MoES llat ! udth M?PDD anrd ot&.crstakcholders lA otdcl. to protidc fiatt houslag Io" tcachc"s and, ttfior,lrthand, to ?cach a,,cas.hf Joha Kalc ltrstltutc of Sciencc ead TcchnologrThc Committee obscrved that the projcct 1368 John Kalc Institute of Scienccand Technologr was exrted from the PIP.Rccoma'4ndatlonThc bm lttec recommcads tttot t E pmJcct 7368 John Kalc ltrstiaftco.,f Scleacc and, Tcchnologg ls t2l^stated ia thc PIP slncc lt ur4s aprcsldertlal plcdgc.ll Dircctor.tc of laduatrlel TralEing-DIAtaed.qurt. fundlag of thc loscr eccoa&ry cutrlculum dclivcryThe Committcc observes that DIT has got critlcal unfunded arcas most especrallyactivities rn rclation to the [.wer Secondary Curriculum and these include;14,016 Secondary School Tcachers to be traincd on Assessment TratntngPackagcs (ATPs) usc and Compctcnce Based Education and Tratntng (CBET)approaches for cach of the 78 occupations of ATPs from 5,5O2 schools to betrained under the [6wcr secondary Curriculum.UShs Iboth for tralnlng and transport refund.IRG,commeadqtlo'nThe Commlttcc ?ccot rnands tha,t TPPED should a.2k1:atrls DIT utlth qn1,444. 160,O0O is needed,ssff'-g:ffi*fi$''oJ 74,o76 *confury *lrool4ltaachotc ort ATP aad CBDT agptoaches to e sut.c t E litll lmplementatlonoft E Lottnt Scclr dary Cutrlcttlutn-ll Hlghcr Educetloa Studente Flnrnciag Boerd-HESFBIordcqu.tG fundlagThe Committcc observes with concern that HESFB lacks enough funds to offerloans to majority of the needy students that apply to the Board for HigherEducatron funding. ln FY2O21|22 the Board's approved budget was UShs41.190bn mth UShs 32.303bn from the consolidated fund and UShs 8.887bnfrom NTR, however, out of UShs 32.303bn expected from MFPED only UShs16.927bn was released lcaving the Board with a shortfall of USh 15.376bn whichresultcd mto arrears for the entire second semester fees for almost allrnstitutions. ln FY2O22123, the Board's budgct was UShs 33.238bn out of whichUShs 29.52bn was from the consolidatc fund and UShs 3.718bn NTR. However,by end of half ycar thc Board had only receivcd UShs 7.O8bn which is only 24o/oof the year's release. This non-release of funds has led to the accumulation offees arrears by the Board to thc tLrnc of UShs 14.59bn.ln FY2O23124 the Board has becn allocated a paltry UShs 10bn which leaves ttwlth an unfundcd gap of Ushs 2o.664bn rn order to cover the 4,1E9 conunuingstudents on the scheme and admit a new cohort of 1,5OO studentsRccommcadatlonfha Commlttce racommcnd,r t racI frfPED uz:gclntlg allorratoc HES.PB aa a,ddltlonal UShs 2O.664bn laFruO23/24 to caable 4,789 strtdeats a.lrcadg on tfu *tunc @tntitntr.curlth tttrlt stud{ec and to cnablc 7r5OO A.tt cohot{ attala hlghttcducatlon bg arcccesla,g loc.ns throru.gh the Boatd.tl. USrt 74.59bll bc allocatcd toutards clearancc o,f tces donactica,rtcdlts accn/,ed u//ith tha tntlous Un{rEraltlcr to antotd' lltlgatlon duetD rtoa-pa.gnralnf.,ff+IJ42ilr.Irt,Tft€ iloaa lmpleme,,ts setlo 42 oJ the ,ID8'ED Act as luc alungsbcea rccommendcd bg tlu Cornmlltcc b aect all klade of gotnnrmcatsclro.lallchlps urith tic Eodrd aa uas ca vl*gcd ln thc act^fhe Fnnds goturttt E^t allocafc to t tc 4OOO stud.ntc on martt beallocated touards thc Berd tands so ure cldln haoe morc accdggatde,^ts acccss hlghct cducatlo thtough thc Loan Schcrnc.DTAffINATIOIT BOARDAet Ugende Allicd Hcalth Ereminetior: Board-UAEEBThe Committec observcd that the budget for subventions under the MoES wascut by EOolo barcly leaving thcse examination Boards under the Ministry with anyfunds for administratron of examinations n Ftl2O23/24. From UShs6,360,001,024 allocated as subventions in FY2O22123, onty UShs1,051,353,000 was allocated as subvendons tor FY2O23 /24 which can barclysupporr the Board through the yearThc Board requests that at least Uahe 12.6bn be allocatcd to it as subventionsn FY2O23/24 for it to effectrvely manage examrnations rn the Allicd Healthprofessions for 22,OOO candidates both Ccrtificate and Diploma. Thrs will alsocnable thc Board rccruit morc staff and train cxamine.sRwmmendationThc Com,,^lttee rccomttcnds t ut uFPBD rc-l,,futcr lta suDrrenttoa fudCdof USh.s 6,360,007,024 aad an add,ltl,oaal A6,hc 6,239r99t,976 bcbl Votc 165 Ugendr Buelacer end Tcchnlctl Exrmlnetioo. Board(uM#43\rThc Committee observes that UBTEB requircs adequate financtng in order toachieve competence based assessment, examlnations and awards for skillcd andproductivc workforce. The Board currently hires rts ollice space.Land was availed for construction ofan assessment cenLer however, thc fundingtowards the construction rs very meagre, out of USh. 6.246bn allocated asdevelopment budget in FY2O22l23 only UShe l.EE2bn had been released by halfhcnce a l2olo construction completron so far. The development budget has beenlurther cut to UBhe 2.Eba in FY2O23124. 'I'he lnfrastnrcturc dcvclopmcnt projcctwas approved by thc DC-MFPED and coded in the PIP as 1792 rndicating arcquiremcnt of UShs 16.375bn.Thc Board rcquires an addiLronal fundrng of UShr lba for retooling the Boardwrth containers for examinatron storage, furniture and fil,tings, computers andoffice equrpmcnt for staff.Rccomnc,I'datlonTttc Commlttce tccommcnds thac MFPED allocatcs U8TE,IB an addltTornalUSlts 3.2ba as danlopnenQ uthcrc UStrs 2.2bn uill ea,ttlz,ace thecoasttttctloa allocatioa to UShs Sba aa;d UShs Tbtr lot rctoollag ol tlrcButd touards tlv acgrlettlon of ficld contclncrs tor c,rarniaa;tiolnssbragc, co.nlrutcra, olficc cquktmc^t a^d fu'7[;lturc and fittlrtgs to cnablctrlll upta,ke of TIBT bg clll*nts thtoughout t E cou try.cl Utend.. Ifur.c! aad Midwivce Erealnetlonc Boerd-UIIMEBThe Committee obscnres inadcquate budgetary releases to the Board inFY2O22123. Out of a planned subventron budget of UShr 18.89b4, only UShr9.9?5bn had been released by end of quarter three making it diflicult for theBoard to effectrvely execute its mandate of asscssing studcnts through !conductrng examinatrons and overall gcncrd administration duc tortfall ins+dM.r-4,(Kfundrng. The lcss tt^an 2Oo/o rclcase of the devclopment budget has also affectedthe progress of the planned construction of ofiice space.ln FY2O23/24, UNMEB is among the Institutions that are affectcd by budgetcut of 8O7o.The Boa.d's desired cxpenditure rs UShs 4O.772bn, howevcr as aresult of budgct culs, the Board has bcen avarled a budget ceiling of UShs2O,4?4,931,OOO with a minimal govcrnment subvention of only UShs2,474,931,O00 leaving rt wrth a shortfall of UShs 20,297,7A2,77 2 which willgreatly affcct construction of the new officc block and administration ofexaminatrons by thc Board.Recomme,[.datloaT,|,. Comntttce t?lcomtneads that MFPED a.rloc4ite, thc Boasd aa additionalItsht 2O,29?,?t2,7?2 tD @Er ttt btldget clrortfalls la ruga,r{s bna dlgcrrt At aad genctal ada ,;l.stratlo,^ of Exa,'/u, and coa'f,t?r';cf,lon olthe rneut qftlce blockdl votG 128 Ugrn& [rtloael E:remh.tlor. Boerd-lIItEBThe Committee obsewes thet the Board continues to reBister incrcasing numberof SNE candrdates that rcquire special funding given therr needs are unique.These candidates require support in form of braille equtpment, supportpersonnel tranecrrbers and languagc interpreters the Board requires anadditional UShs 1.2bn to cffectively support thc SNE candtdates.The Board has a few areas that arc not well funded hkc accommodation forhostrng markers, the Board would like to lncrease the unit cost from UShs22,OOO to UShs 4O,00O due to increascd, power, water and sanitation costs andtherefore requires an addrtional UShs 4.6bn, top up of funds for the markers ofcandidate scrrpts by 25o/o an additional UShs 3.9bn is needcd and lield transportof examine from 25,OOoshs to 5o,0o0shs an addluonal UShs 6.66bn rs nccdcd.-j4s(s#(tNational Assessment of progress_- in Education (NAPE) contmues app€arunfunded for the sixth year the Board has not been ablc to carry out NAPE forboth krmary :rnd Secondary and thrs requres UShs 6.6bn. Development ofContinuous Asscssmcnt guldclincs continucs to bc unfundcd at USh6 3.5bn.Recomrnz,n,datfionTh. Cornmlttcc tt,c{,mntcnds t tg:t NFPED allocqtca:l. an addlfJional UShs 7,2ba to ctlccttulg s'[pport the SJ\IE caadid,at.s.{1. aa addltlonal UShs 4.6bn to cater tor thc nvl*d unlt cost torhostlttg caitars to o..conun,date I,NE;B otatklag &E 6 c iacreascla baslc comtaod,ltla,s.lll. t/Shr 3.9bn as top up tor nrarlcers oJ ccnrd,ldatc ttanxcrl.pts.{u. UShs 6.7'ba as cnhanced ficld ttaatpott' tor thc uotnlnets.u USfts 5,6bn to cant! out IIA?D and UShc 3.5bn Jor Coatlnuousarsassrrraat guldcllacx and data co,pAlrc tool,s tor sclcttcc EubJccts.OTHER EI{TITIEAvotc 132 Educatlon Senrlce Comaierion-EscThe Committee observes that the Commtssion continues to grapple wrth lssuesof adequatc officc spacc. The Committec was furthcr informed that theCommissron was allocated land in Kyambogo by the Minrstry of Education andSports however, it lacks funds to start construction and has startcd grapplingwith issues of squatters due to non-utilizatron of the land.Out of a development budget of UShc 3.692b4 allocated in FY2O2|122 onlyUShr O.SOObn was relcased to the Commissron, in FY2O22|23 out of anallocation of USha 5.O53ba for development only UShr O.99bl was relcased asof half year. 1'hc Commission was appropriated UBha 3bn to kick start theprocess of construction but this haa not yet bccn releascd. a {N\$$[rH-46Thcsc under rclcases under thc development component have greatly affcctedplans by the commission to ptocure computcrs, furniture, vchicles, CTcqurpment and Kick start construction of ticir premlses.Recommeadatloln?lhc Cotnrntttee n oomt c d,a ttrg.t MFPED allor,a,te, thc @fitr,alstloa anaddltlonal UShc S.IEn to ttlck ,tata @n&tu&loa oJ lts lt,,cmt*s atd, tort 4@llrtg the Comrnlscioa.Votc 122 Krrrpela Clty Councll Authotlty-KCCArl lardcqu.t€ fundlng to Educatioa.trd SPort. dcpartacltThe Committec observcs that whercas the adjustmcnt of the unlt cost for theUPE and USE/UPOLET capitation grants was effected for all local Govetnmcntsn FY2Ol9l2O UShc 1.3bn for KCCA was ncver bcen effectcd even after aconFrrmatron by PS/ST MFPED that the adjustment in allocation would becffectcd n F12O2O /21. This Commrttcc was informcd that this shortfall byMFPED has ncvcr been allocatcd.The Committee furthcr observes that in Fy2O22/23, KCCA reccived a wagc bi,llsupplcmentary of USha l6ba to cater for salaries of science teachers, howeverthrs has not been incorporated in the budget for F12O23/24 thus creatrng ashortfall rn the wage brll.The Authonty rcqurres additional seed schools in the city given the incrcasingnumber of learners hence cxcrting pressure on thc few existing one. ThcAuthority seeks construction ofa sc'ed secondary school in Lubaga. Narkawa andKawempc Divrsions to handle thc increasing numbcr of studcnts artd ease onthe numbcr of students per class.Construction of the Phrllip Omondr Stadrum has a shortfall of UBhr 6bin and yetthrsMrs a multr-year projcct.#"/fl$47R*ommendc;tloaTrrc Cormmit'tcc rcco,mmcnd,s that:a. I(CClt b allocrrtcd. an addltTonal UShx 7.3ba lor rculsed, c'aPltdtlogrants tor WEt USE/A?OI8T and SIYE eubucntlon to f.CCA schoolc.ii. UShs l6bn tor coerhrg tlr shortta,ll of rrlcacc tcachere JotFY2O23/24.iii UShs 66n be allocatcd to.rnrds the ongolng concttltctlon ol KCCA.Ptulllp OmoadlStadlum.fllc @nmltt.lec Jutthet rcr'onaread,s that If,oES tttorkc closclg utlth MDPEDa,I,d Ir:Cc,A la c,,.sudtrg t tz:t ,rto.t sccd *hools o,r? bullt li thc cltg baddrc* t tA l.auc of thc groutlrng nutnbcr of le,ara.crs aad gltnn thc tacttlut ltts rrot cug to 4.c.ss 5 acrrcs of land. ln thc citg ts thc tqultcmentIor co st ltctlng a cced school reqube, Theg can coa!,,dct co'Ast ltctlnggolng upwatds 7n otdar to cluarcrc that lcatacrs aaccas qualttg cducatioa.Vote 164 ltletioael Councll for Hlghcr Educatloa-ltCHE.l Iaedcquetc fuadtag for thc Councll to cxccutc it nladrtcThe Committee observes that thc Council has not bccn adcquatety funded for itto cffcctivcly discharge its dutics as the regulator for higher education.The Council budget has bcen reduced by Uahr 5.O69ba and continues tograpple with a shortfall of UStrr 2ba for it to recruit additronal 16 staff for it toget to at least 70 staffout ofan approved establishment of 125 staff this is cnticalfor it to ably monitor institutions.The Councrl has been ncgatively affected by the non-release of rts retooltng andcapital developmcnt budgct. ParliamenL appropriated UShs 1bn for rctooltng andUBhe 4ba for Caprtal developmcnt n FY2o22 /23 and NCHE went ahead Loprocure a consultant unfortunately these funds have not been released and thcCouncil has not been allocatcd any dcvclopment budget in FY2023/24 NCHEles for held work to ovcrsec 252 rnstitutions of Highthas got only fivc vchic'x+!'' v f-+er48!----,'Education, Thrc.e of which are beyond five years and arc due for disposal thisleaves the Council wrth two vchicles for field activities.Rccommandatlontlrc Comml2tec rccommcnds that:L MEPED allocatca ,,E IE a detnlopatcnt htdgct oJ UAhs sibn to e^ablotha Councll pnocun2 comlrut'als and. oficc aqulPr ent, P?otlufieochlcles lot tlrc ficld, and cmh"k oi lts 7^t ?ltructz,"al dallcloplrne Lil. frFPED cllocatcs the Canlacil llSh,s 2bn qPptoP"lated' ta FE2O22|23fot rcctrlliCmelf o! ad.dltTo al ctatl but rtot rzlcasrd-b) Ccntrel Adaioioar for Hlghct l!3tltrtlonThc Commlttee was informed that thcre rs need to ccntralze admrssions forHrgher Education insttutions in order (o ensure that only students who mcetthc minimum admission requiremcnts are admitted and the number matchcsthc avatlable facrlitics and resources of an institution and this will also make thcwork of the HDSFB in rcgards to student applications for Hrghcr Education loanseasler.RecommcadatlonThe Comllntttcc rccotntnend,s tlut tIoES llaecc utlth lff,EE atad HESFB toe;ffcct thc recom;zr.cll.d,attoln of Cc tral odr^laalon Jor lllghet ducatloaIastltutlons to aoold delags ln ptar,ecslag thc tlct ol studcats to bcsupported bg HES,FB tor the loan olle?.votc 111 llrtionel Curriculun Dcvclopncnt Ccntrc-ltcDcsel Budgct Cuta ellectcd on cThe Commrttee observes that thefor FY2Q22123 from UBhr 42.1epritlcrl budgct liacrCenter experienced budgct cuts in63bn in F'{ 2o2ll22 to Ueh. 22.rogrcss of a number of activitiesits budgct125ba insas49FY2O22 / 23 thrs,- affccted th.K,IT P*'implementation of thc lowcr sccondary curriculum especially the trainlng ofsccondary school teachers on O'level content and assessment which rcquircsUBhr ?.23bn, review and roll-out of the A'level curncula needs an additionalUBhr 6ba, ranslation, printing and drstribution of Early Cradc RcadingMaterials requrres UShr lo.tba, Urhr 1.26lba for clearance of domestic arrearsand the missing 3 components of the pnntrng prcsa costed at Ush! 1.65ba.Rccomrzneadatiottfic Co'mmlt'tce ,,ccomfilda;da t,,1.,rqt. ilFPED albcates I\IEDC aa addltlornal USlts 26.941b^ to c able thcCeatct achicu lE planaed but ,tathe,l, untundcd actittltlct llke tttcpd,^tlng and dlscrlhttlon of Earlg Gradc Readlag Ma:tcr{Jrls, tgulcuJand rcll out of A 'lcrucl currlculutr\ dottrcstlc c,rvcars and mlsslngcorryto cnta of thc prlntiag prcss-tt. M?PED allocatcs IEDC Uslrs 75bn Jor thc dctalr,Pmea't of thctttodulanlsed TWT an:rlanla-tii. Tr?€ l'^stt'ucl;lo,tr Matclrla,L, U,llt u,n.dat t,,tc o73 sltould b ttz;nslctted,to t tc lfc.,c a.E t t,€'DC Act, 2027 as amended.bl Rcaircion of Noa-Tar !.vGaueThe Committcc was informed by NCDC that the drrectrve from MFPED to remitall non-tax revenues ro the consolidated fund has stifled textbook €valuations aswell as other activitles that require instart paJrment for intcllcctual inputRccomnz,ndatlonTle Commtt:te recot,4,mends th4lt MPPED ttittcus this aad. a.llouts I\ICDC aorctaln 5O p€]rccnt o, lts ,tfR cofl,ectlons to sqry,,,tt tg,xtbook eoahtatlonsaad othcr oathld'tlcx that tequltc. ln.sta,at lta;ganca't lor l^tellectllal iaput.Votc 166 ltetloael Couacil of Sportr-NCSInadcquetc fuadi-g to NCS)'{(.-#h${>Mi.soThe commlttcc observes that thc council expenence hugc budget cuts w'lth theirbudgct for FY2O23|24 rcductng by 640/o compared to FY2O22 /23 from UShs4?.tbn to an allocation of l?.387ba n fY2O23124, this budget cut is hkcly toaffect a numbcr of planned activities under the Council such as preparatlonrquahficatrons and participation of Team Uganda in the 2O23 All Africa Games inAccra Ghana and thc 2O24 Paris, France Olympic and Paralympic games a.rnongothers The Council seeks an additional Uahr 3O.42 bn in order to Eupport 5lreglst-ered National Fcdcrations and other activlttcs.The Councrl requires a dcvclopment budgct of UEhr t4.OSbn for thercfurbishment and renovatton of Sports facilities at Lugogo Sports Complex andUShe 2o2bn nceded to facrlitate the refurbishment of various National Stadraregionally; Akibua Olymprc Stadium (Lira), Buhinga (Fort Portal crty)' Kakycka(Mbarara), Barifa (Arua), Pece (Gulu). Bugembe /lGkindu(Jrnja), MbaleMunicipal Stadium (Mbalcl, Masaka Recrcattonal Grounds (Masaka)\, IhbaleStadium (Kabale), Soroti Stadium (Soroti), King George Stadium(Tororo), Hoima(Boma Cround) and Masindi Stadium.Recomma,'datlonsThe commlttce recp,mmcnd,s f,hd:t:i. MFPED rclrwtatea that [ntdgct' of lfi$fot rZ2(ngf24 b U$rts4?.abnll. MPPBL cualls llES a dcr*lopmeat hrdgct ol UShs Sobrt to klck scaftthc dcoclopma,I.C ol ttt ,Ibrt clrlmplcx/rrrNrna at Lugogo atd U*hs2O2bt tor the Nat"lolnal ,tadla rcglotallg la thc medlut,za tctlra.FUBLIC T'N'IVERIIITIESIGcacrd Obrcnatioar ead rccornnctr&tlontaf Uadontafllag rnd hlgh rtrtl turnovcr:The Commrttec obscrves that most Public Universities are grossly understalled,with stafflng levels as low as 3O7o in some Universities/Colleges especially thes1new ones. And some Universrties have only one Professor and rely on part timelecturers largely.l'or instance Muni University requires an additional UShs 4.8bn to rccrult staffto meet the 9 ncw academic programmcs that NCHE approvcd and studentsmovlng to 3rd and 4th Ycar Kyambogo requires Urhc 3bn to recrult critrcat staffin thc arcas of Science, Engineering and Architecture, Lrra University has astaffing lcvel of 27Vo wilh. only onc profcssor and 4 Associate Professors.tomcntion but a fcw.Rcconmcadationsunlrrrsltics.bl Wrgc rcquirctncnt for tltelf lleraonlsatloa and PromotlonrThc Commrttce was informed that following an instnrction from Minlstry ofPublic Servrce, all Public Unrvcrsitres arc supposed to harmonise (heir staffstructures and cnsure that similar sdary scales are maintained across all PubltcUniverslties, however, in the coursc of staff harmonisation this has led to anlncrement in thc wagc bill of the Universitres. Additronally, all staff in publtcUniversities have stagnated in the same positions duc to lack of wage provtsions.For example Makcrere University requrres additional UBht 12.6b4 for thrs stafiharmonisation and Ushs 4.3bn for promotions.RccomrncadatioaTtlc Commlttce rcommcad,s that U?PED liascs utlth MoES and Mlnlstry olArbtlc Scrutcc to ensulre t vt t E n at t^st arctlon bg Nlaistry of htbllcScrulcc ls baclccd utt utlth thc agproprlatc lrtcrv,a.ae la uagc blll tor tltcllabnrclticc, oJ llshs 62.5ba tor ctatf harmonlatlon and Uclts 24bn Jotlnc Mrrlce retp Aakrcrsltg.1,#t<>ffiWJs2cl lnrdcquatc Fundtng for Govcrnncnt rponeoted Unlvcrelty atudGnt..The Committcc obscrvcs that the funds sent to the public Universrtres for thegovernment sponsored students arc tnadcquate since funds are always sent forfirst y€ar students in total drsregard of tlte continuing govemment studcntsleavrng the Univcrsity to sourcc for funds from other budget items to pay themand avert any possible strikes. Case in point is Kabalc Universlty wheregovernment sponsored students have increased from tOO to 406 hence ashortfall of USha 6.65ba, howcver this applies to dl the other PubhcUniversitres.The Committec has over the years noted with conccrn that public univctsitiesreceivc rnadcquate funds to facrlrtate gov€rnment sponsored students. Forinstance, students receive a mcagrc allocation of (UShs 4,5OO pcr student) tocater for (Breakfast, lunch and super) per day. Thrs amount is too low to matchthc current high cost of hving, besrdes, therc rs no evrdence in the MinistcrialPohcy Statement that the allocation has been revised in the FY 2O23l24 or eventn thc mcdium tcrm. That notwlthstanding, public unrversrties are proposing atleast UShs 1O,OOO on food pcr student.The Committee further observes that the hvrng out allowance rs allocated underthe category of recurrent non-wage together with NSSF for Univcrsity staff andthis forms almost 8oyo of the Univcrsity recurrent non-wage there by leaving theUnrverslty wrth only 20olo non-wag€ funds for operatrons whrch rs inadequate.Recommcndatlonet. TrE Cor,n ^lt.2e reommands tha;t TFPED allocat s enough twadscofifiensur.atc utlth tlte nuntbcr of gotnranrc,nt spoasored stud.nttb aoold. iacid€nce ul,rtc,tv. t to Uahntsltg hos to usc lts operatlonalsfi.tdc ca o,llou,,a^cc8 aad applgaanclal gcar.trf,s3tl. Thc Cotanlnlttcc tlconrmcads thrrt MDPED ?c'cc,tcgot{'cs lthe ltcttrs'l,ul^g out alloura c., aad I\I8SF Pagfi.it as statutory Pagrrt ^taperlvlts undcr uaga comrlrlnea.t and turt,|acr o.llor;atcs Juads to thepttbllc ltnhnrsltlcs b clear tlrc arzreats got a.s a re*lt ol aoa'pald.tUIiSf lfunds and Llvlng out alloul,aaces as at FYllo2 7f22,w2o22f23to ,r/4,.ad accntal ol turtl?d,r attcqts ln F712O23P4-tlt. t v @mmlttce rccotttntcads that MFPBD consldcrs rcvlolng tltclluittg out allounnce of got*tnnent qtonsorcd stttde,a,ta trom UShs4,5OO to UGhs 7Od)O ltcr dag,dl llarnoalzetloa of got crnacat rcholrnhlp. for lllghcr Educetionundcr thc HESFB.The Committee observcs that thc Ministry continucs to ignore thc Committec'sproposal to opcrationalT€ sectron 42 of Lhc HESFB Act which provides that'"All scholarships annently oJfered by tle Gouemment of Ugandaincluding bilateral scholarstups, existkg immediauly bfore the@mmen@ment of thi.s Act slall uest in tlc board. "Having all funds meant for higher education in a single basket at the HigherEducation Studcnt's Financing Board would cnablc a numbcr of students'access hrgher education especrally thc needy oncs who ideally would not affordand this would in turn rcduce the high dropout rates at thc Univcrsrtres due tolack of funds during the course of the programmeRccomn,'[,datlonThc Committe rccotlattrctad,s that tundt alloatcd to goucm'zl,z,at studcatsas schol,arshlp, a.rn.d grz,ntt bc pooled togeth.r uader tlw flESfB aseanfi,sagcd, undcr sectlon 42 7n otder to avall o,dquatr tv;nds lor a nurthcrol studcats to ccccss hlghcr cducatlon.cl la.dGqurtc Rcrcerch Fua& to Unlecnltisr(#<:-WJ54The Commrttee observes that Public Universitics have not been ably funded tocarry out rescarch apart from Makerere University that reccived a rcscarch Grantof UShs 30bn from Covcrnment and (thrs lrrrs slightly been inoeased bg UShs4bn n FY2023/241 th.at all the other public Unrversities have to wnte proposalsfor approval b5r Makerere University if they are to access these funds.Last financral year 2022123 the Committee allocated UShs lbn to cach of thepublic Universitres for research which was well utrhzed however more fundmg isnecdcd in rY2O23l24 and medium tcrm.Racomme'^datlo,^Otf,lc,r th4,[ akcrerc Unl,/frtltg' t E Commltt . aaaomm.,^ds t ut ,f,FPDDannlls a Orant ol at leact UShs SDa to coah ol thc publlc Ualuerftg tos'4.pport t tal? rcse.rrch a d li orr:tlon lu ctl.on glwa t nt ?G',aa;rl,h 18 aprlodty l^ thls bttdgcLI) l(o fua& for Trevcl AbroedThe Commrttee observes that as p€r the MFPED lnstructions thc Univcrsitieslike other government agencies havc zcro allocations towards thc travel abroadrtem, howcvcr this is affccting the operations of Universities since by nature oftheir work they engege wrth other external partner Universitics and bodics andas such in order to facilitate therr reecarch work they nccd to travel abroad. Forexamplc MUST closcly works/partners wrth Cuban doctors however due to zeroreleases under travel abroad the Univcrsrty cannot continue this partncrshrpwith the Cuban doctors !SrrRcrommelndo;tlon / )Thc Comtalttce recomttcad,s that I?PED ,e.l','sta{,c, t w trai]fl abroad ltrmuladcr the Prtbllc Uahr;cltle,s to ana,bla tllen ablg coatira hebpr,rtncrshQrs and, rcseanah uork.sp155Votc 3Ot Mehctcrc Unlvcrrltylne&quatc fuadiag for rch.bllltrtlon of dtlepldetcd lafreetructurc inMelcrero UnivcreityThc Committee noLes Lhat some Public Universitres are strll grapphng with theissue of dilapidated infrastructurc cspccially thc old ones like MakcrercUnivcrsity which endangers the lives of students. In 2019, the Uganda VeterinaryCouncrl warned lhat they would no longer register graduatcs of Vctcrinarymedicine due to inadcquatc facilities for training.Further, KCCA also thrcatcncd to close all halls of residencc due to therrdilapidatcd statc, UShs 8bn has so far been allocated by MFPED n FY2O22l23and the Unrversity has embarked on worke on Lumumba and Mary Stuart Hallsand an addrtional UShs 8bn has bcen allocatcd nFY2O23|24, therefore with aphascd allocation of UShs 8bn each financial year all thc halls of restdence willbc renovated within eight financial years.Howcvcr, UBhc 52.94ba is nccdcd for the renovation of the College of HealthMedicine and Collcge of Veterinary Medicine, Anrmal resources and Bto Sccuntyand an allocation of UBhr loba cach frnancial ycar is necded for the next hvcycars.As a result of thcsc dcvelopments, thc President directed that MFPED avarlsfunds to pubhc unrversities for renovation of halls of rcsidcncc and schools ofmedicine.Rccommc,^datlo,^Tt?G @rtt ^tltc. rccom,nt,lnd.s that NDPED a,llocat,,, a g,ddltlor!.4l UShslOb^ to klck sta.tt t|te rclnooo,tloa oJ the Collcge ol llcalth Mc,dlclnc andCollcge of, Vctcrlaary ltledlclae, Atlmal ncslouncca and Blo *cutf,tg a nd.coatinue ulth the rer,,osatio[ ol tttc hallsrfr+{:--/resldencc.Ws6Vote 3O2 Mberate Uaivcnlt5l of Scicncc end Tcchnolotgl'If,U8Tal Con.tructlon of thc F.culty of Mcdlclno rt Mbanrr Unlvci.lt,The Committee in onc of its oversrght visits to Mbarara University of Science andTechnolog5r found out that the Univcrsity waa struggling with very old altddilapidated rnfrastructurc of the Faculty of Medicinc. The structures in use aremarnly those inherited from the formcr school of Mrdwifery built in the 1950s' anumber of which arc condcmned as they are beyond repair with clogged seweragesystcm that gets blocked every now and then ther€fore,renovations may not betenable tn additron, MUST drd not rcccive seed funding for infrastructuredevelopment at rnccption to date.The Committcc was rnformed that the asscssment carried out by the Medicaland Dental Practitioncrs Councit threatened to closc the Faculty of Medicine rfno improvcment rs made, as a result of inadequate capltal developmcnt fundingfrom MoFPED.Trte Cor mlfrcc tlercJore ,@omrr?d, d, thatll. ilFPED annlls tunds tor cortstt,l,rchlo of the 74'742m2 llnultl'Purln*Facrultg of cdlclae block to ltouse all ,lLturc rzola,r, Laboratorricsand. officec. Thc ccd,matcd cost ts UOx, 5O.O79bi aad thls trtould' bconst'ucted. ln a 3 phascd t ai',tfu.?, A aoial of UGX. 7E,O btt tsrequlrcd ln FY 2023/24.tl. I^ t,I,. mea',,tTrn , gor/Etrnn?d,nt shoulr', release UGx. O.332m ln ttlcThe Committee observed that the Untversrty stafhng of 573 staff accounts foroaly 22o/o of the approved staff cstabhshment whereas the Academlc staffing isat 3O.S%. Thc .most critically understaffed are Departments of Biochemistry,bttdgct Jor FY 2O23nO24 to cnablc tcaotntlon of thc Patholqg Elocrc \uherc ttlc facrrltg ts cunaattg olxrt:rrtrltg ftottr- -S/sbt laadcquetc trIege Btll for .trlI Rccrultncnt ead Promotlon J )#+u5?MPhysrotherapy, Nursing, Pathologr, Radiologl, ENT, Chemrstry in the FoM andBiomedical, Electronics and Pctrolcum Enginccring in thc ncw Faculty of ApplicdScicnccs and Tcchnologl, Unrversrty Library and the Drrectorate of Research andGraduate Training.Due to inadequatc wage bill, the University is noL able to promotc its staff andthis has resulted into high staff turnover to the newly estabhshed unrversitiesfor higher po6ltion6.Tltc CommltCcc recomraca,ds thc;t UFPED alloratcs;7, Mbanpta Uniutcltg o, Scl.ncc aad Tcchnology an addltlonal uageo1r llllhs ?.2ba to prtlg lracrr,a.e tlte sbtflag lernl"s ol thc acadcmlcst4ff.ii. A^ addttlonlrl uagc bl[ USlts 2,72bnto promotz 63 scalltha;t ar. ductor prcnotloa la otder to lmgrct* st4lf rctcatlon-votc aOA Urkcrcrc Unlvcnlty Burlacr Echool-MUBBlaedcqurtc fuadlng fot MUBSThe committcc notes that MUBS has budget executlon challenges due toinadequate funding like shortfall in thc wagc bill for cxistrng staff, out of a wagcbrlL of UBhr 6t.9bn for exrsting staff, only UShr 62bn was allocated in FY2O22l23leaving a shortfall of UBha 6.9b1 arrd this shortfall haa been carried onto FY2O23124.The Business School is grapphng with issues tncured debts for suppliers to thetune of Uahr 12.4bn. MUBS has bcen gctting less than 50o/o of its budgetcdcapital developmenFt funds in FY2O22 / 23, U6hr 3.2ba was allocated howeveronly UShr O.192ba has so far been released. Thc School still lacks teachingspace and Office spacc for rts staff.Rcr.ommendatloaTlu Commlttec tv,comnteads that:t, UFPED allocatcs AS,hs 72.4bln to clear [ts dornastic c,tzclrne.WIN,\\\r\(s8lt.ilLVage slottJall o, USfts 6.9b^ bc alloratcd tor FPO22f23 and,Fr2O23/24.lrsh^6 5b^ bc allocatcd to start pha.e I of thc cotlsttttctlon ol tttc&^trd.l tcachlag tacllltg.vote 3O4 Kyenbogo UnlecrdtyDilepi&tcd InfrertructurcThe Committee observes that thc Univcrsity continucs to grapple with issues ofdilapidated infrastructure; the Universrty still has asbestos sheets on some of ttsold buildings and this continues to be a health hazard to the Universi(ycommunrty UBha 2ba is nccdcd to start thc process of rcmoval of thc asbcstossheets, UShs 9ba is needed for renovation of the halls of restdencc that arcdilapidated and are not suitable for accommodation,UShr 4ba is needed toconstruct a wall fcncc around thc Univcrsity to protcct thc Univcrsity land,UShs1.2ba is needed ftrr refurbrshment of east End and West End Marn Halls tocomplement ofhce and teaching space and UShr ltbn to upgradc the Universttyroads to Brtumen standards.Recor me,[datlo,|.L Trtc Commlttee recommcttds tha;t M?PED o,lloca,tcs Kga nbogoIlnhnrsttg an addltional UShs 34.2bn la DY2O23f21 to add,rcss thclslua! o, astrstos shccts rcnrotnl, d,lla'pldaicd, lln,ltastfltcfi.ata a d,qddltlonal o.flTct spacc tor lectu?ert os hlghllghtcd aborr,il. Tlv cp,m,,^ltltee lwtahcr tpcomtrendt tha:t ttlc Unhnrsltg ansldctsc^gaglng the Conrpcatloa to sourcr lor lunds tor tlrc taitlal Jcnctngol tlrc Ualoersltg la ordcr toVotc 3OS Busltcna Uaivcmit5lel Inedcqueto rolceece to thc Marltlmc Instltutc tn Nemacagali- tctI.aUalecr.ltlrMs,ffi/.59ln F(2O22O 121, the Budget Committec made an additional allocation of UShr?ta for revamping and equipping the Maritime lnstitute in Namasagali, howeverout of that only UShr 3bn was allocated to the lnstitute and a paltry USht l.2bnhas been released to the lnstitute thcrcby making it diftrcult for the Univcrsrty torcvamp the institute as cnvisaged. To date the Committee was rnformcd that abudget of USha l,Ebn has so far been spent and additional UShr t.?bn is neededto put the required Maritimc infrastructure to allow the start of program.ReommcadatloaTlle &mmtt:tee t.c'com,npla,d,s t ta:t ilFPED aualls Braaitctrto, Unitnrsitgaddll'lonal UShs E.?ba la ordcr to start inplcncntattoa of chc progra n-bl Fundtlg for thc Tcchnololgr Buelncr lanov.tion and lacubetioaCcatcr (tBlICl ln Buritcmr UnlvcnltyTh€ Committee noted that the Technolory Business Innovation and lncubatronCenter (TBIIC) at Busilema Unrversity developcd a number of prototypes most ofwhich are dcsrgncd and gearcd towards supportlng farmers to add valuc to thcirfarm products. [t was further observed that thc prototypcs have been desrgnedto addrcss thc problems of farmcrs purchasing expensive machines from forcigncountries and crcate employment to local innovators in linc with BUBU policy.ln August 2018, M!'PED committed to [inancrng the TBIIC for increascinnovations, howcver no funding has been availed to datc.RccomtteadatloaIlu Commlttcc recomntcnds tlvt ilFPED alloc.ttes UGX ,BA ea'ch fiaanclalga? tor thc na(, 3 fiaaaclal gG.tr1r as lt tt4,d eafller commlttcd toumtdsthe op''rtlo,^allzatloa ol t E tBilC.ct Iaedcquatc fuaSchooltosar& thc complctlon .nd cquippilg of Mcdicdl:NWL60l'he Commlttee notes that out of the required UShe 12.lbn that was needed torevamp the medical school block, only UShr 2.8b4 has bcen availed lcaving ashort fall of UShe 7.3b4.RecomnondatloaTrtc Collnmltt. tccorn lc ds tha,t IIIIPED rrlloca,tcs the An&r,rsltg a daddltloaal UShe 7.3btt to lart fr.ac,k and. complctc t:ha rchabllltatton ol ttrcMcdlcal School and cquQ lt a.' ls tqulnd bg the Iitr,HE sta d.a,.dr.VotG 3()6 }luai Uliec..ityat Inedcquete fundiag to Mual UaivcrrltyThe Committcc obscrvcs that Muni Unrversity continues to suffer issues ofunderfundrng and always seeks supplemcntary budgets due to thc limitcd non-wage budgct it's allocatcd. Thc Committee notes that the University getssupplementary fundrng of UShr 2.8bn cach financial year due to shortfalls in itsnon-wage recurrent and rt would be prudent for MFPED to add this to lhetrbudgetary allncations to avoid supplementary funding.Thc Universigr also urgently needs UShr 4.6bn to cater for critical staffing gapsto cater for ncw programs and students moving to 3.d and 4s for Bachclor ofScrence in Agriculture and Business admin and staff for Erepr.The University also needs UShe 1.2bn for operaticrnalization of Erepr PIC rnr infrastructuralal Rculscs the rccrr;"e t ao -atagc budgct of u l Ualurcltg upuardtto at le,st US,lr., 7.77b^ in ??!2O23/b24 a;nd, Che fffBF pctl.od. Ta orderto at/otd t tc supplc. e^tary fiqu.rts .a.ch Jfi,,,.a,trclal g.a1Moyo. The University requires UShr 8.2bn annually to.cater fo\needs of the Univcrsity.-eS/'\--Rccamrncndatloa.; / ),iThe Co',nmlltcc rccommeads t ut MFPED;rPl+--v\61b) Allocatcis a dddltlona,l USh,s 8.2bn tot completcoa of the Multl-pu':pE/s€ Heqlth sclencc Nodcrtt Liborltory o;nd aid'f,,t,a 4;n^cx}.rtlld;lag cnd USfts 7.2ba for opctatlonallzat/.oa ol Ercpi PTC.c) Allocatct thc Urahlr,tsltg UShs 4.8Dn ncedcd to tecralt .talf ^ededto lcctur. thc ?d and 4t g@" studc ts of Agttc,4lturc andUa a,gcfir.arnt Sclcaccs.Votc 3O7 Krbelc Unlvcrrltyel laedcqurtc tcech facllltic: rlrd laboretorlcr et Kebele UnlvcnltyThe Committee observeg that Kaba.le is a ncw Pubhc Unrversity and still hasseveral challenges in rcgards to teachrng facllities however, their dcvclopmcntbudgct for fY2O23/24 was rcduccd from UShr 9.63lbn in FY2O22 /23 to UShe2.58?ta i.n FY2O23l24.Thcrc is nced by governmenl" to continue supporting theUniversrty to improve its lnfrastructur€.Thc Unrversity also requires additronal UBhr 22.6b4 for specialized machineryand equrpment to support innovation and technolog/ Lransfer.Rar,ommendatlonTl?c Commlttec rccomtmeads tlvt UaPED;l. al^t/:ln.x thc dernlopne,it btdgct ot AShs, 9bn in thc madhtm tcrrnto ca&lc thc Unfintsltg btrlld, ltc lntt?'st atcare.ll. Ararrlls dn addltloao'l UShs 22.6ba tor peocurcmcnt of xpcclallzcd,quap rrre, nt aad, mac hlncty.Votc 3O8 Sorotl Ualvanltyal Conpletio! of Aaatony BlockThc Commlttee observes that duc to devclopment budget cuts cach financialyear, the Unrvcrsity has not yet been able to complete construction of thcAnatomy block. So far USht 3.649bn has been spent, this is a multi-year projccthowever no funds were allocated tn FY2O22l23 and FY2O23|24 thus stalling the5u 4(MLproject. The Universrty rcquires UShs 17bn to complete construchon of theAnatomy block.Rccommea.d.d'tlo'^,:hc Conmlttee tccommands Chat MFPED a,llocatcs thc Uahnrsltg aaadditioaal UShs 17ba for complctloa oJ thc Anatomg Blockvotc 3o9 Gulu unlncrrltyel lnadcquatc fuadlng for Ccntrel TcachlnS FeclltyThe Committee observes that Gulu Unrversity had a reduction tn tts dcvelopmcntbudget of FY2O2|122 by UShe 6.O'l7bn after a supplementary budget that wasapproved by MFPED was indrcated as an already approvcd budget by BudgetCommittcc of Parliament and thcrcby not approving thcir supplcmentary whichwas not the casc. Thrs has caused challenges in regards to the continuatron ofthe constructron of the Central Teaching Facility to enable the University mectthe tsasrc Requirements and Minimum Standa.rds.ln FY2o22/23, out of a dcvclopmcnt budget of UShe 11. t6bn only UShr 1.22bnhad been relcased by half year further stalling the progrcss of thc centralteachrng facrhty project and this has led to demobilization from site by thccontractor.ln ?Y2O23 /24, only USh! 2.L2ba- has becn allocarcd as devclopment budget forthe Universrty regardless ofall the unpard certificates as a result of works on thccentral tcaching facrlity. ."S...*-r\FRecomt^e datio nTllr Commttt e ?eoomrnctds that MFpsD otrrt(dt " tttc 1r^tta"tlqg'rdct/€l,,pr'^e,trt bardgct ol UShs 77ba atd. tlmelg relcascs bc made to cnabl,dE A,^h,€rsltg ra€et lts conttactual obllgattoas ia tcgateaching facillty.l\l-bf Ina&quetc fuadlng for othcr kcy dc?cloprncnt proJcctt"d.s to thc Ce,[;ttalxN T63The Committee was rnformed by the Universtty that, UBhr 6.455b4 ts neededfor the multipurposc building constructron at Culu Unrversrgr ConstituentCollege, Moroto and UShr 7bn for Construction of the teaching hosprtal.Rccomnendatlon?rE Co,,nmlttcc sccomna nds th,,t TDPED alloca:ccr @rtlu Uah/r,rsltg aaaddltTonal USh^E I3.455Da ln otdcr to ulndctaakc thc co st ltctio of murti-pttrposc buiElng at thc Coastltueat College 7n Mototo annd. frachlrllgHosplta,l-Votc 31O Lln UnlvereltyInrdcquete dcvclopmcat fund for Lln UnivcnityThc Commitlee obscrves that the Unrversrty has a number of ongoing capitaldevelopments and rcquircs an additional USh. 9bn for completion of the MarnAdministration block for all-inclusive office space, central lecture & conferenccfacilities and Uehe 3.6bn for cquipping thc tcaching hospital and facultrcs ofEducation and Mcdicrne with essentral equipment & supplies for effectivet raining and efficrent functioning.RccotnmeadatloaTlra commtt:tce rccommends th4;t IFPDD allocatcs ttla Unhtctsltg aa crt.raUShs 72.6b^ Jor thc complctloa of tho matn adnlaistratlon blork andprocanattunt of thc nacccary mcdlcal qulpmcat tot thc teachlag hospltala rd. Jocultles.VotG 312 Ugende Manegcmcat Inltitutc-lrulInedcqurtc Cepltd l)cvclopmcnt fuldr for lltllThe Committee observes that UMI rcquircs an additional UShe 1.5bn forconstruction of a new classroom block at rts campuses of Mbale and MbararaThe Institute also needs UShr loba for construction of Multipurpose buildrng rn '.thc medium term.nlgtIZIl N64RecomrtendatlonT,?c Conmlttce recomntends that DPED 4."E|lls UtI addltloaat UShr I.564Jot colnrtn ction of ncut clossroom blocks at lohlc and, Ibarata and UShsTOba to tclck start thc coastnrctiott of nulti'1tu4toln DllJ'Id,tng at tttcNampd.la Br4, ch.VotG 313 Mtr of thc Mooa UaivcraityInedcquatc devcloprncnt budgctThc Committee observes Lhat in FY2O22/23 as the Unrversrry was established tthad a dcvclopment budget of Uahr 5.41bn howcver by hdf year only UShr1.8oba had been relcascd, however, there is no allocation for development inFY2O23124. This being a new Univcrsity, thcre is need to re-instate thedevclopment budget to address issues of rchabilitation of buildings taken overand equipprng dcpartmcnts.The Unrversity also sceks USht 5.4bn as rctooling budget usua.lly allocated tonew votcs to procure Icy equipment, furnrture and transport cquipmcnt in ordcrto support teachlng, rcsearch and adminlstrative functions.The Presrdent pledged 2obn to Mountains of the Moon University for theconstructlon of the faculty of science, innovation and tcchnologr in 2O2O.Rccommatdatlon7hc Com',,lltlee t.rjomme,4.ds ttrd.t IOPPEIT ru.lnst.rtct Nt9 ol thc froottIlailuctslty dctt loprrrc,al budgct of AS,hs 5.47hn, addltloa'al USftl 5.484 acrctoE,ling budgct and tlla Uclt Zobn Presldeatial plcdge tor tE@nstn ctlort of the tacrl.ltg of *lcnce, laaotr:tioa and techaologg.-n-sVOTE 612: LOCAL GOVERNMENTS++65IDllepidetcd infrartructurc ia Educetlon rld SPort. In.tltutioasThe Committee obserwes that there are a number of dilapidated lnfrasLructurern both education and sports institutions and thrs was exacerbated by the COVID19 pandemic and thc natural disasters that frcquently occurRccomlzleadatlon?hc Cotwnlttce rccommend,s that gotntaments ota,kes dclibetate cllort btckc sCock of all gornramcnt educ<ddon and sltorts /acllltics aclross thccountry ulth an alm of lnprouing thctrn ulth spcclal attcation to dlst f,ctsthac arc uauallg atlectcd bg aatwa,l disaster..8.O I(TY UI|FUTTIDED AI|D UTIDIRFUI|DED ACTIVIIIES OT THE EDUCATION,SPOR?8 AIID AXILIS sUB-PROGRAII}IEThc unfunded and underfunded and yet critical activitics of thc sub programmehave bccn attached as an Annex.Plea,. rclet to An^e, 7.9.O COUCLUSIONRt. Hon. Speaker and Hon. Mcmbcrs,I bcg to movc that the budg€t for the Educatron, Sports and Skrlls Sub-Programmc bc approved as per the table below. Unfunded and Underfundedprioritics for thc sector are attached as an Annex l.M#N66Teblc 13: BT DGEAARY ESTIMATEa FOR SUB'PROGRTTMiIE FIORrtr2o23124App B[l Dr.ft E tlaetcrvoTt/rrEflTUTtOlt A.UOUI|T (OOOI USES Bil |o/ uJo/w Non-Wagcow Pcnsron and Gratultyo/w arrearsTotd Rccot'ent 20.144,61sDcvGloprncnt Cornponcato/ tu GoUo/ Lu External Financingo/w aneatsTotrl DcvclopncntowWo/w Non-o/w Pension and GratuityO/w ArrearsV(}rE Ol3: mrIsTRr OF EDUC,A?IOII AIID SFORta (UOESIR.currcnt Coal)oaclt48,226,349r39,746,64729,609,7261,574,008t59,94?,2??42,S05,130250,366.54442,709292,91S,383votE 111: ltATlOl{AL crrRHCULt f DE\TELOPf,EXITCEIrTERo/w GoU (lncluswe oTaxeso/w Wageo/ w anrearso/u Nono/w Per*ton & CratuityTotel RacurrcntDcvclopo.cat ConponGato/ ut Dxtemal Ftnancingo/ u arrearsTotel DctclopmcntRccurlcnt Conr8,554,164I1,670,53180,0803,074,0003,O74,OOOVOTE L2t3 UOAI{DA IIATIOIIAL Er [llrA?lolla BOAnDRccurrant ComDotrcnt/ 12,360,000104,489,68791,238-nr #67Aotd Racurrcato/ tu External Financingo/ u afiearsDcecloP'!.cot Co;1lloncnto/w GoUo/w Ertemal FinanangTotal Dct,clol!.CNto/uJ arreafsVOTE 1323 EDUC/\TIOII AERVICE OOMUIaAIOII (ESCIowwow NonRccurrGnt Compoacnt2,891,5386,584,791t,479,26538.7568,035,82O2,436,41Oo/w Pcnsion and GratuityDcnclopDCtrto/ tt GoUTotal Rccrrtento/w arrcareTotd DcvclopmcatV(}TE 164 r llAtlOltllL COUTCIL FOR IIIGHER EDUCATIOI(ow WagcRacurrcnt Componcnt5,239,536l,33S,9369,496,257o/w Pension and Gratuityo/w Anearso/w Non-wageVOIE 165: UGNTDA BUSINEAS AlfD TECEI{ICALEI(AMIITATIOIIS BOARD12,1O2,335 Totrl RecurrcntIotd DGvclopEcntECatolw GoUo/ ut Extemal Financingo/w AftearsRccErrcnt Cornponcnto/w Non-wageo/w Wageo/w Pensron and GratultyI 14,658,45Ot 1,544,000I t,s44,OOO2,4i!6,41O4,895,00022,A79,4O21.560,00024,654$O2Io/w arrearsTotrl R.cumc[td #682,800,0002,eoo,ooo1,608,542ts,793,644435,6?216,966,ti14, Dcv.lopncllto/u GoUo/ nt Dxtemal Financingo/u AnearsTOTAL DTI'EI'PUET{TvoTE 166 : NATIOT{AL COt ltCIL OF sP'ORIsRacurrcnt CotnpoaGnto/w Non-wagco/w Pension and Gratuityo/ ur AftearsTotel RccurcntDcvcloptrc[to/ u GoUo/ w Fxternal Financingo/w ArearsTotal l)cvclopraca tV(y[E 3O1 : MAI(ER.ER.E Irl{IvERIiITY T PALARccurrcat Coartrcncntow Wagco/w Non-nrageow Pensron arrd OraturtyArrea-raTotal Rccurrcato/ ut Efrernal Fmo/ ut AnearsTotal DcrrcloprncrtVOTE 3O2 : MBARARA UNIVERSTTY OF SCIENICE AI[I)TECHNOIIrcY208,970,38 r139,E42,9??2.143,8003.06,669.558t9,o72,698Dcvclopmcnt Conpoacnt<t/ ut GoU19,o72,69E40,006,320Rccurrcnt Coaponctrto/w Wagc14,954,398o/w Pcnsion and Gratuityo/w Non-W673,r507 ,444 o,/w arrearsTotd RacuEa[t *.xrs,oL2./ <Y Dcvcloprncnt Comporrcnt / t'Y,q,4-Jf 3,?64,04? o/ u AoU _,J /l -/x#J69o/ tu Extetnalo/ut AreatsTotel DcrclopEcatV(}[E 3O3: MAII|ERERE ITIIMRaITY BUSINTAS ACHOOL3.?64,O4?RGG[rGnt CoE Gnt62,644,?42 o/w Wagc1O3,lO3,S?5579,4204 1,038,2535302,t25,ow Pensron and CratuiLy-wa8e ol.iwonlot l R.curGtrtDct clopDrcrto/ut GoUo/ut Extemalo/u Anearso/ t! Aftears2,125,53O Tot l DcvcloptlcntVOtE 3O4: KYAUBO(rc ITXMRIUI?61, r7 t,533Pensio andon atuGroNon 70,530,159Rccutrcnt Cotalroncnt4a232372,368 o/ u Anearso/w Wager31,291,?34 totrl Rccu'rcnt1,689.992Dct clopmcat Conpoacato/ t, GoUII 20,so4Ertemalllto/o/ w Anears1,7 t 0,496 Totd DcrrclopncntVOaE 3O5: BUSITEUA TTNMRSITYRGGnrrGnt ConDo!,Grto/w WaEeo/w N'on-wagco/w Pcnsion and Graturtyo/ ut anrearsTotrl RecurcntI)cvrlopDGnto/ut AoUo/u Ertemalo/Lo ateats37,556,407t4,823,443266,95? t,52,112,893s,883,8968,568w70Total Dcvccnt s,t92t464VOTE 3O6: UU!tI UITMRAIaYRccut:cnt Coaponcnto/w Wagc 18,291,043301,E496,091,500o,/w Pensro_n and C13lt1ityo/ ul anearso/w Non-wage24,O80,69{ Totil Rccurrcnt4,752,000o/ u anea?sDctrcloprrcnto/ ut Drternal Financmgo/ w GoUTotd DceclopncntVOTE 3O?: XAAALE IrrI\rERSIff4,7S2,OOORccutrcnt Coa.poacnto/w Wage 39,486, 19318,211,469o/ w_Penaion zmd Gratu ityo/ u' Anearco/w Non-wage?otd RccurrcntI,686,381s6.o11,281D6e6lopncnt Coaponcnt2,586,568VoTE 3O8: SOROTI III|rVERSITYRGcurrcnt ComDoa€ato/ tu Gollo/ ut arrearso/ u' Dxtema) Frnanc,.ngTot l trt 2,586,56t15,650,6077.560,343o/w Wageo/w Non-wage336,8495,26322'.4?9, 4DcvcloDment ComponcntTotel Rccurrcnto/ w (ioUTotd Dcrr.lapnento/u Drtemal Financmgo/ w Atearso /w Pension_{r.9-Oratuityo/ w Arrears1,254,0003,362l,2s?,362VCyrE 3O9: -GULU U TERSIIY_Rccuraat CorD.potrcnt"k /**V77ao/w Wage23,?4A,06A o/w Non-wage349,?36t 17,18261,529,3()3o/w Pension and Gratultyo/u Anearstotd Racurant1,67 t,O20Totel Dcvclo GntDcvclopraG[.to/w WagcRccurcnto/w@Uo/ ut Extemal Financtngo/ ut AtearsV(}fE 3lO: LIRA ITIITITERAITY308,000o/ ut Anears29,943,2??o/w Non-wageo/w Pcnsron and GratuityTotal R€currcntDevclopmcnt5,OOO,OOO5,O(x),OOO20,084,?6720,616,69r5,107,38435,594,O731,320,00038,013,7881,571,O2O20,546,I 199,737,566o/ tt hUo/ ut Dxtemal Ftnancingo/ ut AnearsTotal DcrrcloDncntvqrE 312: UOAI|DA If,AIIAGEMENT MSTII'mERccur?crto/w Wageo/w Non-wagco/w Pension and Gratuityow arTearsTotrl Rcct!.rrcntDcvalopncnto/w GoUo/ u,t E:ctemal Firu ncingo/w AnearsTotd DcrrcloDrrcntVOIE 313: ITS OF TEE UOO!| IIlfIvERtllTYRGcurrontowWo/w Non-wagew Pensron and Oratui1,32O,(X!O '2t ,989,67416,O42,O94368,958JolNtyffir72Io/w a-rrearsTotrl RccurfcatDcveloDErcnto/w OoUo/ ut Dztemal Financtngo/i AnearsTotrl DceclopacntvorE 612 IoCAL (X)VER.![MEI[TS:Rccu"rcnto/w Wage 2,61O,480,000o/w Non-wagc 519,080,000o/w Pcnsion and Grahrityo/ ru arrearsTotrl RccurrcntDct cato/rt OoUo/ ut Erternal hno/ ut AnearsTotrl Dct clopncntv(YrE 122: KCCA EDUCATIOI{ GRAI{TRccurrcnto/w Wagco/w Non-w 9,780,000o/w Pension and Gratuityo/u AnearsTotal RecurrantDcvclopmcnto/ ut GoUo/w Erternal F\nanc,ngTotrl Davalopmctrtr\M+d+37,?O2gLO3,129,560,(X)O349,030,000349,O30,(XXt35,930,00045,71O,OOOt-7 2,230,0002tz3(),OOO71aREPORT ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AI{D BUDGETESTIMATES FOR THE COMMTTTEE ON EDUCATION, SPORTS ANDSKILLS DEVELOPMENT SUB.PROGRAMME FOR FY 2023124.NoNAME CONSIITUENCY PARTYHoo. Twesigye John NlomuhlroChoirpeconHon. Iibosiimwo Jorom RurongoHon. Eogrrre Aggrey Henry BUNYA WESTEUNYARUGURUCOUNWNRIANRMNRM2tSIGNATURE345678910.ll.12.13.14.t5.t{on.Culhbcrl Abigobo MlrcmbeV/ChoirperonKIBAI.E COUNTY NRMMr-Hon. Asiimwe Musrrme Molly RWAMPARA COUNTY NRMHon. Nyokolo Dorothy DWR KITAGWENDA NRMHon. Nyomuloro Phiono YOUTH NAIIONAL NRMHon. Acibu Agnes NEEBI DISTRICT NRMHon. Komoteneti Josyline DWR NIUGAMO NRMHon. Awich Jone DWR KABERAMAIDO NRMHon. Kubeketeryo Jomes EUNYA COUNlY EASTNRMHon. Lokwong Philiphs llukol NAPORE WESTCOUNTYNRMHon. Mutumbo Abdul KIBOGA WESlCOUNTYNRMHon. Etuko lsooc Jookino UPPER MADI NRMHon. Dr. Tobon Shorifoh Aole OWR KOBOKO NRMHon. Poporu Lillion Obiole DWR ARUA NRMl-lon. Kotusrme Annel Mugisho DWR EUSHENYI NRMOPS WESTERN t617.\Ia18.t9.22.30Hon Akumu ColherineMoveniinoINDEPsoRoTr wEsT DrvrsroN INDEPUPDF REPRESEMATIVE UPOFDWR RAKAIREPRESENTATIVENORTHERNNRM#FNRM Hon. Erngi Polrrck Nyonzi BUTEMEA COUNTYOTUKE EAST COUNTY NRM 20. i tion. Acon Julius BuoI2123.DWR SIRONKODISTRICT. NRMFOCFDC24. DWR LUWERO NUP Hon. Nobukenyo Brendo25.Hon. Ssewungu .Joseph KAI.UNGU WEST NUPNUP 26llon. Nsombo Potrrck Oshobe KASSANDA NORTHNUP Hon. Kokembo Michoel ENTEBBE MUNICIPALIIYINDEP BULAMBULI COUNTY27.2829BUSIA MUNICIPLAITYINDEP GULU EASTINDEPINDEP 3rINDEP 32Hon. Kotenyo lsoocHon Aogon SilosHon. Rev. Fr. Chorles OnenHon. Mocho GeoffreyKUMI MUNICIPALITYSURUtI COUNIYKASHARI SOUTHCOUNTY33.INOEPHon. Akugizibwe Aled RonoldHon. ltungo Nothon TwesigyeHon. Ebwolu JonolhonHon. Lt. Col. Or. Jennifer AlonyoHon Suubi Juliet Kyinyomolomo343536Aancx l: IJST OF UII?UIIDED PRIORITIEa FOR TIIE EDUCAIIOII SFoRta ANDArlLIS AUB PROGRAIIUE FOR tHI TIITAITCIAL YEAR 2O23l24t? 80Orant t2aOrant ardirccond 3ch6ls 36.8ECrant aidinB87 aecondary schoolERehabititation of tradrtional schools 15Rehabilitatron of tradltronal schoolsSalary cnhancement of ArtsTcachersFunds bc allocated towards talaryenhanccmcnt of the Arts lcachers to90cnSurc cducationWagc brll for 4.809 tcachertFor (hc wate bill of 4,809 tcachcrs,rccrurtcd and not deployed duc to l6ckrecruited and not t22of waAc bill.Rccruitment of 3,000 pnmary'tcachara 23Rccruitmcnt of addltronal tcachcrs forprl!!ery_!!hfp!19 clo8e thc Raplmplcm€nt thc Schcmc of Scrvlce tomottvatc teachcrs espcclally those thatTcachcr! Schcmc of Scrvicc 6.70{thavc scrvcd forlongat the samc l€velRccruitment of at least 3,000 To rmprove on thc pupit teachcr ratro rnaddr primary teachcrs 25thc l3tl,44lnadcquate fundrng of thc lowersecondary curriculum dehveryl4,O 16 Secondary Schoot Teachcrs to bctrarncd on Asacssnent TrainingPackagcs (ATPsl u3c and Comp.t.nceBascd Educatlon and fraining (CBEI]approaches for cach of the 78occupatrons of ATP8 from 5,502 schootsto bc tralncd under th€ Lower iccondan'Cu rric r-rlum.Hrghcr Education Students'i. MFPED urtcntly allocatcaHESFB an additronal USht20 664bn in lrl2o23l24 tocnable 4,189 students alreadyon the 8chemc contrnue wlththeir atudres and to cnabl€ 1,500ncw cohort attain hrghercducation by acccsstng loansthrough the Board.ii. UShs l4.59bn bc allocatedtowards clcarancc of fceadomestrc arrcar6 accrued wrththe vanoug untverattGa to avoldlihgstlon due to non-paymentP 35 25Uganda Atlied Hcalth ExemrnatronsRc-rnstatc its eubvcntion bu(ltet ofUShs 6,360,00 1.024 and an addrtronalUShs 6,239,998,976 bc allocated toUAHEB for thc Board to cffectrvcly carryout lt! mandatc.schoolsDrrectoratc Industfl al Tra.lo13-roa8Orant echoolsBoard AHEB) 126Uganda Nurses and MrdwrverAuocates thc Board an additionel USh820 ,29? ,7 82 ,772 to covcr rts budtctEhortfatlg in rcgarda to managcmentand general administration of Exams,and construchon of the new office blockExamrnatrons Board NMEBAltocatc8 UtlTlrB an addltional UShS3.2bn as devclopmcnt, whcrc UShs2.2bn will cnhancc the constructronallocatron to UShs sbn and UShs lbnfor retoohnt of the Board towards thcacqusrtion of field contarncrs forexamlnationa storagc, computers, of6cecquipmcnt and furnrtura and fittmts tocnablc full uptakc of TVET by citEcnsthroughout thc country.ll.an addrtional UShs l.2bn tocffcctively lupport the SNEcandidatcsan additronal UShs 4.6bn tocatcr for the rcvrs€d trnrt cost forhosting ccntcrs to accommodateUNIIB markrng du€ to anincrcasc rn bastc commoditlcs.UShs 3.9bn aa top up formarker8 of candidatctranscriptsUSha 6.?bn ae cnhanccd frcldtransport for thc crafirrnera.UShr 6.6bn to carry out NAPEand UShs 3 sbn for Continuousassessmcnt guidelinca and datacapturc tools for sctencesuble{:t3lu.tv,Sup@rt thc O LOVEL CumculumTo ollcr continuous support on thctrarnrng pcdagogre6 and aa3€ssmenmodahtics of thc revired Lowcr_SccoBdary eJ.giculglBAddrtronal UShs 6bn to revisw andout thc A-Levcl curricula.IttIIrorr Imcntation ____?43_600 A-lcvel Curriculum RcvrewArrea.r3 0.48lo tulty arrearsTo scttlc all domcrtic arrciars toUganda Bugmess and TcchnicalUganda Natronal ExamrnationaExamtnatrons Board BTEtsBoard NEBTotrl 465.t?20.3ll426.sA.rcars 0.781suLers-.114/A?16 0r IIShortfa.tl on paymcnt of scicncctcachers' lalancsProvi3ron of revrsed unrt ofcaPltahon Sranta toUPE,USE/ UPOLB:T and SNEConstrucbon of a Secd SecondarySchool rn Nakawa drvrgronRcmoval of asbesto3 andrcfurbishment of lO schoolsConstruction of clas6rooms atRenovation of claasrooms at KrtanteRcnovatron of claesrooms at KrbuycRenovation of clarsrooms at I(CCARcnovation of claasrooms atST Ponsiano K-vamula P/S PrinaryschoolConstruct of KCCA Phihp OmondrStadrtrmTotrlts ro KCCA schml8PrimaryschoolNtindarubvcntlon 8ranhcooIshool B u Sc uC.ommn acqafotrltotrltotrlShortfall wa8 allocatcd assupplemcntaq/ ln FY2022/23 and thrshas not becn incorporated rn budgct for1Y202324.Capitation Crant3 to achools ln KCCAl332.50.5o.6o.2to offcr qualitv cducatlonlmprove on thc classroom puptl ratto30.3to offcroualrtv €ducatronlmproye on thc cla3sroom pupil ratloso4to'fo rmprovc on Spofts facilltlea wtthrn6thec-rty' - -30,tr rThc Commiarion hac bccn given 3bnthrs t Y 2022123 to klck start thcprocess of constructron of thc o(iccblock howcvcr, this fund has bccn cutn thc trl 2023/24Funde allocatcd for constructton andS1s.lAllof,atcs NCIIE a dcvelopment budgatof UShs Sbn to cnablc the Council IRetoollng to cnablc procurcmcnt ofcomputcra and ollicc furniture andp(rcure computcrs and offrcecqulPm('nt, ptocur€ vchrcles for thc ficldand cmbark on tt8 lnfrasttucturaltinfraatructurc dcaclomcnt, 5Recutmcnt ofitronat Sta(f 126MFPIJO aUocates thc Councrl UShi 2bnappropnatc.l rn ttt2o22/23 forr€cruitmcnt of a(ldrttonal stalf but notrcleaaed6.26MFPED nnnstates that budgcL of NCSfor ff2023124 to Ushs4?.8bnShortfalls rn Bnon 30.42Develo nt ofnal stadiaMFPED avaits NCS a dcvelopmcntbudget of UShs Sobn to ktck start thcdevclopmcnt of [h€ sportscomplex/arena a( Lutogo and Ushs2o2bn for thc National stadn regronallyln thc mcdlum tcrmTotrlOuBtandlng Arrcars with no atlocation4.8 rin thc i'Y20231242.t66The Unrvcrarty requircE a UGX 9 l55bnfor food and hvrng out allottaaccs atthc currcnt ratcs allocauoa of UGX7.039bn12.634.41r00Cotlegc of llcalth Mqdictoe and Collcgcof v€tennary Medrctne, Antmalrciourccs and Bro Security andcontlnuc arrth thc rcno!ation of thc hallsof rcsidcnceSomc unlvc6ty btrtldings rtll posscssasbcstos roofs. Thcrcforc thcrc rs an1.4ut nccd to r€-roof thc36..116Construction of thc Faculty ofMedrcrncFacihtate th" Screnc€ Bascd Unrvcrsityin alignment wtth NDP lll Structureaat the Faculty of Medrone aredita tc-d and condemncd for uscRcnovation of chc patholory blockwhcrc tlle Saculty of Mcdlqnc lglocatcdFacrhtatc thc scrcncc Bascd Unrvcrsityin ahgnmcnt wlth NOP lll Structurcaat thc Faculty of Mednnc an:dilaptdatcd and condcmncd fot use.Provlsion of Living Out allowanccs Inadcquatc provlsion for govcrnmcntto Cotrcrnmcnt Srcd Students s6rcd 3tudcnt3.lncrca6e wage bill to cater forMbarara Unlvsrsrty of Sclencc andTcrhnolos/ an additional urage of UShs?.2bn to partly rncrcasc the stalfinglcvcls of thc acadcmrc sta(T.An addrtronal wa8e bitl USha 2 t2bn toeo.42sooUnderfunding for food and Lvratout allowancca for gotrcrnmentThe wagc rcquircment for shlfhatmonrsatronWagc rc4uiremcnt for the promotrono, Academlc StalfRenovahon of thc collcgcs ofRcnovatron of non-acadcmlcburldrngs includrng re-roofing ofhouscg and rcplaccment of asbcrtosrooftDomcstrc Arrearstotdrttcdtcinc (CHS and CovABl3 studcntat8.oo.332o.158rtcrurtment and trons 932D!_omotc 63 8taff that arc duc foraTotd 2?.61Constructron of a S264sqm Centrat6.9 Shortfalls in Wacc Brll12.4Tot.l 24.3s0 Eagr!'!L-Clcar Domcstrc arrcareWaBe and stafi rccrultmcntcspcciatly e.mor acadetlic stalf andtcchnrcransRcmoval of aebestos Ehccta fromatam Uruvcrar butldDomcstlc ArrearafotrlR.crurtmcnt of senlor STEM/STEIteachrng staff to rcach at least 50p/oC.omplctron of Mcdrcal andequrpprng Laboratory tslock forMcdlcal Schootfrom 10 o/o stafnnlcvclComplctron and cquippmg MandmeUpgrading and rns6llahon ofNetional Back Bonc lofrastructureat Palllsa, Nagongcra, andOperatlonahzation of UnrvcBrtyTcchnotogy, Busrncsg andlnnovations lncubation Ccntrc(TBllCl and commercialsng ofa.L€cturc andTotr.lNamapromotron rn ordcr to improve 3taffretcntron.Wagc shortfall of UShs 6 9bo bcallocatcd for FY2O23124.UShs Sbn bc allocated to start phas. Iof thc constructron of thc Ccntrattcachmg facrhty.lrl-lMF?ED allocatcs UShs l2.4bn to clqaita domcsLic arrears6 39534.2wagc cnhancemcnt and addltionalrccruitment to cnablc teachlng andAllocates Kyamboto Universrty anaddrttonal UShs 34 2bn in FY2023/24to address the (tauca of asbcatos shcetsremoval, dilaprdatcd rnfrastructure andaddrtlonal o(ficc spacc for tccturcrs ashrghllghtcd atDve.Thcsc arc auditad domcstlc arrears asaudrtcd by the Audltor Gen€ral andfunds have not bccn allocated to settlcthcnrThe ataffng levcl of l0 7o re far belowthe requrrcd m[umum of 50P6 as P€rNDPIIINccd to put thc rcqulrcd laboratorlesaa requrred by NCHENc€d to put the requircd Marrtimcrnfraatructurc to allole thl: 8tart of thcprogra m949.66.77.3E.70.7Commercra.hzation of prolo typ(:st.02+1To avoid supptcmcntary rcqucsts €achNon-w rccurrqrt shordallt 2A6nancial rRccruitment of critical staffTo support ncwly accrcdtted programsand pro8ramhc8 whoac atudcnts aremoving to 3rd and 4th bachclor ofacicncc for aSnculture& bach€lor ofabbaAllocates an additional UShs 8.2bn forcompletbn of the Multl-purpo3c HcalthBcience Modern Latroratory and admtnanncx burldrng and UShs 1.2bn foropcratronaluzatron of Ercpi PtCDeve tBOperationali2ation of EREPI PTCTo catcr for repair and upgrade betrantcd 557m rcparr& upgradc 623mMo for runncoataComplction of Phasc ll of thc AnabmylJlock whrch hes takcn tong duc tornldgqgalglgn4_'4s.To trana gtudentaDcvclo cnt [JudtSalar,v Ilarmonrzatron and recruitmcntof addltlonal stalT4.8a.2l_217.O fotdbcncnt from HESFBNon-remittancc of fees for 3tudcntg2.22Domestrc arrearsDomcstic ArrcariTo clcar debt8 thc unlvcrslt, inhcritcdMarntarns thc developmentbudgct of UShs 9bn m themctium tcrm to cnablc thcUruvcraity butld ttsinfras(ructure.Avail6 an addrtronal UShs226bn for procuremcnt ofspcciahzed cquipmcnt ands disnaatron31.6fromIt.machine3A.tcnt DcvclofotdDcvclopm€nt BudgctUnive6rty Bus to transport Studentsfor chnical studi€s and Outrcach17.O0.651?.65 TotdI 1.0Rc-lnstate lts devclopment budBct topay thc pcndrng ccrtificatcr andcontlnue with the constructton of thcBuarness and DevelopmcntCantcrCcntral Tca Facrh7 .2Sg Shortfalls ln WbrllMultipurposc burlding constructronat Gulu Univcrsity Conrhtucnt13.455TotCollcse and 'ttachinE Hospltal31.?1126Biltwlnadcuatc rnfraatructurc facrhtrcsShortfalls rn allowanccatotdo.576l9.ltDcvclo bu t.3t.2Construcl,ion of a new cl,assroom/officeblock at Mbale BranchConstructron of a ncw clalsroom/officcblock at Mbarara Brancht0Constructron of the ncw multlpurposcburldiat Kamla BranchDcvclot Dcvelototd 12.5Tte Committcc rccommcnda thatMFPED re-mrtate3 Mts of the MoonlJnivcr$ty development budSet of UShs5.41bn, addrtronal UShs 5.4bn asrctoolin buand thcPrcaidcntEl plcdge for the constructionof the faculty of health ecicnccs,rnnovatron and tcch5.420Ra-rn statc dcvcloment buPrcsidcntialTotd 26.+trl;"dibt l-, --ll::?tri l eto,L6.008Thc Commlttcc recommcnds tharMFPED allocatca Gulu Unrve rsrty anaddrtronal UShs 13.455bn rn ordcr toundertaka thc conatructron of multl-purposc burldrng at the ConstituentC,olrn Moroto andtcagb{rE!{qrprtallrq, lanel oI 2'ln/oI'hc Commrttcc rccomDcnds thst MFPEDsllo(atcs thc Unlvcrsrty an crt a UShsl2.6bn for thc codrptcLpn of thc marnadmurrltmtton block and paocuremc.rt of ttrencccarao, mcdrcal cqurpmcnt for thctcachrnS hosprtal and facultlca.l,ivin8 Out Allowanccs for GovcrnmcntstudcntsiIMINT,TES FOR TIIE MEETING OF TITE COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION ANDSPORTS IIELD ON TUESDAY ISTII APRIL 2023 AT 2:OOPM IN COMERENCEHALL A, SOUTH WING, PARLIAMENTARY BTJILDING, KAMPALAMembcrs Prcsent( I ) Hon. Twesigye John Ntamuhiira(2) Hon Abigaba Cuthbert Mirembe(3) Hon. Lokwang Philliphs tllukol(4) Hon. Kakembo Michael(5) Hon. Acon Julius Bua(6) Hon. Kubeketerya James(7) Hon Lt.Co[.Dr.Alanyo Jennifer(8) Hon. Nyakato Dorothy(9) Hon. ttungo Nathan(10) Hon Katenya Isaac(l I ) Hon. Katusiime Annet Mugisha(12) Hon. Ssewungu Joseph(13) Hon. Macho Geoffrey(14) Hon. Bingi Patrick Nyanzi(15) Hon. Akugizibwe Aled Ronald(16) Hon.Nyamutoro Phionah(17) Hon Acibu Agnes(18) l{on Akumu Cathcrine(19) I lon. Asiimwe Molly Musiime(20) tlon. Ssubi Kyinyamatama Juliet(21) tlon llagire Henry AggreY(22) Hon. Tibasiimwa Joram(23) Hon Paparu Lilian ObilacMembers absent with Apologyl) Hon Nabukenya Brcnda2) Hon Nsamba Patrick Oshabe3) Hon Awich Jane4) Hon Oguze l,ee Denis5) Hon Aate Taban Sharifah6) Hon.Kamateneti Josyline7) Hon. Etuka Isaac Joakino8) Hon. Wamala Nambozo9) Hon.Rev. Fr. Onen CharlesI0) Hon. Ongiertho EmmanuclI I ) Hon. Ebwalu Jonathan12)Hon. Mutr.rmba Abdull3 ) Hon Aogon SilasChairpersonDeputy ChairpcrsonMembcrMembcrMembcrMcmbcrMcmbcrMcmberMcmberMcmbcrMcmbcrMembcrMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMcmbe rMemberMemberMemberMemberMembe rMemberMemberMcmberMcmberMembcrMembcrMembcrMembcrMcmberMemberMemberMemberIIn ettcndance:Ministry Of Educ.tion and Sportsl) l{on Muyingo J2) I{on.Dr.Joyce Morika K3) I lon, Ogwang Peter4) Mr,Ketty Lamaro5) Mr.Robert Bellarminc Okundi6) Dr.Safinah Musere7) Dr.Patmiiick Byahetah8) Ms.Jane Egau Okou9) Mr.Muhammed Kabaale101 Mr. Timothy Nambggoll)Ms.LilianNabiryol2) Mr.Richard MinzBl3) Mr.Jre EremIn attcndencc (f he Committce S€creteri.t)I ) Ms. Mircmbc Barbara - Principal Economist2) Ms Akullo Caroline - Economist3) Ms. Asiimwe Flavia - kgal Offrcer4) Ms. Keijagye Brenda - Poticy Analyst - Lcader of Opposition5) Ms. Namata Sylvia - Policy Anatyst [LGB]6) Ms. Nanono Veronica - Researchcr7) Ms. Bugembe Sylvia - Rcscarcher8) Ms Ninsiima Diana - Principal Clerk Assistant/Minutc SccrctaryAGENDAL Recitation ofthe Parliamcntary Prayer2. Communication from thc Chairperson3. Consideration of Policy statements and lludget Estimatcs FY 2023/2024 by thcMinistry of Education4 AdjoummentThe meetrng was called to ordcr a( 2:50pmMin.l- Recitation of the Parlitmcntary I'reycrThe Parliamcntary Prayer was recited by thc Clerk to the Committcc.Min.2- Communicetion from thc Chairpersona) The Chairperson informcd Mcmbers that the mee(ing was convened to ConsidcrPolicy Statements and Budgct Estimates from Agencrcs and Depadments for thcFinancial Y eat 2023124b) He invited the Minister ofEducation and Sports to rcprcscnt the Policy Statemcnt andthe respective budgetary proposals to the Commiftee.tMin.3- Considcration of Policy Strtcmetrb and Budgct Estimetcs FY 2023/2024 byUniversiticsThe Permanent Secretary presented the respective Policy Statements and budget Estimalesfor the Ministry of Education and Sports for the Financial Year 202312024. [See attachmcntsfor detailslO bse natio ns/ Iss ues ra isedThe Contmittee sought to establith'a) The budget estimates by the Ministry ofEducation and Sports are considered in all.b) 'l'he reason as to why senior three students have not gotten instruction materials todate.c) Whether New vision is publishing the right content of the new materials.d) Whether National Curriculum Development Centre has a general mandatc to availinstructional materials.e) An account as to why seed schools are majorly givcn to Ministers.fl An account as to why there is delay in coding of some schools.g) Whether there is equal distribution of secd schools in all constituencies inthcCountry.h) An account as to why money for seed schools is not allocated in regard to some subcountrcs for cxamplc in Omoro Constituency where one ofthe seed schools usespolyhene bags to cover the windows of the building where the equipment is kept.i) An account as to why thcre is delay in the constructton of Bunyoto University.j) Whcthcr thcre is any solution in regard to the rcfugees in Kibaale as they have causedinflux in schools.k) An account as to whcn thc program by Wodd Bank to build schools in Kibaale willbcgin.Min.{- AdjournmentThe meeting was adjourned at l7:00pm to 25dApril 2023 at 10:00amConfirmed by, Recorded by:[fl.,nuNinsiima Diana OlenyCOMMITTEE CLERI(Twesigye John Ntamlra.CHAIRPE,RSONMINU.TES FOR TIIE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION ANDSPORTS HELD ON FRIDAY I7III APRIL 2023 AT 9IOOAM IN CONT'ERENCE HALLA, SOINH WING, PARLIAMENTARY BT,,ILDING, KAMPALAMemberi Present( I ) Hon. Twesigye John Namuhiira(2) Hon Abigaba Cuthbert Mirembe(3) Hon. lokwang Philliphs lllukol(4) Hon. Kakembo Michael(5) Hon. Acon Julius Bua(6) Hon. Kubeketerya James(7) Hon. Lt.Col.Dr.Alanyo Jennifer(8) Hon. Nyakato Dorothy(9) Hon. Itungo Nathan(10) Hon. Katenya [saac(l l) Hon. Katusiime Annet Muglsha(12) Hon. Ssewungu Joseph(13) l1on. Macho Ceoftey(14) Hon. Bingi Patrick Nyanzi(15) Hon. Akugizibwe Aled Ronald(16) Hon.Nyamutoro Phionah( l7) Hon Acibu Agnes( 18) Hon Akumu Catherine(19) Hon. Asirmwe Molly MusiimeMcmbcrs abscnt with Apologyl) Hon Bagire Henry Aggrcy2) Hon Nabukenya Brenda3) Hon NsamM Patrick Oshabe4) Hon Paparu Lilian Obilae5) Hon Awich Jane6) Hon Oguze Lee Denis7) Hon Aate Taban Sharifah8) Hon.Kamateneli Josyline9) Hon. Etuka Isaac Joakinol0)Hon. Wamala NambozoI l) Hon.Rev. Fr. Onen Charlesl2)Hon. Ongiertho Emmanuell3)Hon. Ebwalu Jonathanl4) Hon. Mutumba Abdull5) Hon. Aogon Silasl6)Hon. Ssubi Kyinyamatama JulietI 7)Hon. Tibasiimwa JoramIn Attendence: The Public UniversitiesMekerere Universityl) Prof. Barnabas Nawangwe2) Prof Henry N3) Mr. Yuruf Kiranda4) Mr. Evarist BaainomugishaChairpersonDeputy ChairpersonMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMcmbe rMembcrMemberMcmbcrMembe rMcmberMembcrMcmbcrMcmbcrMcmbcrMcmbcrMemberMemberMemberMembcrMemberMember1,5) Mr. Kizito Simon5) Dr. Zahara Nampewo7) Mr.Ssanyu l,awrence8) Mr. Musoke Hudsson9) Mr. Mugagga M. Anthonyyl0) Mr. Kitamirike EmmanuelI l) Mr. Muwanguzi Darius12) Mr Agaba Paul13) Mr. Bbale Edward14) Mr. Eria Hisal15) Mr. Omara Cyrus15) Ms.Kabumbuli Winifredl7) Mr. Misinde Cyprianl8) Mr.Kambugu Andrewl9) Mr.Lubowa Ssebina C20) Ms.Nalumaga Ruth21) Prof.Buyinza Mukalabi22) Prof Eric Awich23) Mr. Ireeta Tumps WinstonMrkerere University Business Schooll) Prof.muhwezi moses2) Mr. yosa francis3) Ms.namaganda Jacqueline4) Mr.Duhipira m5) Prof. Waswa BalunywaMinistry Of Education and Sportsl) Mr.Abagu Jane FlorenceIn .taendance (The Committce Secretariet)l) Ms. Mirembe Barbara - Principal Economist2) Ms. Akullo Carolinc - Economist3) Ms. Asiimwe Flavia - kgal Officer4) Ms. Keijagye Brenda - Policy Analyst - Leader of Opposition5) Ms. Namata Sylvia - Policy Analyst [LGB]6) Ms. Nanono Veronica - Researcher7) Ms. Bugembe Sylvia - Researcher8) Ms. Ninsiima Diana - Principal Clerk Assistan/Minute SecretaryAGENDAl. Reciution of thc Parliamentary Prayer2. Communication from the Chairperson3. Consideration ofPolicy starcments and Budget Esrimates FY 202312024 by Agenciesand Dcpartments4. Adjoumment2The meeting was called to order at 9:43amMin.l- Recitation of the Parliamentary PrayerThe Parliamentary Prayer was recited by the Clerk to the Committee.Min.2- Communication from thc Chairpcrsona) The Chairperson informed Members that the meeting was convened to ConsiderPolicy Statements and Budget Estimates from Agencies and Departmenls for thcFinancial Yar 2023D4b) He invited the Accounting ollicers ofthe Universities in attendance, to represent theirrespective budgetary proposals to the CommitteeMin.3- Consideretion of Policy Strtemeots rnd Budgct Estimrtes FY 202312024 WUniversitiegThe Universities present€d their respective Policy Statements and budget Estimates for theFinancial Year 2023D024. [See attachments for details]O bsemalio as/ Iss ues raise dThe Comm lee sought to estabhsh.a) Justification from Makerere University for the decrease in enrolment ofundergraduate students and the increase in post graduate students.b; Justification for the Suspension of the tribunal at Makerere University.c) Whether the amendment of the Makerere Gurld Statute was a proper administrativcdecision by Makerere University.d) An account for the money that was allocated for the restoration ofthe lvory Tower.c) Whethcr thcre are any funds allocated for rchabilitation ofthe dental school andveterinary school that have dilapidated structures.f) Whether there are any unfunded priorities that are key among those prcsented byMakercre University.g) Whcther thcrc is any solution to the issue of the thrcat of not registering medicalstudents due to the issue of poor infiastructure and staff.h) Whether the University has any plan on how it is going to renovates the Sludents'placrs of residence.i) Accountability for the money that was allocated to the rehabilitation ofthe dentalschool in Makerere University.j) Whether there are any discussions that Universities make on the Vice Chancellor'sforum.k) Whether Makerere University is taking advantage ofthe facilities around it to supportstudents.l) Makercre University should include the Budgct for hosting the Easl AfricanUniversity games.m) Clarifrcation on the issue of promotion of academic slaff.n) The rcason for Makerere University losing its academic position at the intemationallevcl3o) Justification for the issue of the staffof Makercrc Unrvcrsity bcing employed outsideMakercre University.p) What the recovery rate is for the NTRq) Whether the reduction in the funding of NDA by the Govemment has affectcd thcprogram,r) Whether the universities support the issue pf Uganda Revenue Authority collcctingmoney on behalf of the Universities.s) Give a rcason as to why Govemment Univcrsitics are not interested in sports,t) Whether Makerere University Busincss Schools has allocated money in their Budgafor the construction ofthe hotel.u) What is the reason behind delayed release oftranscripts for thc Degree holders inMakerere University Business School?v) Whether there is any solution for Government studcnts who do not receive anyfunding for their intemship.w) Jusification for the funds that were received by Makercrc University for producingthe Covid vaccine.x) An accounl for the numerous research projccts that Makerere University involved in.Rcsponses to the i$ucsy' observations;Makercre University Business School infornrcd the Conm,ttee,a) the former Minister of trade Professor Ephraim Kamuntu had promised to allocate apartlcular hotel for the University but then it was not allocated as promised.b) the money that is gotten from private students is what is used to supervise theGovemment students as well during inrcmship.c) the dropout rate has increased to 15 percent due to issues of tuition.d) the University has a Budget for sports and hence it is inrcrested as well.Makerere Unnernty informed the Commttee that;a) thc university rcleascd a circular to put an end to the issue ofthe staff ofthe universitybcing employcd somcwherc else.b) thc Univcrsity has put forth measures to curb the issue of sex for marks.c) Makcrere University Business School is still afliliated to Makererc University by law.d) the University Sets the NTR it collects except in instances where there are Budgetcuts in the Ministries and the Universities are affected as well.e) the University hospital is very small for it to accommodate all the studcnts pursuinSthe Bachelor's Degree in Medicine.0 the University does not have much say in regard to the administration of KCCAschools around the University.g) the Tribunal was not suspended however the activities were halted as per thc guidanceof the Attomey General who advised the University the Tribunal is not propcrlyconstituted.h) the amendment ofthe Ouild Statutc was made by the Student's Constitutional ReviewCommittee.i) the reason for the amendment of the Guild Statute was as a result of the violence thatstudents use during the election campaigns.j) the issue ofa trac€r is at its beginning stage and the University has b€gun with thosewho were under the Master Card Foundation.4Min.& AdjournmentThe meeting was adjoumed at l3:06p.m to 2:00p.m on the same day.Recorded by:frw,.o,Nlhsiima Diana OlenyCOMMITTEE CLERI(by:slgyeJohn Ntamuhiira, MPCHAIRPERSON5MII\IUTES FOR THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AI{DSPORTS HELD ON FRIDAY I?MI APRIL 2023 AT 2:OOPM IN COM'ERENCE HALLA, SOI,,ITH WING, PARLIAMENTARY BUILDINGS, KAMPALAMcmbers Present(l) Hon. Twesigye John Ntamuhiira(2) Hon Abigaba Cuthbert Mirembe(3) Hon. Lokwang Philtiphs tllukol(4) Hon. Kakembo Michael(5) Hon. Acon Julius Bua(6) Hon. Kubeketerya James(7) Hon. Lt.Col.Dr.Alanyo Jennifer(8) Hon. Nyakato Dorothy(9) Hon. Itungo Nathan(10) Hon. Katenya Isaac(l l) Hon. Katusiime Annet Mugisha(12) Hon. Ssewungu Joseph(13) Hon. Macho Geoffrey(14) Hon. Bingi Patrick Nyanzi(15) Hon. Akugizibwe Aled Ronald(16) Hon.Nyamutoro Phionah( l7) Hon Acibu Agnes(18) Hon Akumu Catherine(19) Hon. Asiimwe Molly Musiime(20) l{on. Ssubi Kyinyamatama JulietMembers absent with Apolosr| ) Hon Bagire Henry Aggrey2) Hon Nabukenya Brcnda3) Hon Nsamba Patrick Oshabe4) Hon Paparu Lilian Obilae5) Hon Awich Jane6) Hon Oguze Lee Denis7) Hon Aate Taban Sharifah8) Hon.Kamatenetl Josyline9) Hon. Etuka Isaac Joakinol0)Hon. Wamala NambozoI l)Hon.Rev. Fr. Onen CharlesI 2)Hon. Ongiertho Emmanuell3)Hon. Ebwalu Jonathan14)Hon. Mutumba AMull5)Hon. Aogon Silasl6)Hon. Tibasiimwa JoramIn Attendance: Public InstitutionsKyambogo Universityl. Prof.Kahingwe R2. Prof Maria Musoke3. Mr. Katongole AChairpersonDeputy ChairpersonMembcrMemberMemberMembcrMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMembcrMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMembcrMemberMemberMemberMembcrMembcrMemberMembe rMembe rMembe rMembe rMemberMembe rMembe r1I4. Mr Kasirye Bukulu Stevens5. Me Manano Richard5. Mr. Tumwebonire A7. Dr.Nassali State Eliz8. Dr.Annie Begumisa9. Ms.Ninsiima Clarc10. Ms.Nakimuli Agnes Mugalull. Mr.Wamono Ivan12. Mr. Okuonzi JohnUgande Menagement InstituteIn .ttendance (Thc Committec Secrctrrirt)l) Ms. Mircmbe Barbara - Principal Economist2) Ms. Akullo Caroline - Economist3) Ms. Asiimwe Flavia - Legal OIIiccr4) Ms. Keijagye Brenda - Policy Analyst - Leader of Opposition5) Ms. Namata Sylvia - Policy Analyst [LCB]6) Ms. Nanono Veronica - Researcher7) Ms. Bugembe Sylvia - Researcher8) Ms. Ninsiima Diana - Principal Clerk Assisant/Minute SecretaryAGENDAl. Recitation of the Parliamentary Prayer2. Communication from the Chairpcrson3. Consideration of Policy starcments and Budget Estimates FY 2023nO24 by Agenciesand Departments4. AdjournmentThe mccting was called to order at l4:2lpmMin.l- Recitetion of the Parliementary PreyerThe Parliamentary Prayer was recircd by the Clerk to the Committee.Min.2. Communication from the ChrirpeBonThe Chairperson informed Members that the meeting was convened to Consider PolicyStatements and Budgct Estimatcs from Institutions for the Financial Year 2023124He invited the Accounting oflicers ofthe Universities in attendance, to represent theirresp€ctive budgetary proposals to the Comminee.Min.3- Consideration of Policy Stetemcnts rnd Budget Estimrtes FY 2023f2024 byUnivcrsiliesThe institutions presented their respectivc Policy Statements and Budget Estimates for theFinancial Y ar 202112024 . [See attachments for detailsl2.lObsemuions/ Issues raisedThe Comnuttee sought to esrabl$h.a) Whether the issues that cut across all Universities are discussed on the ViceChancellors forum.b) Whether sports are a write up in both UMI and Kyambogo University.c) Clarity from Kyambogo University as to Asbestos causing health hazards.d) Whether Kyambogo has any writing as to the Dircctive rhat was given by thcPresident.e) How is Uganda Management Institute involved with the parish Development Modelfl Whether Uganda Management Institute has the 23 Dir€ctives that werc given by thePresident.g; Whether Kyambogo University has an expansion plan in regard to the rcnovation ofthe Students Halls ofresidence.h) Whethcr there are any issues of school drop outs in Kyambogo University.Responser to the issuB/ obscrvrtions;Kyambogo Uruvernty ntformed the Comminee that:a) the crosscutting issues are discussed with the Chancellors of the various Universitiesand a meeting was held with the Ministry of Education and Sports and Ministry ofFinance.b) there issue ofschool dropouts is existent in the University duc to lack oftuition bysome students.c) the University prioritises spo(s as there is a sports policy where the Universityparticipatcs in various sports activities on both National and inrcrnational levels.d) the University does not have sufficient sports faciliries due to the issue of funding.e) students cannot pay for the halls of residence due to the condition they are in.0 the renovation ofstudents' residences is going to be spocifically in relation torepairing them and not expanding them.g) the University is making more research on how it can engage in Pubhc PrivatePartnerships to build students halls ofrcsidence.Uganda Management lrrstttute inlormed the Committee thal:a) the completion rate in the Institute is at 74 perent.b) It is the mandatc of UMI to ensure fulfilment of the Human Capital DevclopmentProgram under the National Development Plan (NDP) III hence its support towardsGovernment realising the Covemment Strategy for Parish Development model.Min.4- AdjournmentThe meeting was adjourncd at l5:59p.m ro l8n April 2023 at l0:00amRecorded by:W,-0Nirisiima Diana OlenyCOMMITTEECLERKConfrmed by:sigye Iohn Ntam ra,PCHAIRPERSON3tMINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EDUCATTON ANDSPORTS HELD ON FRIDAY 14TH APRIL 2023 AT 9:00AM IN CONFERENCEHALL A, SOUTH WING, PARLIAMENTARY BUILDINGS, KAMPALA.Members Present( I ) Hon. Twesigye John Ntamuhiira(2) Hon Abigaba Cuthbert Mirembe(3) Hon. Lokwang Philliphs Illukol(4) Hon. Kakembo Michael(-r) Hon. Acon Julius Bua(6) Hon. Ongiertho Emmanuel(7) Hon. Ebwalu Jonathan(8) Hon. Lt.Col.Dr.Alanyo Jennifer(9) Hon. Itungo Nathan(10) Hon. Aogon Silas(l I ) Hon. Sscwungu Joseph(12) Hon. Macho Geoffrey(13) Hon. Bingi Panick Nyanzi(14) Hon. Akugizibwe Aled RonaldMembers absent with Apologyl) Hon Bagire Henry Aggrey2) Hon Nabukenya Brenda3) IIon Nsamba Patrick Oshabe41 Hon Paparu Lilian Obilac5) Hon Awich Jane6) Hon Acibu Agnes7) Hon Oguze Lee Denis8) Hon Aate Taban Sharifah9) Hon.NyamutoroPhionahl0) Hon. Kamateneti JosylineI l)Hon. Etuka Isaarc Joakino12) Hon. Wamala Nambozo13)Hon.Rev. Fr. Onen Charles14) Hon Akumu Catherine15)Hon. Asiimwe Molly Musiime16) Hon. Kubeketerya Jamesl7)Hon. Nyakato Dorothyl8) Hon. Katenya Isaaclg)Hon Katusiime Annet Mugisha20) Hon. Ssubi Kyinyamatama Juliet2l)Hon. Mutumba AMul22) Hon. Tibasiimwa JoramChairpersonDeputy ChairpersonMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMembcrMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMember1,In Attcndance: The Public UnivcrsitiesBusiteme Univcrsityl) Prof. Parl W2) Dr.Saphina Biira3) Mr.Matsiko Mutungwire4) Mr.Ojiambo Wilberforce5) Dr.Lugga Fredrick6) Ms.Akello LyidahSoroti University1) Prof. J. R. Nwja Odongo2) Mr.Magnesa Ruber3) Mr. Okot Zaithum4) Mr.Oketlo James5) Mr.Okumu A.MMbarere Univerrity of Science and Technolory1) Mr. Byaruhanga Melchoir2) Mr.Musano Dominique3) Ms.Nakakeeto Robinah4) Prof.C.TushabomweMuni Universityl) Prof.Fr.Odubuker Picho E2) Mr.Wahid Abdul3) Mr. Marachiho Moris4; Mr.Adrapi Francis5) Ms. Achan Nancy6) Mr. Bakar RobertIn attendencc (The Committee Sccretrriat)l) Ms. Mirembe Barbara - Principal Fronomist2) Ms. Akullo Carohne - Economist3) Ms. Asiimwc Flavia - Legal Ofticer4) Ms. Keijagye Brenda - Policy Analyst - Leader of Opposition5) Ms. Namata Sylvia - Policy Analyst [LGB]6) Ms. Nanono Veronica - Researcher7) Ms. Bugembe Sylvia - Researcher8) Ms. Ninsiima Diana - Principal Clerk Assistant/Minute Secrctary2tAGENDA( I ) Recitation of the Parliamcntary Prayer.(2) Communication from the Chair(3) Consideration of the Policy Statements and Budget Estimates for PublicUniversities for the FY 2023/2024.(4) AdjoummentThe meeting was called to order 9:55 a.m.Min.l - Recitetion of the Perliementary Prayer.The Parliamentary Prayer was recited by the Committee Clerk.Min. 3; Communication from the ChairpersonIn his communication, the Chairperson;(a) informed Members that the meeting was convened to consider Budget Estimates forFY 2023124 for public Universitics; noting most public universities encounteredoperational challenges that primarily included inadequate budget allocationsl(b) thanked Government for the initiative of ensuring that there was faimess in theallocation of government grants to public universities across the country.Observations/iss ues raisedThe Committee noted the following:(a) that the information so submitted by the University administrations of Soroti andBusitema as availed to the Committee was authentic;(b) that all public universities presented unfunded priorities that needed the attention ofGovernment;(c) that by Covernment needed to revise its plans ofopening up new public universitieson account of limited resource envelope;(d) that despite inadequate resource allocations, some public universities like MbararaUniversity of Science and Technology (MUST) and Muni University embarked onviable projects and research and development;The Committee sought to establish the following:(a) whether universities' management had forums where key cross-cutting issucsaffecting of Universities were consideredi(b) the cost ofbats that Muni University sought to procure to facilitate research studies:(c) justification that Ministry of Financc, Planning and Economic Development had toignore supplementary expenditures it allocated to Public Universities;(d) reasons/causes for low student enrolment in some Public Universitiest(e) the reasons for non-inclusion of civil works in the development budget componentto refurbish dilapidated infrastructure at Busitema University;(f) details about specimens for research that Muni University was to undertakel3I(g) reasons for refusal of the Mbarara Univcrsity of Science and Technology ViceChancellor to honor invitations to attend meetings of the Committee on Educationand SportslResponses to issues raised:The nteeting was informed:(a,) Busitema University's top unfunded priorities included staffing and refurbishmentof the the Univemity Complex.@/ Soroti University's unfunded priorities werc listed in the written memoranda thatwas presented to the Committee;(c) Mrbau:ara Univcrsity of Science and Technology's Vice Chancellor's absence atmeetings of the Committee of which he was invited was not deliberate but ratherhinged on other engaganents relating to funding of public universities that he hadto attend to;(d/ Non-promotion of university staff to higher positions in the staff structure wasoccasioned by inadequate wage bill allocation;(e) Muni University low student enrolment was occasioned by regulations set byNational Council of Higher Education (NCHE) to enrol particular student numbersfor science degree courses as compared to those to offer arts counies' That theUniversity was looking at enrotting students to undertake/puniue new programs inorder to increase on the students population.A representetive from Ministry of Education and Sports informed the Committce thatunder the UNESCO principles. States ought to allocate at least I p€rcent of the country'sGross Domestic Product (GDP towards Education. Howcver, in Uganda, only 0'3 percentwas allocated to education.a. Suggested that URA should be bafted from collecting money from Universities tosolve the issue ofNTR not being allocated them as they have collected it.b. Requested the Universities to avail evidence ofwhatever they are alluding to in theirpresentation. (the University availed a letter before the Committee informing themof the Communication the PSST made to the accounting officers of all Universitiesinforming them that "owing to cashflow constraints. the timits do not consider theadditional adjustments to several votes as made by Parliament at thc Budgetapproval)c. Suggested that all University representatives should be available when theCommittee is meeting the Ministry of Finance.4d. The issue of Muni University having a low number of students is as a result of itsgeographical location.Hon. Twesigye John Ntamuhiiraa. tnformed the Universities that the Committee can only be of help to them only ifthey present their issues and be open about them.b. Informed the Committee about the issue of monitoring of the quality of books byNCDC.c. Further requested the Committee to inquire into the Budgct at the Ministry head-quarters.d. Requested the Universities to avail evidence of research that they have made.e. Requested the Universities to avail their plan on how they plan to equip the staffthat they already have.Hon. Bingi PatrickStated that he is appalled by the stafling levels of Mbarara University regardless ofits status as one of the best Universities in Uganda.Min.4 - AdjournmentThe meeting adjoumed to 2:30 p.m.Recorded by: Confirmed by:f.-Cffi.'S,Nlnsllma Twesigye Johntamuhiira, MPCHATRPERSONDiana OlenyCOMMITTEE CLERK5IMINUTES FOR TIIE MEETING OF THE COMMTTTEE ON EDUCATION ANI)SPORTS ITELD ON FRIDAY l4fl APRIL 2023 AT 2:OOPM IN CONFERENCE HALLA, SOUTH WING.PARLIAMENTARY BUILDINGS,KAMPALA.Members Precnt(l) Hon Twesigye John Ntamuhiira - Chairperson(2) Hon Abigaba Cuthbert Mirembe - Deputy Chairperson(3 ) Hon. Lokwang Philliphs tllukol - Member(4) Hon. Kakembo Michael - Member(5) Hon. Acon Julius Bua - Member(6) Hon. Ebwalu Jonathan - Mcmbcr(7) Hon. Lt.Col.Dr.Alanyo Jennifer - Mcmber(8) Hon. ltungo Nathan - Member(9) Hon. Aogon Silas - Mcmber(10) Hon Ssewungu Joseph - Member( I l) Hon. Macho Geoffrey - Member( 12) Hon. Bingi Patrick Nyanzi - Member( 13) Hon. Akugizibwe Aled Ronald - Member(14) Hon.Nyamutoro Phionah - Member(15) Hon. Katusiime Annet Mugisha - Member(16) Hon. Ssubi Kyinyamatama Juliet - Member(17) Hon Akumu Catherine - Member(18) Hon. Asiimwe Molly Musiimc - McmberMembers abscnt with Apologrl) Hon Uagire Ilenry Aggrcy2) Hon Nabukenya Brenda3; Hon Nsamba Patrick Oshabe4) Hon Paparu Lilian Obtlae5) Hon Awich Jane6) Hon Acibu Agnes7) Hon Oguzc Lee Denis8) Hon Aatc Taban Sharifah9) Hon.Kamatcncti Josylinel0) Hon. Etuka lsaac JoakinoI l)Hon. Wamala Nambozo12) Hon.Rev. Fr. Onen Charlesl3) Hon. Kubeketerya Jamesl4) Hon. Nyakato DorothyI 5 ) Hon. Katenya lsaacl6) Hon. Mutumba Abdull7) Hon. Trbasiimwa Joraml8)Hon. Ongiertho DmmanuelIn rttendance:Netional Council of Sportcl) Mr.'l'ashobye Ambrosc2) Ms.Anyacait Cecelia3) Dr.Ogwel B.P{) Rev.Can.Duncaus Mugumya5) Mr.Katcnde DavidMembcrMembcrMemberMemberMcmberMembe rMemberMembcrMcmbcrMcmberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMember6) Mr.Muguwa lvan7) Mr.Ssali Mark8) Mr. Oguti Geoftey Osede9) Ms.Nakamanya Shadiahl0) Mr.Tucungwirwe RaymondI l) Mr.Bbale Muhamadil2) Mr.Oluga Josephl3) Mr Musimami Paul14) Ms Nanyonjo ShadiahIn attcndrnce (The Committcc Secrcterirt)l) Ms. Mircmbe Barbara - Principal Economist2) Ms. Akutto Caroline - Economist3) Ms. Asiimwe Flavia - kgal Offtcer4) Ms. Kcijagyc Brenda - Policy Analysl - Lcadcr of Opposition5y Ms. Namata Sylvia - Policy Analyst [LGB]6) Ms. Nanono Veronica - Researcher7) Ms. Bugembe Sylvia - Researcher8) Ms. Ninsiima Diana - Principal Clcrk Assrstant/Minute SccretaryAGENDAL Recitation of the Parliamcntary Prayer2. Communication from the Chairpcrson3. Consrderation of Policy statcmcnts and Budget Estimatcs FY 202312024 by Agenciesand Departments4. AdjoummentThe meeting was called to ordcr at l.l:40pm.Min.l- Rccitrtion of the Parliamentary PrryerThe Parliamentary Prayer was recited by thc Clcrk to thc Committcc.Min.2- Communicetion from the Chairpcrsona) Thc Chairperson informed Mcmbcrs that the meeting was convcncd to considerPolicy statements and Budget Estimatcs FY 202312024b) Hc rnvited the accoun(ing officers ofthc Agencies and Departmcn6 ln attendance' toprcscnt their respcctive budgetary proposals to the Commiftec.Min. 3- Considcration of Policy statcmcnts and Budget Estimetcs FY 202312024 byAgencies and Departmenls'l'he Agencies and Dcpartments prcsentcd their rcspcctivc Policy Statements and BudgetEstimates for Financial Ycat 20231204 [ Sce a(tachments for details']Obsenalio hs/ iss aes ru isedThe Contmr ee sought to establsh'a) Whcther the National Council for Sports has any plan for thc construction ofthcrcgronal stadia.b) Whether thc 5l federations submit thcir Budgets to Natronal Council ofSports.c) The reason as to why the Ministry docs not seek a loan to cater for the issue ofinfrastructure.d) Whether National Council of Sports has visited Namboole Stadium to find out what ishappening there.e) Accountabrlity for thc 80 Billion Shilhngs whrch was allocatcd to thc Ministry ofSporrs to rchabilitatc Namboolc Stadium.f) Whether it is possible to avail sports materials to the Sub county Councils and beavailable for all schools who would wish to borrow and use them in their schools.g) An account as to why the money that was allocated to National Council ofSports(vote 166) to alloca(e to Gderations was ins(cad allocatcd by FUFA which has nomandate to allocate the abovc moncy.h) Whcther National Council of Sports has any plan conccmlng E-sports in the country.r) Thc plan the National Council ofSports has for thc construction ofthc Anti-Doprngfacility.j) An account for the 50 Billion for Sports Facilitics that National Council of Sportsintends to build.k) 'l'he plan National Council ofSports has for the rchabilitation ofdilapidated sportsstructures.Responses to the issucs/ observrtions;Netionel Council of Spor,ls [NCSIIn thcr response. Nauonal Courw of Sports,a. Statcd thal thcy arc in support of thc rcgional sudia and visrted areas like Gulu. Lira.Soroti. Mbalc whcrein they confirmcd that all these areas had land. 'l'hey furtherrcqucstcd that thc abovc land is clcarly allocated for purposes of sporls so that it is notused for othcr purposcs.b. lnformcd thc Committcc that thcy want to come up wlth a general policy on sports inthc Ministry of Education and Sports.c. lnformed thc Committce that efforts are being madc in line with rehabilitation ofNamboole.d. Requested the Committee to strengthen National Council ofSports.e. Promised to take into consideratron the issue of getting a loan so as to support (hcdevelopment ofsports in the countryf. Brought it to the Notice of thc Committcc that they cntered into a mcmorandum ofunderstanding with Uganda lnvestment Authority in relation to the Lugogo Projcct.g. Pledged to submrt a report on how much land is available in regions for thc rcgionalstadra and the proposed plan of the stadia.Repr€scntative from thc Ministry of Sports.a. Ministry of Sports put in place a project management tcam and projectimplementation unit to supervise the actlvlties taking place in Namboolc Stadium.Min 4-AdjournmcntMeeting was adjoumed at l6:35PM to Monday l7h April.2023 at 9:00am.Recorded by.EB*r,Niiuiima Diana OlenyCOMMITTEE CLERKConfirmcd'l'wcsigyc John Ntamuhiira, MPCTIAIRPERSONMINUTES FOR THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AI\IDSPORTS HELD ON THURSDAY 13 APRIL, 2023 AT 9:00AM IN CONFERENCEHALL A, SOUTH WING, PARLIAMENTARY BUILDINGS, KAMPALA.Members Present(1) Hon. Twesigye John Ntamuhiira(2) Hon Abigaba Cuthbert Mirembe(3) Hon. l.okwang Philliphs lllukol(4) Hon Kakembo Michael(5) Hon. Acon Julius Bua16) Hon. Ongiertho Emmanuel(7) Hon. Kubeketerya James(8) Hon. Ebwalu Jonathan(9) Hon. Lt.Col.Dr.Alanyo Jennifer( 10) Hon. Nyakato Dorothy(l l) Hon. Itungo Nathan(t2) Hon. Katenya Isaac( l3) Hon. Aogon Silas( 14) Hon. Katusiime Annet Mugisha(15) Hon. Ssewungu Joseph(16) Hon. Macho Geoffrey(17) Hon. Ssubi Kyinyamatama Juliet(18) Hon. Bingi Patrick Nyanzi(19) Hon. Mutumba Abdul(20) Hon. Tibasiimwa Joram121) Hon. Akugizibwe Aled RonaldMembers ebscnt with Apologrl) Hon Bagire Henry Aggrey2) Hon Nabukenya Brenda3) Hon Nsamba Patrick Oshabe4) Hon Paparu Li.lian Obilae5) Hon Awich Jane6) Hon Acibu Agnes7) Hon Oguze Lee Denis8) [Ion Aate Taban Sharifah9) Hon. Nyamutoro PhionahI 0) Hon.Kamateneti JosylineI I ) Hon. Etuka Isaac Joakinol2)Hon. Wamala Nambozol3) Hon.Rev. Fr. Onen Charles14) Hon Akumu Catherinel5)Hon. Asiimwe Molly MusiimeChairpersonDeputy ChairpersonMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMembcrMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMember1In Attendence: The Public UniversitiesKabale UniversitSr1) Prof. Joy C.Kwesiga2) Mr. Twesigye Gad3) Mr.Baryantuma J.M4) Mr. Twebaze AlexMountains of the Moonl) Ms.Nakajubi Jane2) Mr.Mutogo Ronald3) Mr.Kagambe Edmond4) Prof. Achanga Coxwell5) Mr. Ndoleriire WilliamGulu University1) Prof. David Okello Owiny2) Mr.Dibele Jacqueline3) Mr. Wesonga Emmanuel4) Mr.Oballim Christopher5) Mr.asafAdebuaIn rttendence (fhe Committee Secreteriet)l) Ms. Mirembe Barbara - Principal Economist2) Ms. Akullo Carolinc - Economist3) Ms. Asiimwe Flavia - Legal Officer4) Ms. Keijagye Brenda - Policy Analyst - Lcader of Opposition5) Ms. Namata Sylvia - Policy Analyst [LGB]6) Ms. Nanono Veronica - Researcher7) Ml Bugembe Sylvia - Researcher8) Ms. Ninsiima Diana - Principal Clerk Assistant/Minute SecretaryAgenda(1) Recitation of the Parliamentary Prayer(2) Communication from the Chair(3) Considcration of the Ministerial Policy Statements and Budget Estimates for FY202312024.(4)Adjoumment2The meeting was called to order at 9:30 a.m.Min.2 - Communication from the Chair.In his communication, the Chairperson guided that the meeting was convened to considerPolicy Statements and Budget Estimates for Public Universities for the Financial Year2023n4.Min. 3 - Consideration of the Policy Statements and Budget Estimates for FY20,3,n024.3.1 Kabale University.The Accounting Offrcer for Kabale University presented the University's Policy Statementand Budget Estimates for FY 202312024 (see written memoranda for details)3.2 Mountains of the Moon University.The Accounting Officer for Mountains of the Moon University presented the University'sPolicy Statement and Budget Estimates for FY 202312024 (see written memoranda fordetails)3.3 Gulu University.The Accounting Offrcer for Gulu University presented the University's Policy Statementand Budget Estimates for FY 202312024 (see writte memoranda for details)Observations/issues reisedThe Committee sottgh to establish;(a) whether Mountains of the Moon University enrolled students who were directbeneficiaries of the students loan scheme: and whether such students rec€ivedfunding from the University;(b) the kind of support services and facilities that Mountains of the Moon Universityrequired in order to deliver on its mandate;(c) causal factors for recurring increment on non-wage budget component forMountains of the Moon University;(d) the status of construction of the Students' Hostel at Gulu University that was beingundertaken over by a private individual;(e) whether Culu University communicated to Ministry of Finance, Planning andEconomic Development on non-release of funds appropriated to the Universityl(fl on the status and fate of Kotido Primary Teachers' College (PTC) given reports thatGulu University was scheduled take it over;3Responses to issues ruisedThe Committee was informed that.(a\ for Kabale University, Govemment released Shs.2.9 billion in consideration of 100Govemment sponsored students; and that the funding for the cunent 400 studentpopulation had remained the same giving rise to a funding gap of Shs.8.6 billion.(b) some students at the Mountains of the Moon University were direct beneficiaries ofthe students loan scheme that they received from the Higher Education Stud€ntsFinancing Board (HESFB);(c) Gulu University land reverted back in the names of Gulu University Council andthat Council worked on processes of Hostel ownership revert back to the University;(d) Kotido PTC was not considered a core PTC and hence could not be phased out andowned by Government;(e) Gulu University Council expected rcceipt of funds Public Service Commissionregarding issues of harmonisation;(f) Gulu University made cfforts to liaise with Ministry of Finance, Planning andEconomic Development to ensure funds appropriatcd by Parliament were released.(g) School dropout rates were informed by statistical data compiled from the time ofstudent enrolment/admission to higher institutions of leaming.The Committee was informed that'a Stated that it is as though the Ministry seelcs to collect money from Universities thatit is not willing to give them back.b. htfurmed the Committee tlat there is money that s approved in the supplententaryBudget and the money is not allocated the consequenl Universilies.c. Brought it to the notice of the Committee that the Ministy of Education and Sportsis nol supporting Universities,d. Complained as to how the Ministry responds to the issucs of the Universities.e. Finance has taken on the roll ofthe Parliament of Ugandaf. Complained on the continuous behaviour of the Ministry of Finance cutting budgetsfor Govemment entities and violating the mandate of Parliament by appropriatingmoney as it wishes.g. Appreciated the Kabale University for attracting professors ln their University aspart of their staff.h. Commented on the understaffing in Universities and suggestcd that something isdone about it.i. Further informed the Committee that a lecturer in Gulu University is paid lesser thanother lecturers in othcr Public Universities.4j. Stated that, the Committee should invite the Minister of Finance, Planning andEconomic Development and his team to appear before Committee.k. Requesrcd them to give accountability for the 7.2 Billion for Salary Harmonisation/. suggested that Gulu University is well funded so as to support other constituentcolleges.m. Supported the idea of Gulu University taking over Kotido PTC.n. Suggested that the issue of construction of a teaching hospital should also be takeninto Consideration since Gulu University has a very phenomenal record when itcomes to teaching medicine.o. the status and fate of over 2.000 school dropouts in Gulu University.p. Requested that the Minister of Finance is communicated to come with the formulato cut the budget of the different entities.Min.4 - AdjournmentThe meeting was adjoumed at l:33 p.m.Recorded by:MoNinsiima Diana OlenyCOMMITTEE CLERKbIohn Ntamuhiira, MPCHAIRPERSON5(MINUTES FOR THE MEETING OF THE COMNIITTEE ON EDUCATION ANDSPORTS HELD ON TIIURSDAY I3TflAPRIL 2023 AT 2:OOPM IN CONFERENCEHALL A, SOUTH WING, PARLIAMENTARY BT,IILDINGS, KAMPALAMcmbers Prcsent(l) Hon. Twesigre John Ntamuhiira(2) Hon Abigaba Cuthbert Mircmbe(3) Hon. Lokwang Philliphs Illukol(4) Hon. Kakembo Michael(5) Hon. Acon Julius Bua(6) Hon. Ongiertho Emmanuel(7) Hon. Kubekercrya James(8) Hon. Ebwalu Jonathan(9) Hon. Lt.Col.Dr.Alanyo Jennifer(10) Hon. Nyakato Dorothy(l l) Hon. Itungo Nathan( 12) Hon. Katenya lsaac( 13) Hon. Aogon Silas(14) Hon. Katusiime Annet Mugisha(15) Hon. Ssewungu Joseph(16) Hon. Macho Geoffrey(17) Hon. Ssubi Kyinyamatama Juliet(18) Hon. Bingi Patrick Nyanzi(19) Hon. Mutumba Abdul(20) Hon. Tibasiimwa Joram(21) Hon. Akugizibwe Aled Ronald(22) Ilon. Asiimwe Molly MusiimeMembcrs absent with ApologyI ) Hon Bagire Henry Aggey2) Hon Nabukenya Brenda3) Hon Nsamba Patrick Oshabe4) Hon Paparu Lilian Obilac5) Hon Awich Jane6) Hon Acibu Agnes7) Hon Oguze Lee Denis8) Hon Aate Taban Sharifah9) Hon.Nyamutoro PhionahI 0) tlon.Kamateneti JosylincI I ) Hon. Etuka Isaac Joakinol2)Hon. Wamala Nambozol3)Hon.Rev. Fr. Onen Charles14)Hon Akumu CatherineIn Attendance: The Different AgcncicsUgende Netionel Examinetion Boardl) Mr.Dan Odongi2) Mr.Okello Moses3) Ms Nangoya MikeChairpersonDeputy ChairpersonMembe rMembcrMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMcmberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMember1,l) Mr. Baaringanya Geoffrcy5) Mr Wakabi Peter6) Mr.Murana Justin?) Ms lGlule JeniGr M8) Ms Nekesa Sylvia9) Ms Kuzera Julietl0) Ms. Naigaga LaetitiaIn ettendance (The Committee Secreterirt)l) Ms. Mircmbe Barbara - Principal Economist2) Ms. Akullo Caroline - Economist3) Ms. Asiimwe Flavia - kgal Officer4) Ms. Keijagye Brenda - Policy Analyst - Leader of Opposition5) Ms. Namara Sylvia - Policy Analyst [LGB]6) Ms. Nanono Veronica - Researcher7) Ms. Bugembe Sylvia - Researcher8) Ms. Ninsiima Diana - Principal Clerk Assistant/Minute SecretaryAGENDAl. Recitation ofthe Parliamentary Prayer2. Communication from the Chairperson3. Consideration of Policy statements and Budget Estimates FY 202312024 by Boards4. AdjoummentThe meaing was callcd to order at 9:43amMin.l- Recitation of the Parlirmentrry Pr.yerThe Parliamentary Prayer was recited by the Clerk to the Committee.Min.2- Communication from the CheirpersonThe Chairperson informed Members that the me€ting was convened to Consider PolicyStatements and BudSet Estimates from Agencies and Departments for the Financial Year2023t24He invited the Accounting officers ofthe Universities in attendancr. to represent thcirresp€ctive budgetary proposals to the Committee.Min.3- Concideretion of Policy Stetemenc .nd Budgct Estimrts FY 2023t2021 byUniversitiesThe Accounting oflicers ofBoards presented their respectivc Policy statcments and budgetEstimates for the Financial Year 2O2)12024. [See attachments for daails]2aaganda Notional Extminatlons BoardO bsematio ns/ Iss ues ruise dThe Commiaee sought to eflablish:a) Whether Uganda National Examination Board has any approach in rcgard to cateringfor children with special needs during exams.b) Whether the Board has aligned their unfunded priorities in ordcr.c) Whether there arc any pending mergers within the Ministry of Education and Sports.d) An account on how the Board monitors the funds that schools charge pcr student forregistration.e) An account on how the board adheres to the Govemment principle of buy Uganda,sell Uganda.f) Cive information of how much funds the Board Charges for registration.g) Whether the Board publiciscs the fees it charges for registration.h) An account as to why the Personnel involved in marking of exams are underpaid.i) Explain as to why rcgardless of the incrcase in the number of both UPE and USEstudents. the resource envelope allocated to the Board has not increascd.Rcsponscs to the issues/ observetions;Uganda National Examuntnns Boarda) The Board faces a dilemma that most of its activities are intcrtwined.b) The Chairperson prayed that the amount of money al locarcd by the Govemmentmatches with the number of UPE and USE students.c) Informed the Commitrce that the Fees charged by UNEB arc published and circulatedin the media and that any person who charges over and above the fees chargedcommits an offense.d) Further informed the Committee that the rest of the responscs shall be submitted inwriting.Representauve from the Min$,ry of Edrcatrcn and Sprtsa) Capital grants and subventions werc cut by 80 percent by the Ministry of Educationand Sports.Min.4- AdjournmentThe meeting was adjourned at 5:00pm to 14fr April,2023 at 9:00pm.Recorded by:W'qNinsiima Diana OlenyCOMMITTEE CLERKConfirmed byTweslgyeJohn Ntamuhiira, MPCHAIRPERSON3\lMINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION ANDSPORTS HELD ON WENESDAY l2l'IIAPRIL 2023 AT 9:OOAM IN CONFERf,NCEHALL A, SOUTH WING, PARLIAMENTARY BUILDINGS' KAMPALA.Members present(l ) Hon. Twesrgye John Ntamuhiira(2) Hon Abigaba Cuthbert Mircmbe(3) Hon. Lokwang Philliphs Illukol(4) Hon. Kakembo Michacl(5) Hon. Acon Julius Bua(6) Hon. Ongiertho Emmanuel(7) Hon. Kubeketerya James(8) Hon. Ebwalu Jonathan(9) Hon. Lt.Col Dr.Alanyo Jcnnifer(10) Hon. Nyakato Dorothy(ll) Hon. Itungo Nathan(12) IIon. Katenya Isaac(13) Hon. Aogon Silas(14) Hon. Katusiime Annet Mugisha( 15) Hon Sscwungu Joseph(16) Hon. Macho Geoffrey(17) tlon. Ssubi Kyinyamatama Juliet(18) Hon. Brngi Patrick Nyanzi( 19) Hon. Mutumba Abdul(20) Hon. Akugizibwe Aled RonaldMembers Absentl) Hon Asiimwe Musiime Molly2) Hon. Nyarnutoro Phionah3) Hon. Acibu Agnes4) Hon. Kamateneti Josyline5) Hon. Dr. Taban Sharifah Aate6) Ilon Paparu Lilian7) Hon. Tibasiimwa Joram8) Hon. Bagiire Aggrey Henry9) Hon. Akumu Catherine Mavenjinal0)Hon. Wamala Nambozo Florence1 l) Hon. Oguzu Lcc Denis12) Hon. Nabukcnya llrendal3) I{on. Nsamba Patrick Oshabet4)Hon. Rcv. F'r.Onen Charles15) I{on Kakembo Michael16)Hon. Awich JancChairpcrsonDeputy ChairpersonMemberMemberMcmberMembcrMemberMemberMemberMcmberMembcrMemberMemberMemberMcmberMembcrMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMcmberMembcrMemberMemberMcmberMcmberMembcrMemberMemberMemherMemberMemberMember1Agencies and Departmcnts in Attcndencc:National Curriculum Development Centre1. Dr.Baguma Grace2. Dr. Richard lumba3. Mr.Sansa Ambrose4. Ms.Namitala K.Dori5. Mr. Cpa Kwiri StephenHigher Education Students Financing Boerd1. Mr. Birungi Christopher2. Mr. Bbosa Kizito3. Ms.Bategere PeaceEducation Service Commissionl. I{on. Malinga Johnson2. Ms.Izizinga Rose3. Dr.Byakutaga Beatrice4. Mr. Opolot Jacob5. Mr. Kaaya Mohammed6. Mr. Oyirwoth K7. Mr. Munyambabari Adrian8. Ms. Nandudu NorahIn Attendence: The Committee Secretariatl) Ms. Mirembe Barbara - Principal Economist2) Ms. Akullo Caroline - Economist3) Ms. Asiimwe Flavia - t egal Officer4) Ms. Keijagye Brenda - Policy Analyst - Leader of Opposition5) Ms. Namata Sylvia - Policy Analyst [LGB]6) Ms. Nanono Veronica - Researcher7) Ms. Bugembe Sylvia - Researcher8) Ms. Ninsiima Diana - Principal Clerk Assistant/Minute SecretaryAgenda(1) Recitation of the Parliamentary Prayer(2) Communication from the Chair(3) Consideration of the Policy Statements and Budget Estimates forFY 2023124.(4) AdjoummentThe meeting was called to order at 9:38 a.m.2Min.l - Recitetion of the Perliementery PreyerThe Prayer was recited by the Committee Clerk.Min.2 - Communicetion from the Chair.ln his Communication, the Chairperson;(a) informed Members that the meeting was convened to receive and consider AnnualBudget Estimates for National Curriculum Development Centre (NCDC) andHigher Fiucation Stud€nts Financing Board (HESFB) for the FY 2023/24:and(b) invited the Accounting Officers for NCDC and HESFB to present their budgetproposals.Min.3 - Consideration of Policy Statements and Budget Estimates for FY 2023120243.1 Nationel Curriculum Development Centre (NCDC)The NCDC presented its Policy Statement and Budget Estimates for FY 202312024 (seewritten submission for details)O bse malio ns/Iss ues ra is e dThe Committee sought to establish:(a) an account from NCDC on variations in the listed unfunded priorities in thcSupplementary Schedules that were tabled before the Housei and those featuring inthe Centre's Policy Statement and Budget Estimates for[Y 2023124.(b) the detailed breakdown offunds allocated unfunded prioritiesl(c) an account for overlapping issues in relation to NCDC's mandate and the Ministryof Education and Sports.(d) a justification for Wakiso Disrict as the only sample space by the Centre for trainingteachers yet it owed responsibility to the entire country;(e) an account that the Directorate had a policy on replacement of computer gadgetsand the time frame for replaccment.(a) an account on expenditures less than the actual allocations and releases, rcgardlessofbudgct cuts.(b) ajustification for poor budget performance as compared to previous years;3(c) whether the Budget Estimates supported part of the Directorates' projections for theFY 202312024t and an account on absence of materials available in relation toOrdinary Level Curriculum.(d) an account that Ministry of Education and Sports did not brief thc Committee onprograms under implementation;(e) an account by the Directorate not briefing the Committee on the new AdvancedLevel Curriculum;(f) whether NCDC was privy to the fact that some publishing companies like VisionGroup published and printed text books and study materials relating to curriculumrand that this had implications on the mandate of NCDC.The Committee instructed the Clerk to organise for a meeting where the Committee willmeet with NCDC and the Ministry of Education to harmonise issues of over lappingmandales.The Committee instructed NCDC lo give a breakdown of Shs.6 billion to avoid cases ofperceived &tplication of duties and responsibilities between the Cente and the Ministry ofEducation and Sports.The Committee noted that /inalisation of Early Childhood Development Curriculum waskelt in the performance of the education sector.The Committee requested NCDC to avail it with the Report on the Performance of LowerSecondary Curriculum before proceeding with the A 'level Curriculum among whichinclude training of leaclers. The Commiltee noted nt there was need for Government toenswe adequate /inancing ofCurriculum Development since it was NCDC's core mandateThe Committee tmplored NCDC to monitor companies and persons that published andprint boolrs and sludlt materials to er$ure that publications were in line with the approvedscltool cwriculum.Responses to issaes raised:The Committee was informed that:(a) frnancial constraints occasioned limited coverage of tcacher training in the newOrdinary Level Cuniculum in Wakiso Disrict alone as would be desired fornational coverage:4(b) NCDC mad€ appeals to Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Developmentregarding budgetary cuts/revisions indicating this would negatively impact isoperations;(c) New IT equipment including laptops were procured for newly recruited Directoratestaff. The Directorate runs an ICT Policy guiding IT applications to facilitate itsoperations.(d) The Centre has in place a report on the New Curriculum for Ordinary Level. whichcan be accessed upon request. However there was still need to provide more fundingto ensure effectiveness of training ofteachers in the country.(e) The financial allocations featuring in the Policy Statements were funds expendedby the Directorate during the first half (July - December) of the Financial Year.(Q In collaboration with Vision Group, NCDC authorised for publication and printingof study materials and books that have been widely circulated to the country.3.2 Higher Education Shrdents Financing Board (HESFB)The HESFB presented its Policy Statement and Budget Estimates for FY 202312024 (seewritten submission for details)O bseruo tio ns/Iss ues rai s ed :The Committee sought to establish:(a) Items in HESFB that were affected by budget cuts;(b) Inquired as to why there is regional imbalance in awarding loans.(c) whether students that dropped out ofschool formed part of beneficiaries of thcScheme;(d) an account that the Scheme was not very inclusive to accommodate studentsoffering Arts courses;(e) an account that the Board did not award and consider continuing studentsanymore; and the criteria followed in listing students as beneficiaries of the loanscheme.(f) the Board's percentage €xpenditure as against budgetary releases from Ministryof Finance. Planning and Economic Development.(g) The Board's strategic directions;(h) the disaggregated list ofstudents that benefited from the Scheme per district;(i) the Board's Strategy of recovering funds loaned to students upon completion oftheir courses of study;The Cotnmittee made the following observations:5(a) That whereas the Scheme targeted economically disadvantaged students, theBoard's applicable criteria lefi out such students.(b) That the Board lud witnessed inadequate budgetary allocations and as such mostlcey items were underfunded leading to funding students in the next /inancial year insuspense.(c) That on account of presidential arutouncements, the Board was compelled toconsider applicatious for students with science backgrowrd in favour of thoseapplving lo undertake Arts course The Committee implored the Board to cottsiderapplications /rom Arts students from rural areas in the award ofscholarships giventhat such ntral areas had inadequte facilities for teaching both science and artscourses.Tlre Committee inslructed lhe Board to submit to the Committee Clerk, all documentsrelevant documents to the budget consideralion processResponses to issues ruisedThe HESFB irformed the Committee.(a) of its undertaking to avail information on budget items that were affected by budgetcut instituted by Ministry of Finance. Planning and Economic Development duringbudget execution process;(b) that some funds featuring in the Policy Statements included recoveries;(c) that the Board prepared detailed reports on different activities canied out; andundertook to submit the same to the Committee together with the Report of theAuditor General on HESFB for the Financial Year ended 306 June, 2022:(d) that it had a Resource Mobilisation Strategy with intentions to support solicitationof funds for its routine operations.(e) that support for science students was premised on presidential directivcs onpromotion of science in education institutions. However, there was gradualinclusion of humanities as a priority areas ofstudy;(0 that issues of gender and economic balance were key considerations by the Boardin processing students' loans applications; and that the list ofstudents who benefitedfrom the loan scheme would be availed to the Committee.63.3 Education Service Commission @SC)The Education Service Commission presented is Policy Statement and Budget EstimatesforFY 2023124 (see written memoranda for details)O bsemalio ns/iss ue s ra is e d :The Committee sought to establish'(a) plans by the Education Service Commission to safeguard its land from encroachers;(b) whether the ESC ever held meetings with Ministry of Education and Sports toconsider issues raised inthe Policy Statement and BudgetEstimatesforFY 2023124.(c) Plans by ESC to address issues of concem in the teachers' scheme of service withparticular emphasis on upgrading and promoting of teachers:(d) the notion of 'school basic recruitment' and what it entailedl(c) details of the teacher validation exercise that was conducted by the Commission.(f) the scope and coverage of disciplinary cases that the ESC could handle;(g) a detailed account (with evidencel on the ESC's budget performance during theFinancial Year 2021/22, with particular emphasis on funds that were not released;(h) whether there was any evidence on steps taken by ESC n has taken to deal with theissue of trespassers on the land that is owned by the Commission.(i) Requested the Commission to promote teachers who up graded.Responses to issues raised:The ESC itformed the Committee:(a) that whenever approached. the ESC responded to issues relating to teachers' schemeof service in upgrading and promotion of Education Offrcers:(b) that the ESC's targets were sometimes affected by the programs of the Ministry ofEducation and Sports;(c) the ESC reached out to all schools to facilitate teacher validation exercise;(d) requested that the Committee helps out on the issue of recruitments and staffing gap;(e) that the law mandated the Commission to exercise disciplinary control over its staffwhenever such cases were brought before itt7Min.4 - Suspension/AdjournmentThe meeting was suspended at2.07 p.m. to 3:00PMhrr,,t',Ninsiima Diana OlenyCOMMITTEE CLERI(Twesigye John NtamuhiiraCHAIRPERSON8rMINUTES OFTHE MEETING OFTHE COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTSHELD ON WEDI\IESDAY I2T|I APRIL 2023 AT 2:OOPM IN CONFERENCE TIALL A,SOUTH WING, PARLIAMENTARY BUILDINGS, KAMPALA.Members Present( I ) Hon. Twesigye John Ntamuhiira(2) Hon Abigaba Cuthbert Mirembc(3) Hon. Lokwang Philliphs lllukol(4) Hon. Kakembo Michael(5) Hon. Acon Julius Bua(6) Hon. Ongiertho Emmanuel(7) Hon. Kubeketerya James(8) Hon. Ebwalu Jonathan(9) Hon. Lt.Col.Dr.Alanyo Jennifer(10) Hon. Nyakato Dorothy(l t) Hon. Itungo Nathan(12) Hon. Katenya Isaac( l3) Hon. Aogon Silas(14) Hon. Katusiime Annet Mugisha(15) Hon. Ssewungu Joseph(16) Hon. Macho Geoffrey( l7) Hon. Ssubi Kyinyamatama Juliet(18) Hon. Bingi Patrick Nyanzi(19) Hon. Mutumba Abdul(20) Hon. Akugizibwe Aled RonaldMemberc Absent with Apologrl) Hon. Asrimwe Musiime Molly2) Iton. Nyamutoro Phionah3) Hon. Acibu Agnes4) Hon. Kamateneti Josylinc5) Hon. Dr. Taban Sharifah Aate6) Hon. Paparu Lilian7) Hon. Tibasiimwa Joram8) Hon. Bagiire Aggrey Henry9) IIon. Akumu Catherine Mavenjinal0) Hon. Wamala Nambom FlorenceI l) Hon. Oguzu Lee Denis12) Hon. Nabukenya BrendaI 3) Hon. Nsamba Patrick Oshabel4)Hon. Rev. Fr.Onen CharlesI 5)Hon. Kakembo Michael16) Hon. Awich JaneChairpcrsonDeputy ChairpersonMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMcmbcrMemberMemberMemberMemberMcmbcrMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMcmbcrMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMcmbcrMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberAgencies and Departments in Attendance:Directorate Industriel Treiningl) Ms.Prima Kige2) Ms.Komugisha Neoline3) Mr. Byakatonda Patrick4) Ms. Nakyobe Safinah5) Ms. Kuteesa Priscilla NassoloNetional Council for Higher Educetion1) Prof.Mary J.N. Okwakol2) Mr Arthur Babu M3) Ms. Nora Thulira4) Ms Maria Nakachwa Ssemakulaln ettendence (fhe Committcc Secreteriet)l) Ms. Mirembe Barbara - Principal Economist2) Ms. Akullo Caroline - Economist3) Ms. Asiimwe Flavia - Legal Offrcer4) Ms. Keijagye Brenda - Policy Analyst - Leader of Opposition5) Ms. Namata Sylvia - Policy Analyst [LGB]6) Ms. Nanono Veronica - Researcher7) Ms. Bugembe Sylvia - Researcher8) Ms. Ninsiima Diana - Principal Clerk Assistant/Minute SecrctaryAgenda( I ) Rccitation of the Parliamcntary Prayer.(2) Communication from the Chair(3) Considcration of Policy Statements and Budget Estimates FY 202312024 by Agencies andDepartments.(4) AdjoummentThe meeting was called to order at 3:05 p.m.Min.l - Rcciaetion of the Parliementery Preyer.The Parliamentary Prayer was recited by Committee Clerk.Min.2 - Communication from the Cheir.The Chairperson informed Members that thc meeting was convened to considcr Policy Statementsand Budget Estimates from Agencies and Departments for the Financial Year 2023124.Hc invited the Accounting Offrcers of the Agencies and Departmens in attendance, to presenttheir respective budgetary proposals to the Committee.Min.3 - Consideration of Policy Strtcments rnd Budget EstimetesFY 2023f2024 by Agenciesend Depertments.The Agencies and Departments presented their respective Policy Statement and Budget Estimatesfor the Financial Year 2021124 (see attachments for details)Directorete of Industrial Treining @tT)O b s e rval io ns/I s s a es ru is e dThe Committee sought to establish:(a) Justifications for DIT's curriculum being limited to students in lower secondary levelalone;(b) whether certificates awarded by thc DIT guaranteed students' marketability andemployability in the world of work:(c) Govemment's plans to publicise and sensitise the general public on thc mandate, objectivesand activities of DITI(d) An account by Covemment not listing Shimoni University dedicated to training futureeducationlsts/career educationistsl(e) An account by National Council for Higher Education (NCIIE) not providing for budgetlines for transition of National Teachers Collcgcs (NTCs) to National Institute of TeacherEducation (NITE);(f1 The number of court cases NCIIE has been involved in;19) The fate other public and private universities offering dcgrce courses in Education, grvenGovemment's Policy whrch will mandate UNITE to offer dcgrcc courses in educationl(h) NCHE's plans to increase the ratio oftechnical and diploma graduates to bachelors' degreeholdersl(i) NCHE's plans to resolve issues of Public Universities having multiple branches in differentregions of the country.O Whether it was NCHE's responsibility to determine the unit cost for every University;(k) Whether NCHE had plans by NCHE to ensure that all students join University at the samctimeResponses lo Issues/obsetalions raised;Tlrc Management of Directorate of Industriul 'liaining inlormed the Committee:(a) that the purpose of limiting DIT's currrculum to lower secondary was to addressimplications of school drop outs: and to create oppo(unities and rnstil hope among theaffected students; and(b) that there was nccd to publicize DIT to afford students who were unable to completeOrdinary Level, opportunities to continue with school through DIT programs.Responses to hsues/obsematioas raised:The NCHE informed the Conrnittee that.(a) any university or institution that was not provided for in the list availed to the Committeeoperated illegally;(b) the maner of Shimoni University was still under review by Govemment.(c) LJNI'I'E was to come up with minimum standards for teaching the Bachelor's Degree inEducation and the samc standards shall be applicable by other universities that intend tooffer teach Education.(O NCHE did not budget for any single institution hence could budget for UMTE (UgandaNational Institute for Teacher Education);(e) NCHE only equatcd onc's academic credentials that were below Ordinary and AdvancedLevel(f) it was Govemment's role to determine the unit cost per univcrsity;(g) NCHE did not have authority to rcvoke accreditation ofany university; but that it would inliaison with National Planning Authority (NPA) come up with a solution.(h) NCHE workcd with NPA to come up with joint admissions for all universities in thecountry.Min.4 - AdjournmentThe meeting was adjoumed at 5:30 p.m. to Thursday l3 April,2023 at 10.00 a.m.Recorded by: Confirmed byffi#o,*"COMMITTEECLERKTwesigye John NtamuhiiraCHAIRPERSONIMINUTES OF TIIE IN.HOUSE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE OF EDUCATIONAND SPORTS HELD ON TI,'ESDAY IITII APRIL 2023 AT 9:OOAM IN CONFERENCEHALL A, SOUTH WING, PARLIAMENT BI,ILDINGS. KAMPALA.Mcmbers Prcsentl) Hon. Twesigre John Namuhiira2) Hon. Abigaba Cuthbert Mirember3) Hon. Itungo Nathan4) Hon. Kakembo Micheal5) Hon. Mutumba Abdul6) Hon. Katenya Isaac7) Hon. Bagiire Aggrey Henry8) Hon. Ongiertho Emmanuel9) Hon. Bingi Patrick Nyanzil0) Hon. Kayembc Solo GeofreyI l) Hon. Ebwalu Jonathanl2) Hon. Akugizibwe Alcd Ronaldl3) Hon. l,okwang Philips14) Hon. Abigaba Cuthbert Mirembel5) Hon. Suubi Kinyamatama Julietl6) Hon. Kube keterya JamesMembers Absent With Apolog/(l) Hon. Alanyo Jenniffer(2) Hon. Acibu Agnes(3) Hon. Awich Jane(4) Hon. Nabukenya Brenda(5) Flon. Paparu Lillian(6) lton. Kamateneti Joslyne(7) Hon. Etuka lsaac Joakino(8) Hon. Asiimwe Molly(9) Hon. Oguzu Lee DenisChairpersonDeputy ChairpersonMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMcmbcrMcmbcrMembcrMcmberMembcrIn Attcodrncc: The Committcc Secretrriet.l) Ms. Mirembe Barbara - Principal Economist2) Ms. Akullo Caroline - Economist3) Ms. Asiimwe Flavia - trgal OfEcer4) Ms. Keijagye Brcnda - Policy Analyst - Lcader of Opposition5) Ms. Namata Sylvia - Policy Analyst [LGB]61 Ms. Nanono Veronica - Researchcr7) Ms. Bugembe Sylvla - Rescarcher8) Ms. Ninsiima Diana - Principal Clerk Assistant/MinuteAgendel. Reciation of thc Parliamentary Prayer.2. Communication from the Chair13. Consideration of the Ministerial Policy Statements and Budget Estimates for FY2023134: Submlssion of Alternative Policy Statement from the Shadow Cabinet.4. AdjournmentMin.l - Recitetion of the Perliementery Praycr.The Parliamentary Prayer was recircd by the Commitrce Clerk.Min.2 - Communicetion from the Chair.In his communication, the Chairperson informed membcrs that the purpose of the meeting wasto rec.ive and consider the Alternative Policy Stat€ment from the Shadow Minister ofEducation for the FY 202324; and that from the Shadow Minister ofSports.Min.3 - Consideretion of the Ministcrial Policy St&tcments and Budget Estimetec for FY2023134: Submission of Alternativc Policy Stetemetrt from the Shadow CabinctThe Shadow Minister for Sports, Hon. Kayemba Geoffrey Solo prcscnted to the Committee.the Altemative Policy Satement for the Education and Sports Sector for FY 202312024 (seewri en memoranda for details)Observations/issues reiscd.Tlv Comm tee:(a) noted that Government needed to come up with a Policy on how to support spo(scontingents who emerge victorious with medals at national, regional and intemalionalsports and gamcs.@l furrher noted capitation grants wcrc inadequate and were occasioned released late inthe quarters;(c/ adviscd the Shadow Minister that salary enhancemcnt for teachers of Arts Subjects didnot featurc in the Altemative Policy Statements.(d,, guided that the Shadow Minister needed to present altcmative positions on the financialresources rcquired to execute planned activities during thc financial year;(e) disagreed with the idea that children needed to pack food yet they trekked longdistances to schools; and proposed that instead parents mobrlise finances to facilitateschools to prepare meals for their childrcn;6f requested the Shadow Minister to make amendments to the Altemative Statement.(g) noted capitation grants needed to be streamlined wlth the Ministry's Policy of providingfree basic education to children in Uganda;/A) further noted that Early Childhood Development was clearly elucidatcd in the ShadowCabinet's Alternative Policy Statement;(i) noted that Govemment to work with inGmational organisatrons to ensure that EarlyChildhood Development Program extended to children in rural areas:2() gurded that Covemmcnt nceded to provide accommodation facilities in seed schoolsshould also be included in the Altemative Policy statement;(k) noted the need for Govemment to establish vocational institutions in all constituenciesin the country to promote vocational skills education and training;(l) further noted that tax exemptions should bc rcduccd to enhance increased revenuecol lections by Covemment;(m)staEd that the challcnges within the Education sub program among which included the4.000 teachers who have since not been placed/deployed on account of inadequateWage Bill;The Comminee mode the lollowing saggestions ta the Shadow Cabinet for consideration:(a) that the Shadow Ministcr spccifically states the objectives of the Sector and the budgetproposals to that effcctl(b) that revenue collections highlighted in the Alternative Policy Statement needed to besafeguarded to address cascs of comtption that may arise:The Comnuttee sought to establish reasons as to why the Alternatlve Policy Statement wassubmitted beyond the timeline prescribed under Rule 147 of the Rules of ProcedureResponses to issues rrisedTlu Commttee was inlorned by thc Shadow Minister lor Sports that,(a) alt€rnatlve sources of funding for the Education and Sports Scctor would bc availcd bythe Shadow Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Dcvclopment.(b) the contract to build Sports Stadia was awarded to persons that did not have the capacityand expertise to construct such facilitiesl(c) the Committee ought to demand for accountability for funds expended for therefurbishment of Mandela National Sports Stadium, Namboole;(d) the challenged highlighted in the Alternative Policy Statement were intended toprovoke Government to generate solutions to address such challengesl(e) funding ofthe Sports Sector in South Africa was donc by thc private sectoc thc mostnotable being sAstco.Presenta(ion of en Anelyticel Brief on (hc Ministcrirl Policy Stetcment rnd BudgctEstimates for thc FinencielYe*.r 2O23124.The Committee rcceivcd and considered an Analytical Brief from the Parliamentary BudgetOffice on the Ministerial Policy Statement and Budget Estimates for the Votes under theEducation, Sports and Skills Sub-Programme for the Financial Yar 2023D4 (see copy o/ tleAnalytical Briefl3Min.4 - AdjournmentThe meeting was adjoumed at 2:07 p.m.Recorded by: firmed by:ftfu,qNinsiima Diana OlenyCOMMITTEE CLERKl'wesrgye John NCIIAIRPERSONtamuhlrra.IvtP4MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE OF EDUCATION AND SPORTSHELD ON TUESDAY ll APRIL 2023 AT 2:00PM IN CONFERENCE HALL A' SOIJTHWING, PARI-IAMENT BUILDINGS, KAMPALA.Mcmbers Prescntl. Hon. Twesigye John Ntamuhiira2. Hon. Abigaba Cuthbert Mirember3. Hon. Itungo Nathan4. Hon. Kakembo Michcal5. Hon. Mutumba AMul6. Hon. Katenya Isaac7. Hon. Bagiire Aggrey Henry8. Hon. Ongiertho Emmanuel9. Hon. Bingi Patrick Nyanzi10. Hon. Kayembe Solo GeofrcyI L Hon. Ebwalu Jonathan12. Hon. Akugizibwe Aled Ronald13. Hon. Lokwang Philips14. Hon. Abigaba Cuthbert Mirembe15. Hon. Suubi Kinyamatama Juliet16. Hon. Kubeketerya JamesMembers Absent With Apolory1. Hon. Alanyo Jenniffer2. Hon. Acibu Agnes3. Hon. Awich Jane4. Hon. Nabukenya Brenda5. [Ion. Paparu Lillian6. Hon, Kamateneti Joslyne7. Hon. Etuka Isaac Joakino8. Hon. Asiimwe Molly9. Hon. Oguzu Lee DenisIn Attendrnce (Civil Society Budget Advocecy Group)ChairpersonDeputy ChairpcrsonMcmberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMemberMembcrMemberMemberMemberMembcrMemberMemberMcmberl)2)3)4)s)6)7)8)e)Mr. JeffC.WachiloDr. Obed KambasuMr. Ongom WMr. Ainebyona MitchellMr. Ochen RonaldMs. Nasuunah. S.KattyMs.Akello JulietMs.Ainembabazi ShallonMs. Namubiru Christina1l0) Mr. Muhangi PascalIn ettendance (The Committce Secreteriet)l) Ms. Mirembe Barbara2) Ms. Akullo Carolinc3) Ms. Asiimwc F'lavia4) Ms. Keijagye Brenda5) Ms. Namata Sylvia6) Ms. Nanono Veronica7) Ms. Bugembe Sylvra8) Ms. Ninsiima DianaPrincipal EconomistEconomistLegal OffrcerPolicy Analyst - Leader of OppositionPolicy Analyst [LGB]ResearcherResearchcrPrincipal Clerk Assistant/Minute SecretaryAgende( I ) Recitation of the Parliamentary Prayer.(2) Communication ftom the Chair(3) Consideration of the Policy Statements and Budget F,stimates for Public Universities fortdo,eFY 202312024.(4) AdjoummentThe meeting was callcd to order at 3.10 p.m.Min.l - Recitation of the ParliamenterT Preyer.The Parliamentary Praycr was recited by the Committee Clerk.Min.2 - Communicetion from the Chair.ht his conmunicarion, the Chairperson:(a) welcomed persons present for the meeting; and specially welcomed the Civil SocietyBudget Advocacy Group, whom he indicated were in attendance to submit memoranda onthc Financial Year 2023124 Ministcrial Policy Statement and Budget Estimatcs;(b) infonned Members that the Shadow Cabinet had tabled before the House, AltemativePolicy Statements and that the technical team had been tasked to scruitnise the samc forpresentation of briefon the budget consideation processl and(c) commended the Civil Socrety Advocacy Group on the Budget for endeavouring to prcscntmcmorandum on Ministerial Policy Statements and Budgct Estimates on annual basis.Min.3 - Considcration of the Policy Stetcmcnts end Budgct Estimates for Public Universiticsfor the FY 20232024: Submission by Civil Socicty Budgct Advocacy Group.2,'Ihc Civil Society Budget Advocacy Croup presented the Civil Socicty Position Paper on theEducation and Sports Sub Program in response to the Ministerial Policy Statcmcnt 202112024.(see written memorandum attached)In ad&tion to the presentation, Dr Obed;(a) informed the Committee of the Advocacy Group's visit to Karamoja where it establishedthat children outside school going age found themselves going to school premises in questfor food that was made available by the World Food Pmgramme for childrcn attendingschools.(b) suggested to thc Committee that e-inspections needcd to be done in addition to physicalinspection.Obserartions/issues rrisedlThe Commi ee(a) noted that the Advocacy Group needed to have made proposals in line with mobilisationof funds since most suggestions centred around allocation of funds;(b) guided that Civll Society Organisations needed to work to assist Govemment regardingoutsourcing for funds from extemal sources.(c) brought to the notice of the Advocacy Group that their recommendations were key andviable but that the issue still remained inadequatc allocation of funds to facilitateimplementation of Govemment planned activities;(d) challenged Civil Society Organisations to collaborate and engage local govemments inmatters to do with education in communities where they have resident operationsl1e) advised Civil Society Organisations to educate and sensitise local govemments on bestpractices in executing their mandates on provision ofeducation services;(0 noted that some issues raised in memoranda submitted by Civil Society Organisations onany matter before Parliament were wakeup calls to Govemmcnt that the issues so raisedwere rn existent and affected community welfare;The Committee inquired whether during scrutiny of the Ministerial Policy Statement and BudgetEstimates for FY 2023124, the Advocacy Crroup came across funds that were allocated to somesub sub program that were considered redundant.Responses to issues reised:The Civil Society Budget Advocacy Group informed the Connrittee.(a) that whereas issues of rcsource allocation within govemm€nt existed, comrption and abuseofoffice were key determinants ofpoor governance and that the Office ofthe Inspectorate3of Govemment had reported the country losing approximately Shs.l0 trillion as a result ofcomrption;(b) that Govemment needed to take deliberate steps to save the available financial resourcesand ensure that their allocation to key priority sectors;(c) it reviewed Uganda 'l'ax Policies for tbe FY 2023124 and lobbied for Govemment toconsidcr their implementation in order 1o generate more tax revenucsl(d) of an Association dubbed the 'Monitory Service Committee' created !o monitor servicedelivery within the different Govemment Sectors;(e) it undertook to promote enhanced accountability for the different activities undertaken;(f) it undertook to ukc lead in the Civil Society Coalition on the Education Sector generateproposals that would be presented at an appropriate timc during review ofthe EducationSector(g) of advisories made that Govemment needed to first consider implementation of existingpolicies before new ones wcrc formulated;(h) of intentions by the Civil Society Advocacy Groups on the Budgct to share key documentsfor accountabillty before the NGO Bureau.(i) that the Minrstry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development hal launched the PublicInvestment Finance Strategy wherein the Ministry had a strategy ofsourcing for lunds andadvised the Committee to take keen interest in the samc.'Ihe Committee guided the Society to put their responses in writingMin.4 - Adjournment11re meeting was adjoumed at 4: 16 p.m.Recorded by: Confirmed by:@."qNinsiima Diana OlenyCOMMITTEECLERKTwesigye John Ntamuhiira. MPCHAIRPERSON4Anncr l: LIAT OF UltFUltDED FOR THE EDUCATIOII SFORTA ANDSXILLA ST'B PR(rcRAi'ME FIOR TIIE I.II|AT{CIAL YE,AR2O23I24o13-UOEaGrant ardms primarv schools 17.80Grant aidins 128 orimarv schoolsGrant ardrnq secondarv schools 36.88Grant aidine 87 sccondarv schoolsRehablhtation of traditronal schools l5Rchabihtatron of traditronal schoolsSala4r enhancement of ArtsTeachers 90Funds be allocatcd towards salaryenhancement of the Arts teachers toensure oualitv educatron.Wage brll for 4,809 teachersrecrurted and not deDloyed t22For the wage brll of 4,8O9 teachers,recruited and not deployed due to lackof wase bill.Recruitment of 3,OOO pnmaqrteachers 25Recruitment of additronal teachers forpnmary school to close the qap.Teachers Scheme of Servrce 6.704Implement the Scheme of S€rvrce tomotivatc teachers espccially those thathave served for long at the same levelRecrurtment of at least 3,0OOaddltronal pnmary teachers 25To rmprove on the pup teacher ratro lnthe least-staffed Dnmarv schoolsDrrectorate Industrial Traimnc t1.44Inadequate funding of the lowersecondary curnculum dehvery.14,016 Secondary School Teachers to betralned on Asseasment TrainrngPackages (ATPS) use and CompetenceBased Educatlon and Tramrng (CBET)approaches for each of the 78occupations ofATPs from 5,502 schoolsto be trarned under the Lawer secondaryCurriculum.Higher Educatron Students'Financins Board. (HESFBI 35.2sMFPED urgently allocatesHESFB an additional UShs20.664bn rn FY2O23l24 toenable 4,189 students alreadyon the scheme contrnue wlththeir studies and to enable 1,500new cohort attarn highereducatron by accessrng loansthrough the BoardUShs 14 59bn bc allocatedtowards clearance of feesdomestic a-rrears accrued wlththe varlous Universitres to avoidlitlgatlon due to non-paJrmcnt.llIUganda Allied H€alth ExamlnatlonsBoard (UAHEBI t26Re-rnstate rts subventron budget ofUShs 6,36O,O01 ,O24 and an addltronalUShs 6,239,998,976 be allocated toUAHEB for the Board to effectrvely carryout its mandate.Uganda Nurses and MidwivesExaminations Board (UNMEB) 20.3Allocates the Board an additional UShs20,297,742,772 to cover rts budtetshortfalls in regards to managementand general admrnlstratron of Exams,and construction of the new office blockUganda Business and TechnicalExaminatrons Board IUBTEBI 11.4Allocatca UBTEB an additional UShs3.2bn as development, where UShs2.2bn will enhance the constructronallocatron to UShs Sbn and UShs lbnfor retoohng of the Board towards theacqursitron of field containers forexaminations storage, computers, olficeequrpment and furnrture and fittings toenable full uptake of T1/ET by crtrzensthroughout the countryUganda National ExaminationsBoard (UNEBI 265l.an addrtronal UShs l2bn toeffectlvely support the SNEcandidates.an addrtronal UShs 4 6bn tocater for the revrs€d unrt cost forhosting centers to accommodateUNEB marking due to anlncrease rn basic commoditicsUShs 3.9bn as top up formarkcrs of candldatetranacnpts.UShs 6 7bn as enhanced fieldtransport for the examrners.UShs 6 6bn to carry out NAPEand UShs 3.5bn for Contrnuousasseasment guldehnes and datacapture tools for sciencesubjects.llivTotrl 4s5.8?Support the O LEVEL CurriculumimDlementation 7 2t7To offer contlnuous support on thetrarnrng pcdagogies and assessmentmodalitres of the revls€d L.werSecondary CurriculumA-level Curnculum Review 6.00Addltlonal UShs 6bn to revrew and ro[[out the A-kvel currlculaTo pav graturty arrears Arrears 0.48Arrears 0.781To settle all domestlc arrears to3UliersShortfall on palrment of scienceteach€rs' salarlesTotal L4.44?16.01 1Shortfall was allocated assupplementary n FY2O22 /23 and thrshas not bcen rncorporated ln budget forFY2023124.Provisron of revised unlt ofcapltation grants toUPE,USE/UPOLET and SNEsubventron gants to KCCA schools 1.3Capitatron Grants to schools in KCCAwere not reviscd like other LGsConstructron of a Seed SecondarySchool m Nakawa division 3Improve on the classroom pupil ratlosto offer oualitv educatron.Removal of asbestos andrefurbishment of 1O schools 25To ensure safetv of learnersConstruction of classrooms atNtinda Pnmarv School 0.5lmprove on the classroom puprl ratiosto offer oualitv educatron.Renovation of classrooms at KrtantePnmary school 0.6Improve on the classroom pupil ratlosto offer quahty educatron.Rcnovatron of classrooms at Krbuy€Pnmary School o.2Improve on the classroom pupil ratlosto oller quahty educationR€novatron of classrooms at KCCABuscga Communitv Pnmary School 0.3Improve on the classroom pupil ratrosto oller quahty educatron.Renovation of classrooms atST.Ponerano Kyamula P/S Pnmaryechool o4Improve on the classroom pup ratlosto oller ouahty educationConstruct of KCCA Philip OmondiStadrum 6Construction of Office BlockTotel 30.81r51To rmprove on Sports facilities withinI'he Commrssron has been grven 3bnthrs FY 2022 123 to krck start theprocess of constructlon of the officeblock however, thrs fund has been cutin the FY 2023124.Funds allocated for constructron andthe clrctoolRetooling to enable procurcmcnt ofcomputers and office furniture andinfrastructure development.Totrl s.l5Allocates NCHE a development budgetof UShs 5bn to enable the Councilprocure computers and olTrcecquipment, procure vehicles for the fieldand embark on its infrastructuraldevelopm€nt.Recruitment of Addrtronal Staff t .26MFPED allocates the Council UShs 2bnappropriated in FY2o22l23 forrecruitment of additronal staff but notreleasedTotrl 6.26Shortfalls m Budqet non-wage 30.42MFPED rernstatcs that budget of NCSfor FY2O23 /24 to Ushs47.8bn.Develooment of reEional stadia so.oMFPED avarls NCS a developmentbudget of uShs SObn to kick start thedevclopment of thc sportscomplex/arena at Lugogo and Ushs202bn for the Natlonal stadE regronallyln the medrum tcrmTotelDomestrc Arrears80.424.81Outstanding Arrcars with no a.llocatronrn the FY 2023124Underfundmg for food and hvmg-out allowances for governmentsponsored students 2.t66Ttre Universrty requrres a UGX 9. l55bnfor food and livrng out allowances atthe current rates allocation of UGX7 039bnThe wage requrrement for staffharmonraatron 12.63For stalf harmonrsatron followrng thepubhc seruce lnstructlonWage requrrement for the promotronof Acadcmic Stalf 441For oromotion of ouahfied stalfRenovation of the colleges ofmedrcrne (CHS and CoVABI looThe Committee recommends thatMFPED allocates an additronal UShslobn to klck start the renovatron of theCollege of Health Medrcrne and Collegeof Veterinary Medicine, Antmalresourcea and Bro Security andcontinue with the renovatlon of the hallsof residenceRenovation of non-academrcbuildings mcludrng re-roofing ofhouscs and replacement of asbestosroofs 14Some unrveralty burldings strll possessasbestos roofs. Therefore there ls anurgent need to re-roof the buildinssTotdConatructron of the Faculty ofMcdicine35.41618.0Faclhtate the Scrence Based Unrversityin alignment wlth NDP lll. Structuresat the l'aculty of Medrcine aredllaDldated and condemned for usc.Renovabon of the pathologr blockwhere the Faculty of Mediclne rslocated 0.332Facllitate the Scrence Based Universityln alignment wlth NDP III. Structuresat the Faculty of Medrcine aredllapldated and condemncd for use.Provisron of Lrvrng Out allowancesto Government Sponsored Students o.158lnadequate provisron for governmentsponsored students.Increase Wage bill to cater forrecrultment and promotrons 9.32Mbarara University of Science andTechnologl an additronal wage of UShs7 2bn to partly increase the staffinglevels of thc academic staffAn addrtional wage brtt UShs 2.l2bn topromote 63 stall that are due forpromotron rn order to rmprove staffretentron.Shortfalls rn Wage B lTotd 2?.At6.9WaBe shortfall of UShs 6.9bn beallocated for FY2O23 I 24 .Construction of a 5264sqm CentralTeachrnq Facrlrty 5.0UShs Sbn be dlocated to start phase Iof the construction of the Centralteachln8 facrhtyClear Domestrc arrears t2.4MFPED allocates UShs 12.4bn to clearrta domestlc arrears.Totd 24.3Wage and stall recruitmentespecially senror academic stall andtechmciane 6.395Wage enhancemcnt and addltlonalrecruitment to enable teaching andlearnmqRemoval of asbestos sheets fromburldrngs at Kvambogo Unrversity 34.2Allocates Kyambogo University anadditional UShs 34 2bn in FY2O23 /24to address the rssues of asbestos sheetsremoval, dllapldated rnfrastructure andadditional office space for lecturers ashrghhghted above.Domestrc Arrears 9These are audlted domestic arrears asaudlted by the Audltor General andfunds havc not bcen allocated to settlethemRecrultment of semor STEM/ STEIteachlng staff to reach at least 5070from 1O o/o stallinq levelTotd 49.66.7The stamng lcvel of 10 o/o is far belowthe requrred mlnrmum of 5oo/o as perNDPIIICompletion of Medical andequipprng lr.boratory Block forMedrcal School 7.3Need to put the requred laboratonesas required by NCHE.Compleaon and equrpping Mantimel.cture and Laboratory 8.7Need to put the required Maritmernfrastructure to allow thc start of theprogramUpgradrng and mstall"atlon ofNational Back Bone Infraatructureat Palhsa, Nagongera, andNamasaqah camDuses o.7Commercrahzation of proto typesOperationalzatron of UniversltyTechnolory, Busrnesa andInnovatrons lncubatron Centre(TBtlC) and commerciahzrng ofprototypes. l.oTotd 24.4Non-Wase recurrent shortfalls 2.4To avoid supplementary rcqucsts cachfinancral year.Rccruitment of cntrcal staff 4.8To support newly accredrted programsand programmes whose students aremoving to 3rd and 4th bachelor ofscience for agriculture& bachelor ofabbsDcvcloDment Budset 4.2Allocates an addltional UShs 8.2bn forcompletion of the Multi-purpose Healthscrence Modern laboratory and admrnannex building and UShs l.2bn foroperatronahzatron of Erepr PTCOp€rationalization of EREPI PTCMoyo t.2Domestrc arrearsTotd t7.o2.2Domestrc Arrears 2Development budget 31.6To cater for repair and upgrade begranted 557m reparr& upgrade 623mNon-rcmittancc of fees for studentsTo clear debts the universrty rnhentedl. Marntarns the developmentbudget of UShs 9bn m themedrum term to enable theUnrversity burld itsinfrastructurc.ll, Avarls an addltlonal UShs22 6bn for procurement ofspeciahzed cquipment andbenefit from HESFB.for costsn s drs frommachTotel 35.4Devclopment Budget 17.0Completron of Phase ll of the AnatomyBlock which has taken long due tornaduate fuUniversity Bus to transport Studentsfor climcal studles and Outreach0.65To tranrt studentsTotrl 17.65Develo ent Budt ll.0Re-instate rts developmcnt budgct topay the p€nding certrflcates andcontmue w1th the constructron of theBusrness and DevelopmentCenterCcntral Teac FaciliShortfalls in Wbtll 7 259Salary Harmonization and recrultmentof addrtional staffIt7 ^oMultlpurpos€ bulldlng constructionat Gulu Universlty ConstituentHotal and Teac 13.455Thc Commrttee recommends thatMFPED allocates Gulu University anaddrtronal UShs 13.455bn ln order toundertake the constructlon of multr-purpose burldmg at the ConstltuentCol tal in Moroto and teachi HosTotd 31.? 1BiIw 6.008uate infrastructure facrlitres 126l,ow stalfinq level of 27o/aThe Commrttee rccommends that MFpEDallocates the Unlvcrslty an extra UShsl2.6bn for the completron of the mamadmmrsratron block and procurement of thencccssary mcdrcal cqurpmcnt for theteachrng hosprtal and facultres.Shortfalls in allowances o_576Lrving Out Allowances for GovernmentStudentsTotd 19.18Develo ent but 13Conatructron of a new cLassroom/officeblock at Mbale BranchDeveloentt 1.2Construction of a new classroom/officeblock at Mbarara BranchDeveloentt 10Constructlon of the new multipurposebu Branch at t(amTotd 12.SRe-rn state tbut 5.4The Committee recommends thatMFPED re-instates Mts of the MoonUnrverslty development budget of UShs5.4lbn, addrtronal UShs 5 4bn asretoo buand thePresrdentral 20Presldenthl pledge for the constructionof the faculty of health scrences,lnnovatlon and technoloTotel 26.4