Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.






Tuesday, 2 April 2019

Parliament met at 2.03 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. It has been brought to my attention that some of the ministerial policy statements that were laid on the Table last week lacked some information and did not meet the requirements as provided for in the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, in the Acts of Parliament Act and in the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. This is really unfortunate because those assigned responsibilities have not met the expectations of Parliament. 

I cannot, at this stage, blame any particular individual. However, as a Parliament, the person who takes responsibility is the political head of the Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) and responsible for not executing its job well. 

I am, therefore, sending a fairly strong call to the concerned ministers to bring their houses to order so that we do not have a repeat of such situations. It has happened before, it has happened again; please, it should not happen again.

The policy statements, which are submitted with incomplete information, include the following – remember the pompous way in which the policy statements were laid last week. They include the following entities:

    1. The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives whose policy statement lacks certain vital information. The committee cannot proceed with it. That even weakens the Opposition the more because they are relying on this to present their own alternative policy statement.
    2. The Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities
    3. The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs
    4. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development
    5. The Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation
    6. The Ministry of Works and Transport
    7. The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development
    8. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries
    9. The Ministry of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance.

The above acts of omission, like in any organisation, should attract penalties and sanctions. However, the Rules of Procedure of Parliament are silent on how such cases can be handled.

Therefore, I request the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges to interest itself with this matter and consider proposing amendments for the consideration of Parliament so that errant MDAs can be penalised for these kinds of things.

Honourable members, we have a timeframe within which to process the ministerial policy statements. This task is very involving and requires concentration and time. To enable the sectoral committees to systematically handle ministerial policy statements, I will suspend sittings of plenary for a certain period so that committees can complete their tasks. 

By so providing that time, I do not expect any excuses from any committee for not completing the assignments in time. Accordingly, I will adjourn the House at an appropriate time, to allow the sectoral committees to concentrate on the consideration and completion of the ministerial policy statements.

Honourable members, you will recall that there was a matter that relates to the issue of harmonisation of the border issue between Katakwi and Napak districts. The Speaker of Parliament, the Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, following what had been raised in Parliament, wrote a letter on 11 March 2019, which was based on a petition that had been brought by members of the Karamoja Parliamentary Group and Napak District Council. She wrote urging the institutions of Government involved to hasten the process of re-opening the border and establishing the actual border based on the coordinates that exist and help these people so as to avoid situations that can escalate.

The Speaker urged this team from Government to act promptly. However, there is still some tension and the Members have come to me again. I am requesting the Leader of Government Business to take this up so that these agencies go to the ground, solve this problem and come back to advise us on what we need to do. If there is something that needs to be done by Parliament, we should be advised accordingly.

That is my communication. I will be communicating other aspects at an appropriate time. Thank you. (Ms Nambooze rose_)

Honourable member, on what matter do you rise?

MS NAMBOOZE: On a point of procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of procedure arising from my communication? (Laughter) Proceed.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you. Rt Hon. Speaker, you communicate to us through the Order Paper even before we reach here. I am rising on that matter.

Today, it has been listed in item No. 25 that this House will consider the Kampala Capital City Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2015. That matter came before this House in January and you guided that we would have a meeting between the Opposition and the Government side.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you say item No. 25?

MS NAMBOOZE BAKIREKE: Yes, item No. 25.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is the Roads Bill, 2018.

MS NAMBOOZE BAKIREKE: Rt Hon. Speaker, I am sorry. It is item No. 26.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Item No. 26 is the Kampala Capital City Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2015. It is what you are talking about. 

MS NAMBOOZE: Yes, it is item no. 26. Rt Hon. Speaker, you guided that we have a meeting to harmonise our positions and make work for the plenary much easier. Indeed, we are very grateful for that guidance. We did have the meeting and the Government side conceded on a number of issues but they requested that they go and consult the Attorney-General.

Rt Hon. Speaker, we expect that as a result of that meeting, we on the Opposition and the Government side will be moving amendments. It is now a practice of this House – and I think it is good practice - that amendments are shared before the matter comes up for discussion.

As of now, we have not received any amendments being proposed by the Government side on that matter. We are also getting ready to present ours. I, therefore, seek for your guidance - wouldn’t it be procedurally okay that both sides submit their proposed amendments before this matter comes for debate, Rt Hon. Speaker? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Honourable members, I think we had agreed that all amendments that would affect the text of legislation to be passed by this Parliament must be shared before we tackle them at Committee Stage so that we know what the amendments suggest and their implication on the entire Bill. This matter is on the Order Paper today under item No. 26 - the Kampala Capital City Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2015. 

There was a meeting that I advised to take place so that we harmonise everything before we go to Committee Stage for us to go through these things quickly but I have not received any such amendments either from the Government or the Opposition. The only amendments that we have are from the committee, yet, there seemed to have been some disagreements with the amendments that had been presented by the committee and the text of the Bill itself. So, can we have this? If the amendments are coming from the Government, as stated by hon. Nambooze, they should come so that we share them. 

I have heard the honourable member saying, “We, from the Opposition, will also come with amendments,” when are you coming with those amendments? Those amendments should all come and we internalise them so that when we go to Committee Stage for this particular Bill, we know what we are changing from the text of the law. 

That is my guidance on this matter all this time. Please, let us heed this because the matter is already on the Order Paper. Let us have the amendments as soon as – actually, they should have been here by yesterday but let us see how best we can deal with them.

Honourable members, I have Members who have –(Mr Lugoloobi rose_) yes, honourable member, do you have a point of procedure?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. You did outline a list of MDAs that have presented policy statements, which do not meet the requirements of this House. I think it will only be fair to send back those policy statements. What are we going to do with those policy statements if they do not meet the requirements? This House should pronounce itself on this matter. 

Rt Hon. Speaker, you have done well to name and shame those ministries because it is very unfair. The budget process started way back in October last year and they very well know the provisions of the law. The timetable is there yet they are unable to present small policy statements. I think this matter should be treated very seriously because it jeopardises the whole process and delays committees in delivering the reports. 

Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg that the record on the presentation of these policy statements be expunged from the Hansard and they are returned to the respective senders. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member. If you lay a document that is incompetent for purpose, it is not a document. It should be treated as such. For example, there were issues that I do not want to get into about documents laid here which – no, along this budgeting process - also have issues of incompetence. 

Therefore, the nine ministries that I have listed here should consider that they have not laid any ministerial policy statements in this House. (Applause) Today is the 2nd of April. These policy statements should have been here by 15th March. I made adjustments in the timing to allow the shadow ministers in the Opposition to present their alternative policy statements by 29 March 2019, taking into account the changes that had happened because of the delays of Government. However, even that has now been overtaken. 

If by 2nd April 2019, we have not yet received proper policy statements, what time do I give the Opposition? We all know that the sectoral committees must report to the Committee on Budget by the 20th of this month but we are still here without policy statements. 

Leader of Government Business, what do we do with this situation? (Laughter) You might need to crack the whip. 

2.19
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Rt Hon. Speaker, indeed, I am very sorry that some policy statements did not meet the required standards and therefore, we have to take them back. 

We should point out what information is missing from the various policy statements presented by these various ministries so that they are able to provide it because up to now, they are not aware that – (Interjections) - but according to them, they have submitted their policy statements but those who received them said they are not up to standard – this is my understanding. Therefore, we have to take back what has been shot –(Interjections)– I have already said that I am sorry –(Interruption) 

MR NZOGHU: Rt Hon. Speaker, the mandate of each portfolio holder in this House is well known. Rt Hon. Speaker, you have been reminding the frontbench about these deadlines; not once or even twice. In the presence of the Leader of Government Business, they submitted documents that they thought met the required standards. In principle, he is supposed to guide the frontbench, as the Leader of Government Business.

Therefore, Rt Hon. Speaker, is it in order for the Leader of Government Business, a General, who is supposed to guide Cabinet members by giving them a clear direction and ensure that the documents they lay on the Table meet the required standards, to run away from his responsibility and begin talking about what is outside his mandate? Is he in order, Rt Hon. Speaker? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not think I can state any more than I have stated that these errors should not be happening because they jeopardise the whole process. For example, when we looked at the ministerial policy statement submitted by the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities as laid here, we realised it is different from what was transmitted yesterday. The one that was transmitted to the committee is the one that was brought here last week - the 40 copies - they are two different documents. So, which one do we take? Now, which document do we take? We would not want to go too far into this thing but General, these things are not right.

I have already listed the nine ministries whose policy statements do not meet the required standards. These ministries should pick back their documents from Parliament and come back and lay those documents properly before Parliament. This time, we will deal with them when they come. For the avoidance of doubt, I can read them again.

    1. Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives 
    2. Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities
    3. Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs
    4. Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development
    5. Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation
    6. Ministry of Works and Transport
    7. Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development
    8. Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries
    9. Ministry of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance. 

Those nine ministries should come and lay proper documents before Parliament with the requirements so that we can transmit them to the committees and they start their work. We are running out of time. This should be – I see the honourable Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. Honourable minister, I require an up-to-date ministerial policy statement from you. You may want to go back and bring it. 

Leader of Government Business, can we agree that they will all be in by tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. Please, can we agree on that? 

2.27
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Most obliged, Rt Hon. Speaker. 

MS NAMBOOZE: Rt Hon. Speaker, this House has two sets of ministers; the substantive ones on the Government side and the shadow ministers on the Opposition. 

Rt Hon. Speaker, you facilitate all of us. If the Ministry of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance, which I shadow, brings here a document that does not meet the standards; wouldn’t it  be procedurally right that you allow me to present the alternative policy statement for that ministry and the country moves on? (Laughter) 

The Shadow Government is set up to cover the vacuum and we are ready. Wouldn’t it be procedurally okay if you instead called for the alternative policy statement from the Opposition to close the gap?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I wish you were right –(Laughter)– because it was the same Opposition that was pleading for two weeks to be ready after reading the policy statement from the Government. Therefore, you cannot be ready. Please, stop stealing the show. (Laughter)  

I am here pleading with you but if you are ready then I do not have to give any extension. From what hon. Nambooze has said, the Opposition is ready with their alternative policy statement. 

What I will do tomorrow when we receive all the policy statements, the timelines will not change because we already have the alternatives ready. Anyway, it is already time and under the rules, you should have laid them already. Why don’t you lay them now? Yes, the alternative policy statements that are ready because under the rules, they should have come in by 9th. Therefore, bring them - let me proceed with the – not on this, this one has taken too long – I have Members who had requested for the Floor and I have to cut it into a half because we have taken a lot of time already on these procedural matters. I have seven Members who have requested for the Floor and I am going to take only four Members.

2.29
MS IDAH NABAYIGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance over conspiracy among the Indian fish companies to exploit local fishermen and dealers by offering low prices.

From 30 March 2019, fishermen in Uganda, especially those dealing in Nile Perch decided to lay down their tools and stop fishing due to the low prices given by the factory. This matter was raised on 27 February 2019 and the Speaker directed the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, to come and give a report. It is now a month - and these people were still working - but they have now laid down their tools. As a result, our communities are being affected.

Rt Hon. Speaker, - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, that matter is on the Order Paper. I see the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. Can we wait for the minister’s response then you can ask a supplementary question. I had the same request from Kyamuswa County also on the same matter. 

MS NABAYIGA: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker.

2.30
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. It is about the contempt of Parliament by Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Matayo Kyaligonza. 

Pursuant to Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Parliament is mandated to sanction and carryout oversight functions for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda. Whereas Parliament on 27 February 2019 made a resolution to condemn the brutal attack and assault on Ms Esther Namaganda, a police officer on duty by Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Matayo Kyaligonza and his body guards; and whereas in recommendation No. 4 of the above resolution, Parliament asked His Excellency, the President of Uganda, to recall Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Matayo Kyaligonza from Burundi where he is serving as ambassador; following the above resolution, I now with great sadness wish to report to you the grave contempt of Parliament by Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Matayo Kyaligonza.

Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table, the Hansard containing the resolution made by this august House. While giving an interview on NTV, Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Matayo Kyaligonza yesterday, 1 April 2019, discourteously said that this resolution of Parliament was stupid and unfair. He went ahead to refer to the honourable Members of this Parliament as “stupid.”

He further said that Parliament has no authority to pass judgement on him since it was not Parliament that appointed him. 

I beg to lay on the Table the CD with those words.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, might you remember what time this was done? You do recall that yesterday was Fool’s Day.

MR MUGUME: Rt Hon. Speaker, it is in his own words.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you remember what time the interview was?

MR MUGUME: Rt Hon. Speaker, if it was not in his own words, I would not have any problems - (Interjections) - it was at 9.00 p.m.

This contempt of Parliament is a grave offence of obstructing the Legislature in carrying out its functions and of hindering the legislators in the performance of their duties. 

I, now therefore, pray that this august House resolves to sanction Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Matayo Kyaligonza as, among other things, a deterrent for future contempt of Parliament. 

The Executive should be made to expedite the implementation of the resolution by Parliament to recall him by halting the consideration of the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for 2019/2020 until Rtd Maj. Gen. Matayo Kyaligonza is out of office. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether that is a motion or an intention to move a motion. The phrase “contempt of Parliament” is a technical term. There is a big difference between contempt of Parliament and disrespect for Parliament. 

Contempt of Parliament is contained in our Rules of Procedure and there is a clear definition of what amounts to it. Therefore, if someone decides to insult Parliament, it does not amount to contempt of Parliament.

You have stated your case and that not being a motion, I think we only need a response from Government on this issue based on what you have just stated.

2.36
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Rt Hon. Speaker, I do not think I can say anything about this statement because I did not have the information related to what has been said. I am not party to this and I did not know. I do not even know what is in that circular envelope. (Laughter) I do not know what it is. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is called a CD.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: CD? Okay. I do not know what is on the CD. Therefore, I think I have nothing to say about what has been said because I do not know what it is all about.

Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In the newspapers, the heading of the story was “Gen. Kyaligonza Calls the Parliamentary Resolution Stupid”. That was in the newspapers. I think that is what the Members are responding to. 

Let us pass this to Government and see how they will deal with it tomorrow. Please, look at the article and see if it is a proper response to issues that are decided by this House and then we proceed from there. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Rt Hon. Speaker, I do not know how to access the CD and even if I accessed the CD, how do I prove that this is a CD by Gen. Maj. Kyaligonza? On what basis can I come and talk about this tomorrow? I cannot confirm that what is written in the newspapers is a true report. I do not have anything much to say about that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is the issue but also, let us keep remembering that yesterday was 1st April and that date is known by other names as well. If you, however, want to pursue this matter, you can go ahead. If I was to guide, I would guide in the following way;
Some of these things do not define what we are. We know what we are. We know what we do. Personally, if somebody called me a fool, I would look at them and smile because I would know they are the biggest. I would leave it at that. However, that is how I would personally take it. I do not know how other Members would take it.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I am concerned because Maj. Gen. Kyaligonza is one of the Generals that went to the bush and experiences in the bush are very difficult. They can change someone’s orientation. One is living in the bush, eating bush meat, having no toilet paper and one has all these problems.  (Laughter)

I would like to get clarification from Government whether after coming from the bush, these Generals were given counseling and they were guided because the way they have been doing things – in Busabala, one shot at a civilian and now, this one has slapped a traffic officer. Maybe, Government could be advised to get the whole set of Generals that went to the bush and take them to a counseling unit so that they can leave the bush mentality and become civilians. (Interruption)

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Rt Hon. Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Is the honourable member, who automatically yielded the Floor because I stood on a point of order, in order to insinuate that all the Generals who went to the bush require medical checkup, yet, we have some lieutenant generals including, President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, who has spearheaded the leadership of this country to the extent of being recognised globally and being awarded medals. 

Is he in order to insinuate that Generals who went to the bush are mentally wanting and therefore, need medical attention?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the honourable member was very direct. He did not insinuate anything. He just stated it in line with what we have been discussing.  

Sometimes, we extend things beyond what is stated when we come with some points of order. (Applause) Sometimes, we end up saying things that should not be on our record just because we are raising points of order. We should limit it to what we are discussing. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Rt Hon. Speaker, I would like to take the opportunity to inform my colleague that he is wrong to say that Generals need medical attention. He is not a General and so I do not think he has the ability to assess this. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Odur, you are not a General. Therefore, leave matters of the Generals to Generals. (Laughter)

2.43
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning fake salt flooding the market. The salt is called Pearl Vitamin C Salt produced by Ken Salt Limited based in Mombasa, Kenya. It is a product of Okapi Trading Limited. 

The complaints of the community are:

    1. The salt has particles that do not dissolve in water.
    2. The salt is tasteless. You may add a large quantity to food but it does not taste like the salt we eat daily.

The supplier normally takes the salt to Amuru Town Council and supplies it there. The local businessmen within the parishes then come and buy from that supplier. The major areas affected are Amuru Town Council, Mutema, Amuru Trading Centre, Lacor and Olwal.

Rt Hon. Speaker, we pray that the Minister for Trade and Industry, in liaison with the Uganda National Bureau of Standards investigates the source of this salt and stops its supply to the community of Amuru.

I have a sample of the packet of this salt and I will lay it on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But there is no salt in the packet; how can you -

MR OLANYA: Rt Hon. Speaker, when I brought it, I was advised by the security within Parliament to empty the salt and bring an empty packet. I do not know their intention but this is the packet of the salt being eaten by our people in Amuru.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, just respond to the issue.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Rt Hon. Speaker, I am asking as Member of Parliament for Ibanda South and not as a Minister for Karamoja Affairs. We are leaders and we lead the people who elected us. The allegations you are putting up here are very serious as they touch the people who voted for you - our people - and we are here because of the people.

The clarification I am seeking is, as the leader of those people, what did you do after getting the allegations? Did you take a sample to Uganda National Bureau of Standards? Did you take it to the Government chemist to test it immediately? Why do you waste all this time to come here when your people are consuming poison?

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I appreciate the honourable minister for seeking clarification. What he is asking is one of the reasons I am here on the Floor of Parliament. I pray that Government takes this as a very serious concern and if need be, we should test the components of this salt.

Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to lay the packet of this salt on the Table and if need be, I have a carton of this salt in my house. When the community raised the concern, I went to that shop and bought the whole carton. If need be, I will bring the whole carton to Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, that one has no evidential value because the issue is not the packet but the salt. (Laughter) Therefore, retrieve that from the Table. I think what you need to do is to arrange for samples to be taken to the proper institutions and to the ministry responsible so that we can deal with it.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I request you to allow me to bring a packet of this salt tomorrow or take it to the ministry concerned.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, just arrange to take it to the Government Analytical Laboratories for independent verification and give samples to the ministry responsible for the sector. You can also take another sample to the Uganda National Bureau of Standards.

MR OLANYA: Most obliged, Rt Hon. Speaker.

2.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Rt Hon. Speaker, I suggest that in future, when we bring substances to be laid here in Parliament, those substances should be tested to determine whether they are toxic or not for the health of members of Parliament before they are laid. Otherwise, next time, one may lay something, which will affect everybody. Thank you.

THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Rt Hon. Speaker, I rise on a procedural issue. We had a case here of flasks and I invited Parliament to be very careful not to be involved in trade wars. The procedural issue I am raising is whether one should bring materials that are labelled because you can investigate them when there are labelled well.

From my experience as a journalist, I have seen this before. One time, we were framed by a company producing juice. They brought a container that had a cockroach only for us to learn later that they were involved in trade wars.

Therefore, the procedural issue I am raising, Rt Hon. Speaker, is whether you should not guide this Parliament on how to lay materials, especially when materials are labelled because we risk running down people’s brands that they have built and invested in over the years. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, that has been my guidance; that the samples, if they are there, should be taken to the proper institutions to look at and verify what they have and let us know what they are. However, you cannot bring them here, honourable member. I think that is why they emptied the content because they could not verify the contents. Thank you.

2.52
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I rise on an issue of national concern. My committee visited the people of Teriet-Ndorobo in Bukwo District and found their state of living is terrible. Actually, one of their leaders called me to inquire whether we had worked on the report, which we are still working upon. 

However, the urgent issue is that these people live a very difficult state of life; they stay in congested camps. I am aware that the Office of the Prime Minister supported them in 2013 with some tarpaulins and food. Unfortunately, the tarpaulins are all worn out. They do not have food and the sanitation is bad.
Rt Hon. Speaker, I pray that the Office of the Prime Minister comes up with affirmative action to provide some food, shelter and blankets to these people. Otherwise, the rains are coming and these people are living in an unhealthy state. 

I also would like to request that the Batwa people from Bundibugyo be put in the same category because they have challenges of food, shelter and beddings. That is my prayer, Rt Hon. Speaker. 

2.54
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Mary Karooro Okurut): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I have taken note and if I can get a write up - we are expecting some food on Thursday; we shall take care of it.

2.55
MR RICHARD GAFABUSA (NRM, Bwamba County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding disastrous rains we received yesterday in the entire Bundibugyo District. The rains were, however, accompanied by heavy winds and hailstorms that destroyed both private and public infrastructure and property - crops, houses, churches and schools. The most hit subcounties are Busaru, Kisuba, Bubukwanga, Nyahuka and Buganikire town councils. 

I personally visited two of the schools that were completely destroyed. Bundimulinga Primary School in Nyahuka Town Council had its roof completely blown off - a four-classroom block. At St Mary’s Simbya, the roofs of three blocks were completely blown off.

As I talk, the children are stranded and have nowhere to sleep and to learn from. Many people are also stranded and have nowhere to sleep. 

Rt Hon. Speaker, I left the district disaster committee chaired by the Chief Accounting Officer (CAO) of Bundibugyo compiling a comprehensive report. We, therefore, pray that the Office of the Prime Minister, specifically the disaster preparedness unit, comes in to immediately provide emergency relief to the affected people and temporary shelter items and food to the schools.

We also pray that the Office of the Prime Minister works with the Ministry of Education and Sports and the district local government to see how the schools can be repaired so that the children can get back to their classrooms. I thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker.

MS KAROORO: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. Actually, I was in Ntoroko the other day and the spectre of rains was very alarming; one could see that it would come in a disastrous manner. So, we have been expecting that.

As I have already said, we are expecting food on Thursday. Honourable member, if you can get us the write up, we shall swing into action. I thank you.

2.58
MS CATHERINE LAMWAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Omoro): Rt Hon. Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance related to roads and bridges under development and maintenance by the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) in Omoro District.

Two days ago, we got reliable information about a report from the district on Awor Bridge that collapsed completely and has cut off the road from Bobi Sub County via Awor-Oyam, to Aboke-Lira Road.

Rt Hon. Speaker, this is a very busy road that supports our traders in transacting business, especially those from the eastern routes to South Sudan. As I speak, the road is cut off and people’s trucks are stuck with goods along the road.

I am aware of the efforts by UNRA and the Ministry of Works and Transport and the reliable information I received from Engineer Sam Muhoozi is that the contract awarding process is in the final stages and that in three months’ time, the contractor will be on site to put a permanent bridge at that particular point. 
However, my concern is; what can the ministry do in the meantime since the road is completely cut off so that we do not wait for the three months?

My prayer is that immediate intervention be made because this is quite an urgent matter. I thank you.

3.00
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Monica Azuba): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I would like to thank the Member for raising this matter. Normally, when bridges collapse, we do whatever we can and also reach out to sister agencies to see if they have the materials needed to repair those bridges, either by creating diversions or reconstructing the bridge immediately.

It is not proper that people are cut off. I would like to, therefore, promise that we are going to do whatever we can because it is not our intention that people are cut off from one side of the bridge. We shall handle that bridge and by the time I report here, it would have been done either by creating a diversion or putting a temporary bridge. 

3.02
MR CHRISTOPHER KALEMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I also rise on a matter of national importance concerning the movement of cattle from Kakuuto to Kampala.

On Friday, 29 March 2019, five trucks were stopped at Lukaya   yet they had all the documents to move these cattle to Kampala. They were arrested and forced to return to Mutukula. The 125 cattle and five trucks were impounded and kept at Mutukula Prison; four cows have died so far. 

Funny enough, when you ask the ministry concerned, they say they are not aware of this; that it is the Ministry of Security that has instructed people to stop the movement of cattle, saying that they were stolen from Tanzania. However, we share a border with Tanzania and we are within the cattle corridor.

Therefore, my prayer is that Government should tag our cattle and release the 125 animals and trucks at Mutukula Prison because these traders borrowed money from the banks to trade in cattle. They no longer work yet they must pay for every day that the trucks are parked there. I, therefore, pray that Government should tag our cows, release these animals and trucks and should inform the traders about their concerns and the claimants of the cattle that they allege were stolen.

I am a cattle keeper. We sell cattle to these traders. What is happening to our traders and farmers? They must pay school fees and loans; so, we should be advised by Government. It is unfortunate. Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker.

3.02
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Rt Hon. Speaker, it seems the honourable member is complaining about the Minister of Security, who impounded the cows that have been taken to prison on suspicion that they were stolen. (Laughter) It seems outside my mandate –(Interruption)

MR KALEMBA: I would like the minister to know that they even have agents in Kyakatuuma and Kyotera who are collecting money from the traders but are not answerable to anybody. I beg to lay this information here on the Table so that they make a proper follow up.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What information is that, honourable member? Can I have a response from the Government on this issue, please?

3.06
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Rt Hon. Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Kalemba for having raised pertinent issues concerning himself and the people he represents.

A lot of enforcement is taking place along the borders to make ensure control of diseases into the country. A lot of activities are taking place because cattle theft has been rampant. Therefore, since the minister who has been doing that kind of enforcement - especially dealing with cattle - is not here, I am going to contact hon. Gen. Elly Tumwine to liaise with the honourable member to establish the condition and circumstances around this activity so that we can rescue the cattle in case they are innocent. (Laughter)

However, if they are not innocent, then the law will take its course but I have taken the matter very seriously because it touches the economy of our people. What I would like the House to note is that a lot of cattle theft is taking place and cattle cross from Tanzania into Uganda with diseases, which we want to curb. I promise to come back to the House to –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why I asked the agriculture minister whether there is quarantine. Is there any limitation on the movement of animals? That is why I asked you because if there is, then they are being enforced but if they are not, then it is another matter.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Rt Hon. Speaker, there are districts which are under quarantine. Unfortunately, again, the Tanzanian border is porous and has been a cause of transmitting Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD); so, it has been a problem. On the side of disease, certainly we have a problem with the borders.

For theft, we have had a problem of cows being stolen from Tanzania and they cross to our side. However, the answer on theft may not be properly given by me. I would like to request that you agree with the Government Chief Whip to wait for the Minister of Security to answer that. However, I have answers on issues of diseases –(Interruption)

MR KANGWAGYE: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. The information I would like to give the honourable minister is that the cows he is talking about are officially permitted –(Interjection)– yes, they have permits from the District Veterinary Officers (DVOs) and officials who allow them to be transported from the areas of Isingiro, Rakai to Kampala. They have those permits. Those cattle traders are also authorised to buy those cows because our area now does not have Foot and Mouth Disease.

The information I want to give you is that we came to the Floor of Parliament and stated the same challenge but we have not yet seen the ministry coming on board to give us real solutions on how we can be able to control the diseases.

The only solution we have seen on the ground is Gen. Tumwine and his people coming to arrest people without giving a real solution. Therefore, is arresting people and impounding those trucks the remedy you are giving us? Remember, when there is a problem on the ground, Government has a mandate to come and give real solutions on how people can live and survive. We would like to know which kind of solutions you have for those people in Isingiro and other areas in Uganda. We would like to know.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Rt Hon. Speaker, Isingiro has been taken as a special case as far as FMD and FMD vaccination is concerned. We have imported vaccines, specifically to vaccinate districts which border Tanzania and those between the Tanzania-Uganda border. I would like to assure the Member here that we have already started vaccinating Isingiro, Kyotera and Ntungamo; so, that one is handled.

As border districts, you have a special arrangement because of the cross overs of unvaccinated animals from the other side of Tanzania. So, we would like to create a buffer. However, I think the cows we are talking about now are those you do not know, which cross at night from the other side. These are unknown; whether they are stolen or not, they still have a problem –(Interruption)

MR KANGWAGYE: Honourable minister, I would like to clearly know from you if it is in order for you to tell us –(Interjections)– I am sorry, Rt Hon. Speaker.  –(Laughter) I am sorry, Rt Hon. Speaker. Is the minister in order to state that there are some cattle that cross at night into Uganda and are transported to Kampala without giving us evidence? 

In fact, we know that the cattle impounded in the areas we are talking about have permits and they are bought from within Uganda. If there are some cattle bought from Tanzania - because they have marks - they can easily be identified. Therefore, is the minister in order to come to the Floor to tell us things he has no evidence on? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, there are cattle traders who have taken money and their cows have been impounded. They have not been given the reason and it has taken a few days or even weeks. What is happening?

MR SSEMPIJJA: For those, Rt Hon. Speaker, allow me to go and consult the Minister for Security and then, I will give a correct answer and the solutions we have come up with. At this moment, I do not even know what has happened. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You will give that statement tomorrow in the afternoon. 

Honourable members, in the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have students and teachers from Mpumudde Estate Primary School from Jinja District. They are represented by hon. Moses Balyeku and hon. Loy Katali. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. 

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. When we come up with matters of national importance, we do it because they are seriously affecting our communities. Last week, you directed that Minister Idah Nantaba comes up and explains herself on the Floor of Parliament about what happened to a one Ssebulime, who was shot and killed after she complained to the police that he had been trailing her. The issue is escalating out there. 

It is about a week since and hon. Nantaba, even right now, cannot be seen. The Leader of Government Business is here and he has not said anything about her absence. Rt Hon. Speaker, isn’t it procedurally right that the Minister of Internal Affairs comes and explains the circumstances under which Ssebulime was shot and killed and the absence of hon. Nantaba who was supposed to have come and explained herself about his death? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I did not direct the minister to come and make a statement. I said the proper thing would have been for a Member who has something that needs to be explained to the House to come and do so. I never made any directive to that effect. 

Secondly, Gen. Jeje Odongo had requested to make a statement on that issue this afternoon. As we speak, however, that statement is not ready. Therefore, if it is ready, it will come this afternoon and if it is not ready today, it will come tomorrow. That is the conversation I had with hon. Obiga Kania. So, let us go on. We will deal with this matter when he comes. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE LEGAL REGIME UNDER WHICH THE FISHERIES PROTECTION UNIT OF THE UGANDA PEOPLE’S DEFENCE FORCES (UPDF) OPERATES ON THE VARIOUS WATER BODIES IN UGANDA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The learned Attorney-General is not here for this and even the second item. So, let us go to the fourth item. 

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. Shortly before we broke off last week, we had raised a matter about elections in the new and old districts, especially Nebbi District whose LC V chairperson died and the six months within which a by-election was to be held elapsed on 24 March 2019. The Minister of Local Government said the issue was money. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development committed himself and said he would come to this Floor after two weeks and provide the status for the election - especially in the old districts that need by-elections.

I have looked through the Order Paper and even in the items to follow and there is no response to that effect laid down. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that you invoke your power, which is undeterred under the rules, and ask the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to give an explanation to the waiting Ugandans who need to exercise their powers in an election. In Nebbi District, the people are already threatening to go to court. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I remember this issue. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development said if there is money with the Electoral Commission, they will be able to hold the elections. If they have no money, we will have to wait and do appropriation and that is the money which will be used to carry out this election. The question was as to whether that matter was provided for in the budget. The minister was supposed to consult with the Electoral Commission and confirm whether they have the money and come back and tell us. That was the only bit and it was not about the whole election process. 

Honourable minister, would you like to clarify on the money issue?

3.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Rt Hon. Speaker, I will give that information tomorrow in the afternoon.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. (Mr Egunyu rose_) Are we debating by procedure today? If it is the issue of fish, it is in item 4(g). If it is another matter, maybe I will allow. 

MS EGUNYU: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. The procedural issue that I would like to raise regards the absence of the Attorney-General in this House. As far as the motion on the Order Paper –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which motion? 

MS EGUNYU: Item one under Statement by Ministers. Rt Hon. Speaker, about two weeks ago, the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries wanted to debate a report here and two questions were raised. The first question was; are we debating the law regarding fisheries or are we debating the Presidential directive to the soldiers on the lake? The Presiding Officer then directed the Attorney-General to come back and tell this august House which way to debate. Were we going to debate a presidential directive or the laws governing the lakes? 

Rt Hon. Speaker, before the motion comes, the Attorney-General has to be here and explain the way to go. We must know, first of all, the angle from which we are going to debate the matter. It is disturbing that he continues to disappear to do his own things or maybe the country’s things while we suffer in the islands. My honourable colleague has just told you that people are laying down their tools. They are not fishing - the factories are not receiving fish, people are not smoking fish. There are so many questions. How long shall we suffer because the Attorney-General is not here? Can we provide a solution? (A Member rose) I entertain the information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Information on a point of procedure? No, please. Leader of Government Business, where is the Attorney-General to guide us on this debate?

3.23
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): To be honest, I may not be able to know where the Attorney-General is at the moment. I assume he is in his office. We have already sent people to see if he is there so he can come and answer. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you seek the assistance of the Government Chief Whip to look for the learned Attorney-General so that we can have this debate?

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

DRAFT ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE (RECURRENT AND DEVELOPMENT), FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020, VOLUME I: CENTRAL GOVERNMENT VOTES FOR THE YEAR ENDING ON THE 30 JUNE 2020

3.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Draft Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure (Recurrent and Development) for the Financial Year 2019/2020, Volume I: Central Government Votes for the year ending on 30 June 2020.

ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE (RECURRENT AND DEVELOPMENT), FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020, VOLUME III: PUBLIC CORPORATIONS AND STATE ENTERPRISES FOR THE YEAR ENDING ON 30 JUNE 2020

3.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Draft Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure (Recurrent and Development) for the Financial Year 2019/2020, Volume III: Public Corporations and State Enterprises for the year ending on 30 June 2020.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture these two documents. They stand referred to the Committee on Budget. Honourable minister, I would like to get confirmation from you that all the documents that should accompany the budget estimates under the law have now been laid. 

MR BAHATI: Rt Hon. Speaker, can you give me five minutes?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you submit the list of accounting officers?

MR BAHATI: Yes, we did.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Try to advise us if this is it with the budget and then we see how to proceed.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. We all know the format and quality of these estimates. What I see being laid here looks like a product of lazy work. The presentation of the documentation that we are used to having is not this type. 

Is it procedurally right for the minister to lay these documents on the Table in this format? They look like drafts and the product of some lazy person. Is it right to lay such work here, which looks like work from Nasser Road?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have not dealt so much with issues of form in this Parliament. We have dealt more with content. If the content is accurate, we can move with it. However, the form should also be presentable, even if we do not focus so much on it. 

Honourable minister, we cannot guarantee the security of this document whose pages can fly off at any moment. I think this has also been because we have adopted the electronic way of submission of documents. Usually, when these documents are laid here, we are supposed to receive them electronically as well. 

However, we have always asked that there should be some copies for the library and other places - at least five hard copies of each document so laid for other purposes. Now imagine having five copies of those; of what assistance is it to the library and other places? 

That is the challenge because you cannot guarantee their security. If somebody plucks off a piece of paper, the record will not be correct. Therefore, it is important that we also focus on the form that can help us facilitate these processes better. There we are; that is what we have so let us proceed with it and see how we move. Today is already 2 April  2019; we are two days late.

3.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Mr Simon Lokodo): Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the policy statement for the Inspectorate for Government, vote 103, for the financial year 2019/2020. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

3.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to lay the ministerial –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Start by withdrawing the one that was put on our record first.

MR BAHATI: Rt Hon. Speaker, you ordered that they are withdrawn.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You should now state it properly because you are the one who laid it. You should state that you are withdrawing it and then put that one.

MR BAHATI: Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to withdraw the ministerial policy statement which was laid on the Table last week for the Ministry of Information, Communications Technology and National Guidance. 

I now beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for the financial year 2019/2020 for the Ministry of Information, Communications Technology and National Guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. It stands referred to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling. Given the timelines, let us not spend more time on this. Let us deal with these things because we do not have the time now.

RESPONSE TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. STELLA ATYANG ON THE LOOMING THREATS OF LAND GRABBING BY UNSCRUPULOUS PEOPLE IN MOROTO DISTRICT

3.31
THE MINISTER FOR KARAMOJA AFFAIRS (Mr John Byabagambi): Rt Hon. Speaker, a question was raised by hon. Stella Atyang on the looming threats of land grabbing by unscrupulous people in Moroto District.

The response to the matter that was brought to this House by hon. Stella Atyang, Woman Representative of Moroto District, at the 23rd Sitting of the Third Meeting of the Third Session of the Tenth Parliament of Uganda, held on Wednesday 6 March 2019, regarding looming threats of land grabbing by unscrupulous people in Moroto District is as follows: 

Although, the honourable member was not specific in her statement, from the several meetings I have held with her, I can inform the House that the people being referred to are not unscrupulous people as alleged. The team went through all the required procedures.

Rt Hon. Speaker, I will give a background on the land in question. This land measures approximately 221 acres and is located in Kalorewor Village, Nadunget Subcounty, Moroto District. It was secured by the Government of Uganda in 1979 as a demonstration garden for cotton under the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. 

However, the demonstration programme never succeeded due to the dry semi-arid nature of most areas in Karamoja region and the insecurity at the time. Therefore, the land remained idle until 1995 when the new Constitution was enacted. That land was, however, reverted back to the Government and it is actually under Moroto District Land Board. Thereafter, the Moroto District Government Council applied for and acquired a land title, No. LAN/MTO/009/16, in 2017.

Moroto District Council, under Council Resolution Minute No. 06/DLC/11/18, dated 19 November 2018, resolved to offer the cement factory as its equity share capital to enable the district local council and the community therein become shareholders of the said cement and marble factory. 

Rt Hon. Speaker, during the time when this land was not being utilised, people within the vicinity were using it for cultivation. They were not staying or residing on it. However, by way of doing corporate social responsibility, Moroto Ateker Cement Factory, together with the landlord, that is, Moroto District Local Government Council, decided to give them a token of appreciation of Shs 1,000,000 per acre. This token was given to all the people who were using the said land. The evidence is documented; I have it here. 

I would like to lay on the Table the contractual agreements regarding all those people that were using the land, which they signed with Moroto District Local Government Council. I beg to lay them on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR BYABAGAMBI: In support of the industrialisation of Karamoja region, the Office of the Prime Minister, particularly the office of the Minister for Karamoja Affairs, further promised to give 20 iron sheets to each household, to help these families establish better living structures, though they were not living on that land. 

Following this background and the procedures followed in acquiring this land as mentioned above, the issue of land grabbing by unscrupulous people does not arise. Rt Hon. Speaker, also allow me to lay on the Table the authority documents, which contain all the minutes of the meetings that I have mentioned above, including a copy of the land title. They are all contained in this compilation entitled, “Authority Documents.” I hereby lay it on the Table. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who authored those documents?

MR BYABAGAMBI: These documents were authored by Moroto District Local Government. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Rt Hon. Speaker, also allow me to lay on the Table the profiles of the squatters who were using this land for cultivation. The profile of every person, their National Identification Numbers (NINs), and the subcounties, parishes and villages of each of the squatters are also contained in here. This document was authored by Moroto District Local Government Council. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that too.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Rt Hon. Speaker and colleagues, I have held several meetings with the leadership of Moroto District, including the Member of Parliament who brought this question here. In all those meetings, we have always agreed that this is a project worth investing in for the benefit of the people of Karamoja. The minutes for those meetings are available for reference and they are contained in those books. 

Moroto Ateker Cement Factory, therefore, is not grabbing anyone’s land. They are not unscrupulous because they are known and they followed the right channels to acquire the said land. All the necessary investment documents are available for reference. I beg to respond, Rt Hon. Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, do you have a supplementary question?

3.40
MS STELLA ATYANG (NRM, Woman Representative, Moroto): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the response, although I waited for it for long.

Rt Hon. Speaker, while I agree that I participated in the meetings about this investment, in all those meetings I was never satisfied because the investment was affecting the wellbeing of the people. I stand to say that this land has always belonged to these people from time immemorial until the time, as the minister said, it was declared Government land. 

The minister said that it belongs to Government but I have never seen any notice from the Government of Uganda or Moroto District Local Government stopping these communities from using this land until 2018 when –(Interruption) 

MS OGWAL: Thank you for giving way. Rt Hon. Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable member for allowing me to seek for clarification from the minister, who is the author of this report that has been submitted to the Floor of Parliament. 

Honourable minister, you said that this land was acquired in 1979. It would be very useful to this House if you told us the month and date when this acquisition was done. 

My memory tells me that 1979 was a year with a long spell of war. You recall that the first batch of liberators took over Kampala on 11 April. The setup of Government at that time was so rudimentary that I cannot imagine that Moroto District Local Government went to the land office and acquired land in 1979. You mentioned the year yourself. 

I am not very specific, but I am just trying to help you from the little knowledge I have; that period was so problematic that for anybody to transact that kind of transfer of land would cause suspicion. Therefore, I am seeking clarification on how the Moroto District Local Government would be so daring to go through the process of acquisition of land in such a period. Under what circumstances was the land title issued? Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker.

MS ATYANG: Rt Hon. Speaker, I would also like to tell you that from the time Moroto District Local Government surveyed the land - that was in May 2017 - and titled it in June 2019, there are no minutes to show that the community was involved or informed that Moroto District Local Government was intending to take its land. I would like to ask the minister if the community was compensated with Shs 1 million.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Rt Hon. Speaker, first, I do not know whether by 1979 she was already born, because she said that she had never seen anybody –(Interjection)– No, hers first then you come second. She said she has never seen anybody asking about that land. In 1979, I am sure there was a government, although it was problematic. Actually, it was Idi Amin who had directed that they should try to put in place demonstration farms and see if they can grow cotton in Moroto by using irrigation at that time - (Interjection) - he was still the President of Uganda. He was ousted on 11 April; before that, he was the President of the Republic of Uganda and I think that is well known.

However, I can inquire from Moroto District Local Government and they can give us the evidence as to when they were required to give that land. By that time, the greater Karamoja was not the small Moroto that we are talking about now. This land is well documented under Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries as their land. By that time, all the land was under Uganda Land Commission - (Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Rt Hon. Speaker, the minister knows that the crisis which happened in this country is a matter which gives us very painful memories. Throughout that period, you remember that was when our top leaders - some of them were our parents – like Janani Luwum and the former Inspector General of Police were murdered. It was a problematic period. You seem to be talking as if there was a government in place and therefore things should have happened normally. 

I am trying to tell you that that was the time people were escaping to go out of the country and the situation was alarming. There was no way anybody would call for a meeting. How could you acquire land then? You must call and consult the community and get them to agree. I would not want the minister to waste our time. Can you lay on the Table all those documents because the documents will speak for themselves? Just lay on the Table the title and the document showing when the consultation was done with the committee. Before you go through the process of land acquisition, you have to consult with the local people who are affected. When did the consultation take place and where is the land title? Can you lay it on the Table?

Is the minister in order to mislead the House yet he was hiding in Russia and some of us were here?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the year in question is 1979 not 1977. I recall 1977 was the year Janani Luwum was killed with the others. That is not the issue here; we are talking about the year 1979.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Rt Hon. Speaker, there is no better evidence as land being possessed by the Moroto District Land Board. This land belongs to Moroto District Land Board and they are the ones who offered the lease to the district council. It is contained in the books, which I have laid here. When I was in Russia, of course hon. Cecilia Ogwal was Miss Uganda at that time or Miss Tourism, I do not remember. I also think she was enjoying at that time and displaying herself. (Laughter) Maybe, she was Miss Curvy at that time –(Laughter)

Rt Hon. Speaker, they all received Shs 1 million with one heart and they appreciated it. All the pictures of people who received Shs 1 million with all their signatures are contained in this book and anybody can verify that. That land was not theirs and they were not living on that land. It was a token of appreciation. The 20 iron sheets are already in the Office of the Prime Minister. Two weeks from now, they will also be delivered to the beneficiaries. I thank you very much.

MS ATYANG: I would like to ask the minister how they arrived at the figure of Shs 1 million per acre and who valued the land? Honourable minister, if you say that you are giving these people 20 iron sheets, where will they get the land on which they will construct houses? 

The land that you have taken is the only land that each Karimojong owns. Our way of settlement is one acre of land for many households. Therefore, if you want to construct a semi-permanent or a permanent house, you have to move to your garden. Now, where will they get the land to do their gardening?

There are also contradictions between the titles and the area in the minister’s report. The minister talks of Kolalae while the title talks of Ekaale. In fact, there are questions because the title actually indicates where the community says the cotton growing was done. The place Moroto District Local Government is actually grading now, for the cement factory, is different, meaning that they do not know which land belongs to them.

There are individuals in this Government who want to take advantage of the desperation of Government looking for land for investment. They want to take it as a way to solicit funds for individual benefit, taking advantage of the ignorance of the rural community. 

I would like to tell you how Moroto District Local Government acquired money for compensating these community members; it borrowed money from an investor who is taking part in this investment. Shs 221 million was borrowed without the authority of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The finance ministry will tell us the procedures in which local governments are supposed to acquire money if they want to borrow – they have never consulted the finance ministry.

Rt Hon. Speaker, this money is said to have been gotten on goodwill – without terms and conditions written between the borrower and the lender. What shows that this land has been taken for public use?

If your report indicates that the community is part of the shareholders under the district, in between now and the time this investment will be making profit, how will these people be surviving since this land has been their source of food?

What I am advocating for is adequate compensation for these people because if you do not give them adequate compensation to get land to be able to cultivate and get food for themselves, you are rendering them more desperate and yet development ought not to render people desperate. It has to develop people right from the onset. 

My prayer is that there is a lot of meanderings and huge controversies in this investment. I would request that a committee of Parliament, probably the Committee on Physical Infrastructure goes to Moroto, investigates and comes and brings its findings here, with recommendations for the good of the community and for the good of the public. Thank you.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Rt Hon. Speaker, in my statement, it was very clear that nobody was living on this land. It is clearly stated here. It is the community living within the vicinity that were tilling the land. The land was there. It belongs to the district land board. They were not living on it but were tilling it. 

Therefore, where they were living by that time when they were tilling that land is where they are still living now. That is why I gave them 20 iron sheets, just as a token of appreciation in addition to the one million shillings that they got, to improve on their structures. 

Secondly, the district gave land as its equity in the company. They are shareholders. They did not sell land to an investor or anybody. They formed a company called Ateker Cement Company. It is the company which raised one million shillings per acre which they gave to those beneficiaries. It is not written anywhere that they borrowed money from an individual. If they brought it as capital contribution into a company, that is not my job –(Interjections)– this is a company which paid these individuals. There is no borrowing. If there is anywhere they borrowed, they should lay the evidence on the Table.

MS ATYANG: Rt Hon. Speaker, the minister is lying to this House. He stated that I participated in the meetings following this investment – according to the ad hoc committee, they told us that they are borrowing money from Savannah Companies. Shs 221 million was borrowed to compensate these community members. 

I have been insisting that they get authority from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development or put down terms and they insisted that this was on goodwill. 

Is the honourable minister in order to come and lie to this House that there was no borrowing of money? If there was no borrowing, where did the district get this Shs 221 million? Was it allocated in this Parliament?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I do not seem to understand is; the minister says that it is the investor who paid money to the people and you are saying that this money was paid through the district and the district borrowed this money from the investor in order to compensate these people. 

Honourable members, documents have been laid here which we have no opportunity to look at. Documents usually speak for themselves, until recently when we started doubting documents, but usually they speak for themselves. 

I would like to refer this set of documents to our Committee on Physical Infrastructure to look at them and advise us. If they feel they need to go on the ground and find out what is going on, that is also okay. However, if they find that the documents are sufficient for them to come back to Parliament and advise us on what this matter is all about, we would also be satisfied with that.

Honourable minister, you will have to have an interface with our Committee on Physical Infrastructure to guide them through the documents and then we see. We cannot solve this matter this way. Let us go back to the committee and return here.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Much obliged. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister.

RESPONSE TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. ALEPER MARGARET AACHILA ON THE TORTURE OF JIE YOUTHS BY THE UPDF AND THE PEOPLE OF KATABOK PARISH, MORULEM SUB-COUNTY IN ABIM DISTRICT

3.59
THE MINISTER FOR KARAMOJA AFFAIRS (Mr John Byabagambi): Rt Hon. Speaker, this was raised by the honourable member of Parliament for Abim. 

We are gathering facts from the ground. I thought it was going to be done quickly but we had to send a team on the ground to find out whether what the security personnel are telling us is right or not. I beg that I give both statements – the one for the Kitgum Member of Parliament and this one, on Thursday.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. I think that is fair. Let him get correct information and come back to us on Thursday with the report for the Member for Abim and the one for the Member for Kitgum District. We will wait for these statements on Thursday afternoon. Thank you.

RESPONSE TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. NSABA BUTURO ON THE STALLED SHS 41 BILLION TEA AND POTATO FACTORY IN KISORO DISTRICT THAT WAS COMMISSIONED BY H.E THE PRESIDENT

4.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Rt Hon. Speaker, on the 6th Sitting of the 3rd Meeting of the 3rd Session of this House, hon. Nsaba Buturo raised a concern over the pending response to the stalled Shs 41 billion tea and potato factory in Kisoro that was commissioned by His Excellency the President and has not been operational.

Rt Hon. Speaker, our response is thus: Government decided to set up a tea factory in Kisoro District and tasked the Uganda Development Cooperation to conduct an exercise to identify a partner to undertake the investment with. 

Based on the findings, Government decided to partner – through UDC – with Kigezi Highland Tea Limited (KHTL) to establish this factory. The obligation of KHTL was to construct the factory while UDC was to provide the processing equipment, generators and vehicles for transportation of raw materials and processed tea.

Rt Hon. Speaker, Government, through UDC, provided Shs 4.4 billion and delivered the following successfully:

    1. Installation of 450kg tea per hour processing equipment;
    2. Connection of the factory to 33KVA electricity and supply of power back-up generators in form of two 500KVA generators plus 85KVA and 100KVA generators;
    3. Internal wiring of the factory premises and installation of control panels;
    4. Provision of trucks for transportation of green leaf from the fields and processed tea to the export market, mainly to Mombasa for auction;
    5. Construction of water reservoirs, each with a capacity of 24,000 litres for running the boilers.

The Kigezi Highland Tea Limited, on the other hand, provided 3.4 acres of land and built the factory premises, including all the civil works.

Rt Hon. Speaker, following successful implementation of the above obligations by both parties, trial runs were conducted on the factory between 15 April 2018 and 30 June 2018. The factory was confirmed ready to commence processing tea with the capacity of 28.8 tonnes of green leaf per day.

However, the available tea from the nearby farmers could not feed the factory operations once a week and this is below the breakeven capacity. The company could also not access Nkolongo buffer zone where tea is available because the road is impassable at the moment. As a result, the factory was temporarily closed.
Rt Hon. Speaker, these challenges are being addressed before the factory can resume operations. The interventions identified as critical include working on the road to Nkolongo buffer zone where there is tea to sustain the factory twice a week. The Government is also supporting farmers who have land to plant more tea through NAADS. The total land required to be planted to sustain the factory at full capacity is 1,480 acres. Government has also allocated more resources to improve extension services during financial year 2019/2020.

On the issue of the potato processing factory, Government, through UDB, extended a loan of Shs 6 billion to Maina Speedy (U) Ltd, an investor, to put up a potato factory in Kisoro District and this loan was secured by the same factory. However, the factory was not completed and there is a dispute between UDB and Maina Speedy (U) Ltd before court.

The objective of the factory was to promote agro-industrialisation in Kisoro and Kigezi as a whole and increase household incomes of the people of Kigezi as they provide raw materials for the factory. As we wait for this dispute to be concluded in court, the Government is evaluating different options to set up a functional factory to process Irish potatoes in the near future and the House will be updated accordingly.
I thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there a supplementary question?

4.06
DR NSABA BUTURO (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Rt Hon. Speaker, I am grateful to Government for this response. The potato and tea processing factories will be a game changer in so far as the economic fortune of Kisoro District is concerned. We look forward to the completion and realisation of these promises that the Government is making.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

RESPONSE TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. JUDITH ALYEK ON THE DELAY BY GOVERNMENT TO RESPOND TO A MATTER OF SUSPENSION OF SOME RADIO PROGRAMMES IN LIRA ARISING FROM THE DEATH OF MR DICKENS OKELLO

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Under Item No. 5(e), honourable members, there were two issues. One issue touched on security and internal affairs and those aspects were answered. The bit that was remaining was about the closure by Uganda Communication Commission and the Minister of Information and Communication Technology was supposed to respond. 

However, there was misinformation and a communication has been sent to him. I am hoping that we will get a response to this matter very quickly, probably tomorrow. Clerk, please, confirm that this matter is coming tomorrow so that we can deal with it. 

RESPONSE TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. PAUL MWIRU ON THE VIOLATION OF PERSONAL LIBERTIES AND FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS OF THE LC III CHAIRPERSON OF JINJA CENTRAL DIVISION, MR KIRUNDA MUBARAK, WHO WAS ARRESTED BY UGANDA POLICE AND REMAINS IN DETENTION WITHOUT TRIAL FOR THE LAST THREE WEEKS

4.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Rt Hon. Speaker, this is a statement in response to a question, which was asked by hon. Paul Mwiru, the MP for Jinja Municipality East, concerning personal liberties and fundamental rights of Mr Mubarak Kirunda, the LC III Chairperson of Jinja Central Division who was arrested by the Uganda Police Force. At the time of asking the question, he alleged that Mr Kirunda had been in detention without trial for three weeks.

Mr Mubarak Kirunda and two others, one a Congolese and the other a Ugandan from Mpigi District, were arrested at the border on 20 February 2019 at Bunagana in Kisoro District without proper identification documents as they tried to cross the border to the Democratic Republic of Congo on an alleged business trip. They were transferred to Kigezi Regional Police Station on 24 February 2019.

While the police prepared to release them on bond after two days, they received information that other security agencies had interest to question Mr Mubarak Kirunda and the team. Therefore, their release was delayed. 

On 26 February 2019, their file was sent to the police headquarters for perusal and advice. When it was verified that the interest by other security agencies was not forthcoming, Mr Kirunda was transferred to Jinja Police Station to answer other charges, which were pending against him at Jinja Police Station.

Mr Mubarak Kirunda appeared in court in Jinja on the afternoon of 6 March 2019 on charges of malicious damage to property and was released on bail. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

RESPONSE TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. IDAH NABAYIGA AND HON. ROBERT MIGADDE NDUGWA ON THE DROP IN PRICES OF FREIGHT FRUIT BUNCHES OF PALM OIL AND THE DELAY IN OPERATIONALISATION OF THE NATIONAL PRICE COMMITTEE FOR PALM OIL AND THE PLUMMETING PRICES OF FISH IN UGANDA

4.11
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. There are two issues raised by hon. Idah Nabayiga, the Woman Member of Parliament, Kalangala District and hon. Robert Ndugwa Migadde.

One of them is the drop in prices of fresh fruit bunches of Palm Oil and the delay to operationalise the National Price Committee for Palm Oil and the plummeting prices of fish in Uganda.

Rt Hon. Speaker, allow me to start with the pricing of the Oil Palm fresh fruit bunches in Kalangala. 

The Government of Uganda, with support from the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), is implementing the Vegetable Oil Development Project (VODP), under the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF). As part of the project, Oil Palm development is being undertaken in Kalangala District, under a nucleus estate and out-grower smallholder scheme model. The nucleus estate has set up two mills for processing Oil Palm Fresh Fruit Bunches (FFB) from smallholder farmers and the nucleus estate.

As part of the project design, IFAD, World Bank and Government of Uganda recommended that a pricing mechanism be incorporated as part of the project to ensure that the smallholder farmers receive a fair and equitable price for their produce. Given that there is only one buyer for the farmers’ fresh fruit bunches, there was need to ensure that the farmers are protected from the effects of monopoly.

Article 19 of the Agreement between Government of Uganda and BIDCO Uganda Ltd refers to the pricing formula for fresh fruit bunches to be supplied by smallholders to the palm oil mill at the factory gate and the establishment of a pricing committee, which may from time to time, monitor or verify that the pricing formula in the agreement is adhered to. 

The tripartite agreement signed on 28 April 2006 between Government of Uganda, Oil Palm Uganda Limited (OPUL) and the registered Trustees of Kalangala Oil Palm Growers Trust (KOPGT), lays out the composition of the pricing committee and gives further details on the pricing mechanism in Article 9.

The Oil Palm fresh fruit pricing formula applied for payment by OPUL to KOPGT is premised on the international crude palm price. A farmer in Kalangala is paid an import parity price (CIF Jinja), which is the cost that BIDCO would incur if they purchased crude palm oil from the international market in Malaysia. So, all costs associated with crude palm oil import are included in the formula. 

The pricing formula is based on the Malaysian Ministry of Primary Industry and is widely applied in Malaysia to ensure fair pricing for farmers that supply to one mill. 

While one mill or nucleus estate is important for economies of scale and ensuring big mills of high environment standards, it presents itself with a monopoly-buyer situation, hence the need for a fair way of determining prices.

Rt Hon. Speaker, the international palm oil prices have been declining since 2017. These prices have been declining at the international market and this is explained by the following: There has been increase in production of palm oil by Malaysia and Indonesia hence increasing supply and affecting prices.

The trade agreements between the United States and China have affected the market for palm oil, given that China is a very big market for palm oil. China committed to buy an additional l0 million tonnes of United States soybeans for meal to support its livestock industry and soy oil as a by-product and hence reducing the need to import palm oil. 

Palm oil prices are affected by movements in soy oil, as they compete for a share in the global vegetable oil market. Also the demand for palm oil by India has been reducing yet India has been one of the major importers of palm oil.

Conclusion and way forward

The Government of Uganda negotiated appropriate pricing arrangements for fresh fruit bunches for farmers and the implementation of these to ensure equitable share of the benefits from the production of crude palm oil between the mill and the smallholders.

Oil Palm, like other agricultural products, suffers from fluctuating prices. Farmers remain price takers and forces of demand and supply determine the prices to be paid for the products.

The mill will only pay the price that is the same as the one it can pay to import crude palm oil into the country. Otherwise, it does not make business sense. Therefore, the way forward is for farmers to improve their yields by ensuring timely and adequate application of fertilisers and improving agronomic practices for their plantations.

Rt Hon. Speaker, I have shown a graph - at some stage in 2010, the prices were at Shs 262 and moved to Shs 431 in 2011, per kilogramme of fresh fruit bunch. In 2013, it went down to Shs 370. In 2016, it moved up to Shs 485 and in 2017, it went up to Shs 583 and in 2018, it is around Shs 480. The prices keep on going up and down. I beg to submit, Rt Hon. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Is there any supplementary question? Can we deal with the question on fisheries as well? Who asked this particular question?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Hon. Robert Migadde and hon. Idah Nabayiga.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it the one on oil palm prices? Do you have a supplementary question on that?

4.21
MS IDAH NABAYIGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the response. However, in the agreement, we have the National Pricing Committee. It is composed of:

    1. A member from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, who is supposed to chair the committee; 
    2. A member from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; 
    3. A member from the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives;
    4. A representative of farmers who is supposed to be the General Manager 
    5. A representative from Oil Palm Uganda Limited (OPUL), the monopolists, who are also our buyers.

However, when I raised this matter, this committee has sat only once since 2006, when the agreement was made. It is also not in composition and the farmers are wondering who determines the prices. If this committee does not sit, it means that the monopolists maybe determine the prices themselves.
Rt Hon. Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, who is setting the prices now?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Rt Hon. Speaker, the honourable member is right. The membership of the National Pricing Committee includes:

    1. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAIIF) as the chairperson;
    2. Trustees of Kalangala Oil Palm Growers Trust;
    3. Kalangala District Local Government;
    4. Oil Palm Uganda Limited (OPUL/BIDCO);
    5. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development;
    6. The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and
    7. Co-opted members of the committee, as the committee may agree upon.

These members are supposed to serve for three years and adopt their own rules of procedure –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please. Is there a pricing committee? If it is not there, who is determining the prices?

MR SSEMPIJJA: It is there, Rt Hon. Speaker. As of now, when the national level committee was applying this formula to determine the prices, the oil palm farmers complained that they did not feel adequately represented. This necessitated the formation of a Kalangala-based pricing sub-committee that is currently in place and meets every month to set prices for the oil palm fresh fruit bunches. This sub-committee –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, these lower prices have been set by the pricing committee? 

MR SSEMPIJJA: That is right, Rt Hon. Speaker.

MS NABAYIGA: Rt Hon. Speaker, I think the minister – I do not know how to say this but I would like to inform the House that the National Pricing Committee is what we want to see because the people down there do not even know what the formula he is talking about entails. That is why we are complaining and I am advising these people of Buvuma who are going to take up this project to first understand it. There are very many issues in this project.

Rt Hon. Speaker, another issue is about transport. Farmers are complaining about transport. We transport our fresh fruit bunches from the garden to the factory, then they process crude oil. After processing crude oil, they still charge farmers transport from Kalangala to Jinja. There are very many issues which need immediate attention.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Rt Hon. Speaker, that is true but –(Interjections)– you have already heard that the price that is given to our farmers includes the transport from Malaysia, if the company was to import from Malaysia. They add that transport cost because Malaysia –(Interjections)– understand this; that is to our advantage, meaning that we get bigger prices than a farmer in Malaysia. 

The agreement says that you are going to pay our farmers the price of the crude oil when it is in Jinja. Now, the price of crude oil in Malaysia plus the cost of freight is what is given to our farmers, minus the cost of freight from Kalangala –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I wish to thank the honourable minister. I served on the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for 13 years. By the time the Palm Oil project was introduced in this country, I was already on that committee. When you move within the precincts of Parliament, you will see photographs where Members, including me, went to supervise how the seedlings were being raised.

At that time, the rationale was that cooking oil should be made affordable to Ugandans and at the time, we were importing the crude oil all the way from Malaysia. The fact that Government allocated and paid for land in Kalangala to have this palm oil project locally generated was to make sure that we run away from the expenses that we incurred in the past from importing crude oil from Malaysia.

Now, here are farmers who are out growers - as it were - from their own pieces of land. They produce the raw material, supply to the factory and the factory, on its part, makes sure the crude oil is taken to Jinja for purification. 

The clarification I am seeking from you is, how does Malaysia now come in when this is a locally generated crop in Kalangala? (Applause) The only charge that should be levied on the farmers of Kalangala is that of transporting the crude product from Kalangala to Jinja. How does Malaysia come into the picture? I seek your clarification.

MS NAUWAT: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. Rt Hon. Speaker, whereas the minister has told us that they take into consideration transportation right from Malaysia to Jinja, I would like to find out whether, in the pricing, you also take into consideration the by-products of the palm oil? If you do not take that into consideration, then it means our farmers are being exploited.

MR SSEMPIJJA: We are talking about the same thing, honourable member. What I am saying is that the pricing was made in such a way that it benefits our farmers better than the farmer in Malaysia. Up to now, people still import crude oil from Malaysia and Indonesia. Remember we have other companies like Mt Meru, Nile Agro, Mukwano and Bidco itself, which is buying 80 per cent of its crude oil from outside. 

We are only supplying 20 per cent. Therefore, if we were supplying 100 per cent of the crude oil, then we would dictate the price from here. However, now that we are still supplying much less, we will compare ourselves with the others at the international market. 

However, we agreed with Bidco that when they buy the crude oil from Indonesia and Malaysia, they add transport up to here. Now, we need a price for Kalangala farmers as well, which includes the price from the other end, plus the cost of freight up to Jinja. It is because that is what they incur to bring the crude oil here. Therefore, they will have to pay our farmers the same price, which would be to our advantage.

The only thing that this formula does is to deduct the cost of transport from Kalangala to Jinja because the agreement was on Cost, Insurance and Freight (CIF) up to Jinja. That is the arrangement. On that, there is no problem. The problem here is for our farmers to get used to the fluctuations in the international market prices. For example, the issue at hand is the US-China relations. You remember we got higher prices in 2018. We reached $585 because of the breakage in the US-China relations. Now that they have been restored, we have gone down a bit. 

We are saying there is light at the end of the tunnel. I do not want my sister to say, “Since there is that arrangement between US and China, we will lose.” That is not true. There is a new thing coming up. In China, some provinces have even stopped using fuel in their cars; they want to use biogas as fuel. That is where our good dreams are. Therefore, our prices are likely to go up.

Once you go into business, you need to know that there will be ups and downs. 

MR WAIRA: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. Bidco is trying to convince our people in Mayuge to carry out palm oil production. Given that there are worrying issues that are coming up, Rt Hon. Speaker, don’t you think it would be procedurally right for us to have a committee to extensively look at the issues involved in palm oil production before they expand to Mayuge?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know I do not like referring matters to committees when the committees are already fully in charge of a matter unless it is something that is laid here, which would require me to refer it to a committee. Therefore, this is a substantial matter before you and I am sure it also concerns the budget committee because there are budgetary issues relating to this sector. Responsible committees just have to take it up. I do not have to make any reference to them. 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Rt Hon. Speaker, Members should not really be worried. I would like to say that we are currently importing cooking oil worth $270 million every year. What we are producing is just between 10 to 15 per cent. If we decided today, as Parliament, to say that we produce soya beans, simsim, sunflower and palm oil so that we have enough and stop importing, we would then save the $270 million. It is because the demand for cooking oil is still far away from our reach. That is what I wanted to inform you. 

Therefore, there is no cause for alarm. It is only the prices - even then, I would like to inform you that in the calculation from all over the world, the farmers could break even at Shs 200. However, we do not want to say we have to go with the international pricing. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we deal with the second matter?

MS NABAYIGA: Rt Hon. Speaker, before he moves onto the second matter, low prices is one issue among the many that the farmers have. I can cite one. In the agreement, –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, that is outside what was raised. 

MS NABAYIGA: In the agreement, it is said that the farmers are supposed to pay a service fee on the loan they get. However, in reality, we are being charged compounded interest. Therefore, it is my humble request that the minister goes to Kalangala and explains to the farmers so that this complaint is resolved on the ground. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do I have to tell you that?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Rt Hon. Speaker, I have already dispatched a team on that issue. It was not part of this. The team is led by the permanent secretary. He was there last week and he has started working on that point.

MS NABAYIGA: Rt Hon. Speaker, I raised the issue of low prices here. How could he dispatch a team without informing me? Is he in order? How can a team go there without me? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The team is headed by the Permanent Secretary and you are slightly above him. Do you want to go under the Permanent Secretary? If it was the minister going - you are members of Parliament. If a ministry is sending a technical committee headed by a permanent secretary, should you be part of that team? 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Next time, honourable minister, alert your Permanent Secretary that the members of Parliament want to travel with the team.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Much obliged, Rt Hon. Speaker. Hon. Nabayiga, I am sorry about that. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, deal with the second issue.

4.40
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Rt Hon. Speaker, the fisheries sector in Uganda, as everybody is aware, contributes significantly to the national goals of poverty eradication, economic growth and national economic development. 

The fisheries sector continues to suffer with weak weak governance in terms of legal and institutional frameworks that are important in leading the sector to sustainability. Fish conservation measures and co-management arrangements remain weak yet they are key in resource sustainability.

There is still trade in illegal, unregulated and unrecorded immature fish. The sub-sector has, over time, experienced a decline in fish catches in the major water bodies leading to resource use conflicts driven by the increasing population and corresponding demand for fish in the region and international markets. The use of indiscriminate methods has also led to overfishing.

The annual production from fisheries for 2018 is estimated at 345,802 tonnes down from 398,000 tonnes in 2017 and 461,000 tonnes in 2015.
 
While fish catches from Lake Victoria have started increasing, fish catches from other water bodies are still going down because of lack of enforcement activities. The Fisheries Protection Unit has been concentrating on Lake Victoria and it is just moving out to other water bodies. It is hoped that the fish catches for 2019 will be much higher.

While exports to international markets rose from 4,751 tonnes worth US$ 5.3 million in 1991 and peaked at 36.6 million tonnes valued at US$ 143 million in 2005, the export revenues have declined because of declined fish catches. A number of fish processing factories closed with only six operating at the beginning of 2018 rising to l0 by October 2018.

Declining prices of fish 

Colleagues, the prices of fish in Uganda are dictated by supply and demand, both on the domestic and international markets. On the domestic market, there has been increased catches of Tilapia following improved fishing methods as a result of improved enforcement activities. The increased availability of Tilapia has naturally led to the decline of fish prices following the law of demand and supply.

The prices of Nile Perch are governed by the demand in the international markets. Currently, the orders in the international market have reduced and so have the prices per kilogramme. 

At the beginning of the year, the price per kilogramme on the international market averaged $ 5.8 per kilogramme but this has been steadily falling with the average price as low as US$ 2.9 per kilogramme. 

At the local level, factories are offering prices ranging from Shs 11,500 per kilogramme for fish of 1.5 - 2 kilogrammes and up to Shs 35,000 for the bigger fish. 

Currently, the price of Nile Perch on the local market is dictated by the price of fish maw. Fish with fish maw cost more per kilogramme than fish where fish maw has been removed. The prices of other species have remained unchanged. Uganda is still offering better prices in the region compared to Tanzania and Kenya. 

Rt Hon. Speaker, my ministry is still committed to addressing the challenges that arise in the fishing industry, working with all stakeholders both in the public and private sector. I wish to submit. 

4.46
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I thank the minister for that response.

My supplementary questions are, the minister has mentioned demand and supply. When we raised this issue on the Floor, nothing happened regarding the price. By that time, the price was Shs 6,000 per kilogramme having fallen from Shs 11,500. 

The day before yesterday, the fishing community went on strike and because of that, the price has improved by Shs 1,000 to Shs 7,000. That ceases to be demand and supply; there must be another reason. It is either speculation or connivance. If it were demand and supply, the price would still remain the same because it has not changed on the international market.

Secondly, can the minister help us know how he accesses the price on the world market, for example, the one for today? This is because he has mentioned that the price has fallen from $ 5.8 to $ 2.9. Wherever we have gone, no one is able to provide the price per kilogramme of fish for today.

Thirdly, the minister has stated that the price ranges between Shs 11,500 and Shs 35,000. I am a fish supplier and I have colleagues who also supply fish. The whole of last week until today, we could not supply fish for more than Shs 7,500 so where is the minister getting this price from?

Lastly, the minister has indicated that the price of fish is dictated by the price of the fish maw of Nile Perch. I am not talking about Tilapia. The price of fish maw has not reduced on the world market in any way for the last three months. In fact, it is increasing at a terrible speed.

Therefore, where is the minister getting this information that the price is going down? If the price of fish maw has gone down, what was it a month ago and what is it now? Those are the issues where I need clarification.

4.49
MS JANEPHER EGUNYU (NRM, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. May I ask the minister, in his own wisdom, whether he can provide alternative ways to those people so that they get away from the monopoly of selling only fresh fish to these factories? 

According to my understanding, it is this very Cabinet Minister who got a group of people, went and convinced the President. They brought soldiers on the lake to fight illegal fishing gear and as they were doing so, they also decided to prevent people from smoking fish even when it is mature. Since they cannot smoke mature fish, they have no alternative but to accept whatever price they are offered on the market.

Honourable minister, is smoking fish illegal if the fish is mature? Can’t it be a solution for our people?

4.50
MS CAROLYN BIRUNGI (NRM, Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I have a supplementary question. I doubt the information given to this House by the minister because I am also a fish supplier. As of yesterday, I supplied fish at between Shs 6,000 and Shs 6,500 per kilogramme of fresh fish. However, he has just said that the processors are buying fish at Shs 11,500. I doubt whether this information is correct.

I tried to contact the factories – they are nine – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, why don’t you ask the minister directly? Where did you get your prices from?

MS BIRUNGI: I got them from the factories. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, ask the minister where he got his prices. Ask direct questions, honourable member.

MS BIRUNGI: I am asking him through you, Rt hon. Speaker, because as a fish supplier, this information is not true. We are being paid Shs 6,000 and Shs 6,500 per kilogramme although he is now saying it is Shs 11,500. Where is he getting the information from? I doubt it is from research. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we finish with this now?

MR DAVID MUTEBI: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I represent a constituency in Buikwe, which has a fishing community too, Rt Hon. Speaker and so, we coordinated the questions to be asked; this is a supplementary one. 

The minister has indicated that because of lack of an institutional framework, probably which would guarantee collective bargaining, these problems are occurring. He has also said that it is due to lack of governance systems. We have asked for the amendment of that Act on the basis of which probably a better institutional framework would be established. Who is responsible for bringing that Act, which we have asked for all these years and nothing has been presented, to this House for amendments? 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Rt Hon. Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, when are you bringing the Bill with amendments to deal with the situations they are talking about?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Rt Hon. Speaker, next week, the Bill is going to Cabinet and immediately after that – we are really under pressure to bring this Act here, to say the truth, because of the prevailing circumstances in that industry plus the new things that have come in, including the fish maw – these are things I had never heard of myself, although I am a fisherman, but now they are here. 

Therefore, Rt Hon. Speaker, I will bring it very soon. Next week, I am likely to present it to Cabinet and it will be here thereafter. 

4.54
MR JULIUS OCHEN (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Rt Hon. Speaker, I think it would be important for the minister to tackle this problem in a bigger context. The involvement of the military on the water bodies has issues. The fisheries, the agriculture – I think when this proposal is being taken to Cabinet, there could possibly be a need for the Ministry of Agriculture to have a broader amendment of all these Acts of Parliament so that we come out of this problem or to stop the current situation.

When people were being beaten in the waters, there were complaints about the involvement of the army displacing the fisheries officers. Now the Ministry of Agriculture – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is a separate matter and it is a different item on the agenda. Honourable minister, please wind up. 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I would like to agree with the honourable members that some of these things that are being mentioned, like fish smoking being illegal, are not true. Nobody said it. I think we are going to sort out some of these things when we come up with an amendment Bill. 

However, in the meantime, we have also –(Interruption) 

MS EGUNYU: Rt Hon. Speaker, I stay in the islands and it is only when I am in Kampala that I do not stay here. However, is the minister in order to state that it is not illegal, according to him, to smoke fish yet our people in all the islands of Lake Victoria are being denied chance to smoke mature fish and are being arrested and killed at certain instances? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, is there a ban on smoking fish? If there is none, would you like to state it on the record so that the fishermen hear what you are saying?

MR SSEMPIJJA: It is a no. It is in order and it is right for somebody to smoke fish, if he decides to smoke it for trade or home consumption; it is right.

One of the agencies, NAADS –(Interruption) 

MS BIRUNGI: Rt Hon. Speaker, are we proceeding well when the honourable minister tries to convince the House by making a statement that fish smoking is not illegal yet they stopped our people from doing so? The truth is that they even banned smoking of fish for home consumption; it is not allowed. Should we tell our people to start smoking fish, Rt Hon. Speaker?
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is not the first time the issue of smoking fish has come to this House. The law authorises smoking of fish as a method of preservation. Therefore, anybody that stops smoking of mature and legally obtained fish, which meets all the criteria for the kind of fish to be taken out of the waters, is going against the law. That is the position you should communicate because that is what the law offers for now. Honourable minister, please wind up.
 
MR SSEMPIJJA: The Speaker is very right. Just a week ago, we were in Namalere and we showed His Excellency, the President our new acquired technology at NARO for smoking fish. The fish that had been smoked was there. If the Commander-in-Chief, never said that it is illegal, where do these people get their things? Once something is illegal, it is illegal and whoever does illegal things should be – lastly, I mentioned that –(Interruption)

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you will not be able to finish this statement; I have other business.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: This is brief, Rt Hon. Speaker. Would the ministry be comfortable with issuing a statement? Can they issue, for example, a press release to assure those islanders that the ministry is aware of what is happening? Can they include that it is legal and that the people can go ahead and smoke fish and they should also report to the ministry persons that are stopping them from smoking fish? Can the ministry do that so that their position is reaffirmed?  

MR SSEMPIJJA: You rightly read my mind because that is what I was going to say; that I am going to issue a statement on those matters that are really bothering the honourable members. I thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

MR MIGADDE: Rt Hon. Speaker, he has not responded to issue - we have moved away from smoking of fish. The issue was about pricing.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Rt Hon. Speaker, I still insist that the prices are controlled by supply –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the issue was that those who are supplying fish are supplying them at different prices. Where did you get your prices of Shs 11,000? 

MR SSEMPIJJA: The prices are not the same. Maybe, I mentioned that it depends on the size.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, where did you get your prices? It is not about the size but about kilogrammes.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Rt Hon. Speaker, I got the prices from the buyers of the Nile Perch. I stand by – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, would you like to now crosscheck those prices with the people who sell these fish? You are now getting the prices from the factories that are buying the fish and they can tell you anything. Can you ask the people supplying the fish, how much they are being paid per kilogramme?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Sir, I got this question not yesterday or today. Maybe they sold today, and the prices have gone down. (Laughter) I would like to request the Speaker to allow me to go back and check exactly what is happening today. Thank you, Sir.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please check because the issue of pricing is what is bringing all these problems. Would you like to crosscheck again and then alert us on what is going on in that sector?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Much obliged, Rt Hon. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR MIGADDE: Rt Hon. Speaker, much as the minister is going to crosscheck with the price, you do not have to go far because we are the suppliers. My concern is that yesterday, the minister was on television and he was supporting decline of prices. I do not know whether the minister – because he was saying fall in prices is good and more people will have fish. Why doesn’t he say that on maize, coffee and other items?

The minister was here when we were approving money to buy maize. Why didn’t he provide that kind of reasoning? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, let us roll this up. Honourable minister, please windup. 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Rt Hon. Speaker, I have really finished but I am –(Laughter)– let me go and crosscheck on the prices and then I will inform the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF HEALTH TO AN URGENT QUESTION UNDER RULE 46 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE ASKED BY HON. OLIVER KOYEKYENGA, WOMAN MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT FOR BUHWEJU, ON THE UPGRADING OF HEALTH CENTRE IV (NSIIKA HC IV) TO A DISTRICT HOSPITAL, WHY MORE HEALTH CENTRE IIIs HAVE NOT BEEN CONSTRUCTED IN SUB-COUNTIES, EXISTING HEALTH CENTRES ARE POORLY EQUIPPED AND WHY THE DISTRICT DOES NOT RECEIVE HEALTH BENEFITS THAT ACCRUE BY VIRTUE OF BEING A HARD-TO-REACH AREA

5.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES)(Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. Hon. Oliver Koyekyenga, the Woman Member of Parliament for Buhweju raised a matter regarding Nsiika Health Centre IV, which she indicated was a pledge by His Excellency the President to be upgraded into a hospital. Yes, we acknowledge that this pledge was made, and we are aware.

Buhweju is one of those mountainous districts that should be our focus as a health sector. However, on 12 March 2019, we gave a detailed statement on the status of the health sector to this House, where we indicated to this House that we have 39 districts that do not have any hospital at all. Buhweju and Ssembabule have hospitals but they are private. We did indicate to this House that our focus now is to first clear the lower administrative units that do not have any health centre.

Therefore, our focus is to ensure first and foremost, that we attend to sub-counties that do not have any health centre III or those that have health centres III, we will upgrade them. In that report, we clearly indicated that we have about 285 health centres III using the Shs 2 billion that we got as a loan and these are going to be upgraded in phases. 

Already, this financial year, we have 125 health centres II that are being upgraded to health centres III. Next financial year, we shall add more 71 health centres II and 89 will come subsequently. 

Rt Hon. Speaker, under the World Bank loan for maternal-neonatal child health, we have 81 health facilities that are being worked on. That is the focus, Rt Hon. Speaker, and the sub-counties that do not have any health centres III will be covered. 

However, for the general hospitals, we need about Shs 31 billion for each to construct, equip and have human resources in place.
 
The report was sent to the committee so that they can come back to the House and we map a way forward on how to attend to this. Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Any supplementary question?

5.08
MS OLIVER KOYEKYENGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Buhweju): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker and minister for that answer. Honourable minister, the presidential pledge was made in 2011. I think that was after His Excellency saw that Buhweju needed immediate attention. You all know that Buhweju is a special area with difficult topography.

We have only one health centre IV, three health centres III and we have 14 sub counties. That place is a hard-to-reach area.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, this is supplementary question, you need to -

MS KOYEKYENGA: Yes, I am coming to my question, Rt Hon. Speaker. Since 2011, I have been writing letters reminding the ministry and the Office of the President about the pledge. It looks like we are not even on the list of those who are going to be upgraded. That is why I would like the honourable minister to tell me the real status of Buhweju District. 

Secondly, I asked about staffing levels because Buhweju has only one doctor, who is the district health officer. We have only nine midwives. The general staffing level is 59 per cent. Minister of Health, I think there is a problem. I would like to request you to also talk about the staffing levels in the district.

Recently, I donated an ultrasound scan to the district after suffering for a long time because those women who were referred to go for scan, would come to my home asking for money to go to Mbarara and Bushenyi among other places to do the scan.

That scan has been there for a year, but we do not have the radiographer and the district cannot afford to have the radiographer. We also need that help.

You do not know how it feels to be called to the burial of a woman who has died while giving birth. I have four kids that were left by their mothers who died while giving birth. I am taking care of those children. It is three girls and one boy.

Buhweju is a hard-to-reach area which needs serious attention. I know there are some districts that get some money on account of being hard-to-reach areas. Buhweju must be among those districts but we are not on that list. I think we also need to know why our district is not included. Thank you.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. Allow me to inform the honourable member and the House that the Minister of Public Service is the one that determines the issue of the hard-to-reach allowances. He is the one that determines what hard-to-reach is and the areas that are hard to reach and they are the ones that are in charge of that. 

Regarding the issue of staffing, it rests with the district local governments. However, I am very aware, Rt Hon. Speaker, that sometimes the challenge is the wage bill but also sometimes the challenge is that even where they have a wage bill, they fail to attract those workers. This is partially because of the challenge of lack of accommodation. That is what sometimes does not attract these health workers. 

The radiographers are one of those critical cadres that we need in the health sector and they are few and in high demand. We have given scholarships to those that applied when we advertised and we hope that in the next one or two years we should have more people offering this service.

The other challenge is what motivates this radiographer to go and work in a remote health facility and not work in an urban centre. It is partially because of the pay, and I hope this is something that we shall all address in the next budget for the next financial year since the President has already indicated that this Parliament needs to focus on increasing the wage bill for health workers in this country. 

I have already mentioned that Buhweju is a hard-to-reach district. It is a mountainous district and our priority is to the mountainous districts and the islands. Even the Speaker, Madam Kadaga, I think a month ago, indicated that our budget for the next financial year will not be passed unless we have addressed the islands and the mountainous areas. 

Just to assure the Member of Parliament, we are aware of that. We shall include all those sub-counties that do not have health facilities. 

Of course, we may not attend to all because of demand from other districts. Out of the 14, there are 11 that do not have. So we will make sure that we stagger in the next two years and we cover the entire sub-county because we have to attend to the other mountainous and island districts. Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. Honourable minister, you have talked about the health centres II that you have upgraded to health centres III. Kasilo is one of those counties that have benefited.

My concern is, we have that policy where each parish should have a health centre II. Does that policy still stand or not? There should be clarification because we have two big parishes in my constituency, where hon. Asamo comes from. They are the two parishes with the biggest population in Kasilo and yet there is no health centre II. There is a distance of about eight to 15 kilometres to get to the health centre III. I just wanted to know whether it still stands or that policy was stopped. How will such people be able to access the medical facilities?

There is one gentleman who had started a private health centre II but because of the economic status, it could not pick up. If the Government can take up those facilities as health centre II, I do not know what the policy would be. Thank you.

MS WATONGOLA: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I would like to thank you, honourable minister.

I have listened to the Member of Parliament from Buhweju and I nearly cried. It seems like we are cheating our colleague. We are cheating the voters. I stand to be corrected but out of the 14 to have only three sub-counties with health centres III, that is very bad!

Therefore, I would like to request the honourable minister – I know we are talking about health centres II but how about those without any health centre in a sub-county? Can we prioritise? At least give a priority to all those sub-counties without health centres III. When they come on board, then we can talk about health centres II. I beg to submit.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I appreciate what the honourable member is saying but I thought I was very clear and I communicated in English that we have sub-counties that do not have any health facility at all. We are going to ensure that we construct health centres III.

If I can be a little specific for her benefit; we have 125 health centres II which are being upgraded to health centres III. We have 132 sub-counties that do not have any health centre at all. And that is what she's talking about. Even those, we are going to construct using this inter-governmental fiscal loan. 

Therefore, Rt Hon. Speaker, the health centres III are our focus for now. For the health centres II – of course health centres IV are also going to be addressed and the general hospitals too. However, that will only come once we have received funding. 

We have asked the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to find a loan and this document is already with this Parliament. 

For the health centres II, I would like to make this very clear that our challenge was that the districts were constructing health centres II without matching funding for the wage and operations. That is why we halted the construction of the health centres II countrywide. 

However, those that were already operational continue to operate and Government is providing the necessary funding, staffing and resources for its operations. 

For those large sub-counties where distance may be a problem, we have always asked the districts to formally write so that we can see if we can put another health centre on the other side of the sub-county. Please ask the district to formally write and then we can send our technical teams on the ground and address that. Thank you.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW $ 100 MILLION FROM THE DOMESTIC MARKET TO FINANCE CLASSIFIED EXPENDITURE UNDER MINISTRY OF DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2018/2019

5.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Rt Hon. Speaker, before I move, I would like to inform the House that I have confirmed that all the documents, which we were supposed to submit together with the Budget, have been submitted.

I beg to move that the House authorises Government to borrow US$ 100 million, approximately Shs 380 billion, from the domestic market to finance classified expenditure under the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs for Financial Year 2018/2019.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this request was submitted to the committee. However, like I keep saying, sometimes you may need to speak to your motion before the committee reports. You have not spoken to this motion. You just laid papers and we sent them to the committee. As the person requesting for the loan, you have not spoken to the motion. Is the motion seconded?

The motion is seconded by the Woman Member of Parliament for Pakwach, UPDF Representative and the Member of Parliament for Bufumbira. Please, justify the motion and then we will have the report of the committee.

MR BAHATI: Rt Hon. Speaker, we passed the budget for the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs for Financial Year 2018/2019 here. However, during the financial year, the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs, for strategic reasons and for the security of the country, engaged and acquired some classified equipment to protect our country. The equipment was of a contractual nature and needed some down payment.

Therefore, we agreed that we come to this House to get a supplementary budget, which will be financed through domestic borrowing. This expenditure will be financed over three years. We have provided the portion of Shs 1.5 trillion for the Financial Year 2019/2010 budget. It is an expenditure that all of us need to support for the sake of the security of the country. It has been looked at by the relevant committee of this House.

Rt Hon. Speaker, it is a classified expenditure by the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs for the security of this country.  It is urgent and cannot wait. The only way we can finance it is through a supplementary appropriation, which will be backed by domestic borrowing. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the motion that I now propose for your debate is for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow US$ 100 million from the domestic market to finance classified expenditure under the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs for Financial Year 2018/2019. That is the motion I propose for your debate and debate starts now. 

To start the debate, this matter was referred to the committee. We would like to hear from the committee to guide our debate.

THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE PROPOSAL BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW $100 MILLION FROM THE DOMESTIC MARKET TO FINANCE CLASSIFIED EXPENDITURE UNDER MINISTRY OF DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2018/2019.

5.25
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Syda Bbumba): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. This is the report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow up to $ 100 million from the domestic market to finance classified expenditure under the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs for Financial Year 2018/2019.

Before I present the report, allow me to thank colleagues on the Committee on National Economy and those on the committee in charge of classified expenditure for the effort they put in.

Rt Hon. Speaker, as I proceed, I wish to lay the following documents on the Table:
 
    1. The duly signed report of the committee on the subject matter
    2. The brief to Parliament, which was presented
    3. The letter from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on domestic borrowing for classified expenditure under the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs for Financial Year 2018/2019
    4. The Supplementary Schedule No. 2 for Financial Year 2018/2019
    5. Addendum No. 2 to the Supplementary Schedule No. 2 for Financial Year 2018/2019
    6. Copies of the minutes of the meetings, which were held when we were scrutinising the loan
    7. Copy of the letter from the Committee on Budget on the justification for financing the classified expenditure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the report of the committee, the brief to Parliament, the letter from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Supplementary Schedule and the addendum to it. Thank you.

MS BBUMBA: Rt Hon. Speaker, as it has been stated by the minister, a motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow up to $ 100 million from the domestic market to finance classified expenditure was presented to the House by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 18 December, 2018 and referred to the Committee on National Economy in accordance with rule 175(2)(b) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

Methodology: we had meetings and interviews with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs and the parliamentary committee on classified expenditure. We also had a review of a number of documents listed under paragraph 2.2 of the report. 

The defence and security sector, as you all know, plays a vital role in defending and protecting people and their property, the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Uganda as well as ensuring peace and security for socio-economic development. 

While the sector's capabilities have improved over time, there remain significant issues that need to be addressed. The current peace and security that the country enjoys needs to be consolidated, promoted and developed with focus on security of the country from any form of aggression, peace-building and conflict management, through improving the capability of defence and security forces and enhancing the defence and security infrastructure, among others.

Rt Hon. Speaker, on 19 February 2019, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development tabled before Parliament a supplementary budget request, which included Shs 380 billion (equivalent of $ 100 million) to finance classified expenditure requirements. The source of financing this additional budgetary requirement is through additional domestic borrowing amounting to Shs 380 billion.

Rt Hon. Speaker, it should be noted that defence’s classified expenditure has been growing over time; from Shs 347 billion in Financial Year 20l7/2018 to Shs 640 billion in Financial Year 2018/2019. This additional borrowing will see the budget for classified expenditure grow to Shs 1,020 billion, representing 34 per cent, of the total defense budget.

This financial year, as part of the appropriation, the Net Domestic Financing of Shs 1,783 billion was approved. However, an urgent need has arisen, which requires financing classified expenditure of $100 million. This expenditure was not budgeted for and is a fiscal deficit, since it is over and above the approved budget for this financial year 2018/2019. These funds are required immediately and since they cannot be raised by an increase in tax collection or external borrowing, all of which take long to accomplish, there is need for us to do borrow from domestic market.

The objective of this project is to improve the capability of Uganda's defence and security forces and enhance Uganda's defence and security infrastructure.

With consistence on the country's strategy, the National Development Plan II (NDP II), Defence and Security sector objectives, is to improve the capacity of defence and security forces and strengthen of internal and external security.

The particular objectives are: 

    1. Develop and maintain air force physical infrastructure
    2. Construct and renovate administrative and operational Infrastructure, and
    3. Develop and maintain defence and security welfare infrastructure. 

The committee got assurance from the parliamentary sub-committee on classified expenditure that these requirements are consistent with the country's strategy as laid out in NDP II. Rt Hon. Speaker, I have already laid on the Table the letter, which they wrote confirming their position.

The project cost is $100 and the implementation will be done by the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs, with its permanent secretary as the accounting officer.

Government has requested for supplementary funding. This will see the budget deficit grow by an additional Shs 380 billion, resulting into growth in Net Domestic Financing requirement of Shs 2,163 billion, in the current financial year, from Shs 1,783 billion earlier on approved by the budget. In addition, the domestic interest cost will go up by Shs 39 billion.

The loan and the current domestic debt situation is provided under Table 2 under paragraph nine and the trend is upwards. 

Observations and recommendations

The committee noted that the power to borrow or lend is provided for under Article 159 of the Constitution. This Article is to the effect that Government shall not borrow, guarantee or raise a loan on behalf of itself or any other institution except as authorised by or under an Act of Parliament.

Rt Hon. Speaker, right now, there is no law governing classified borrowing and it is the first time Parliament is faced with a scenario where classified borrowing is brought to Parliament for approval. What is provided for under the Constitution is classified expenditure and the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 provides for the auditing of classified expenditure.

The committee was informed that it could not be given all the terms and conditions of the loan to borrow since this is a classified expenditure and so we relied on the assurance of the subcommittee on classified expenditure. 

In light of the above, the committee established that the Constitution, in Article 159(8), mandates Parliament to enact a law to exempt certain categories of loans from the provisions of Article 159(2) and (3), subject to such conditions as Parliament may prescribe. Clauses (2) and (3) mentioned above, are to the effect that the terms and conditions of the loan shall be laid before Parliament and shall not come into operation unless they have been approved by a resolution of Parliament. The committee could not establish whether this is one of the loans that is envisaged under Article 159(8) since this law has never been enacted by Parliament.

The committee recommends that Government urgently tables a Bill to provide for borrowing for classified expenditure.

Domestic debt stock

The committee noted that domestic borrowing is intended to bridge Government’s financing gap, operationalise monetary policy and develop the financial markets. As a result, in financial year 2012/2013, started issuing treasury bills and bonds for fiscal policy purposes and since then, the stock of domestic debt has increased from Shs 5,424 billion, in financial year 2016/2017 to where it is today at Shs 13,386 billion, in the last financial year.

The committee further noted that based on the domestic debt benchmark indicators provided in the public debt management framework of 2013, the present value of domestic debt to GDP ratio increased by 0.3 per cent, from June 2017 to June 2018. This implies that the domestic debt stock relative to the country's income is on the rise.

The ratio of domestic interest cost to revenue has declined by 2.7 per cent, from the previous year ended June 2017, although it remains slightly above the threshold. The interest cost has reduced the burden on domestic revenues due to Government’s switch to longer term bonds, which they should have done yesterday. 

The ratio of domestic interest on Government expenditure has exceeded the threshold by 10 per cent. Exceeding the threshold by l.2 per cent, in June 2018, implies that the amount of resources available for allocation to other critical sectors of the economy is constrained.

The domestic debt stock relative to private sector credit increased by l.6 per, cent from June 2017 to June 2018 and this exceeded what is provided under public debt management framework threshold. The increase was due to a higher rise in domestic issuance reaching l.8 per cent of GDP. 

Exceeding the threshold implies that Government domestic debt is constraining funding to private sector. It is overcrowding it because the banks prefer to lend to Government, which is a sure risk than lending to the private sector. So, there is competition and that is why they always prioritise Government. Rt Hon. Speaker, if the private sector is to be funded, it is done at a high cost because they are not a priority. 

Despite improvements in contracting domestic debt of longer term maturity, Uganda still has a very high percentage of its domestic debt, maturing in one year and this exposes it to significant refinancing risks.

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government should develop and deepen the domestic financial sector to increase participation of the various sections of the economy in the domestic financial markets. This will entail implementation of the Tier-IV Microfinance Institutions and Money Lenders Act, 2016, among others. Increase in participation in the domestic financial markets will lower interest charged on domestic issuing.

Furthermore, Government should limit domestic financing of the budget in the short run, as the financial markets remain shallow and underdeveloped with limited players in the secondary market. The limited Government borrowing from the domestic market will consequently reduce the cost of borrowing charges to the private borrowers. If Government is to continue borrowing domestically, then it should be on long-term and leave the short-term borrowing to the private sector.

Considering the need to improve the capability of the force and to enhance defence and security infrastructure, notwithstanding the call for Government to urgently table a Bill to provide for borrowing for classified expenditure, the committee recommends that – based on the clearance and urgency which was communicated by the sub-committee on classified expenditure - the request by Government to borrow $100 million from the domestic market to finance classified expenditure under the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs be approved exceptionally. I thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

5.33
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Rt Hon. Speaker, I would like to thank the chairperson of the Committee on National Economy. I am rather perplexed at this presentation because I know that whatever we approve in this Parliament must be in accordance with the law.

I also know that the law provides for classified expenditure, but I have not seen or stumbled upon any law which gives power to this Parliament to approve classified borrowing or borrowing for classified expenditure. I say this because classified expenditure is normally provided for under the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs. Normally, we do not ask many questions because we know defence takes care of that. 

However, for the committee to agree with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come and force Parliament to approve a loan for classified expenditure is in breach of the law. We want to know; quote for us the law because as Parliament, both sides of the House have always been very sensitive and supportive of any expenditure related to security. However, we must do so in accordance with the law.

I would like the chairperson of the committee to convince us on what condition the committee was persuaded that classified expenditure must be through borrowing, so that we are comfortable with what is being presented.

Secondly, as an economist, the chairperson should have guided the committee to note that economic growth is driven by the private sector. You would be offloading that kind of burden to the economy, which is so small with very limited resources for the private sector to depend on. You are strangling the growth of the economy. I do not understand how the committee got convinced to plunge this country into that kind of economic mess. Therefore, I am seeking for procedural guidance, Rt Hon. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Article 159 gives authority to Government to borrow or lend. It does not list the purposes for which the borrowing will be conducted; it does not do that. Any budget item attracts a supplementary and the criteria is that it should be unavoidable, unforeseen and - I do not remember the third. 

If need meets that criteria and it was not reflected in the budget, then it can pass. This borrowing is specific, to raise a supplementary expenditure. I have looked at Article 159 of the Constitution and examined the issues you have raised. I have also looked at Article 159 (8) of the Constitution: “Parliament may by law exempt any categories of loans from the provisions of clauses (2) and (3) of this article, subject to such conditions as Parliament may prescribe”.

I know that in the absence of that law, this borrowing has not been exempted and that is why they are here. If they had not come here, it would have been a problem, but they are here. They are requesting that you allow them borrow, and this is in accordance with the Constitution and the authority given to this Parliament to approve or disapprove. So, I think we are proceeding well, but let us have the debate on the key principles.

MS OGWAL: Rt Hon. Speaker, in view of the sensitivity of the matter and the fact that personally, I am not convinced on the legal issue, I beg that the House be properly constituted. Right now, we do not even have quorum and we are going to force this country to plunge itself into borrowing over an issue we are not convinced of.

So, the House is not properly constituted. I would rather we brought this matter when all of us are here so that we all can explain to our various constituencies why we have decided to borrow for classified expenditure. 

Rt Hon. Speaker, the House is not properly constituted to deal with this sensitive matter. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have this rather fortunate relationship with the honourable member for Dokolo District, which she exploits to the maximum –(Laughter)– because she just got up and started speaking. I do not know whether she was speaking on a point of procedure or information and I had not even allowed her to speak yet.

However, because she has this relationship with me, she bends all the rules. (Laughter) In my language, she is called Atat. Atat is bigger than the grandmother. She is the great grandmother and being so, she exploits this situation to the maximum.

However, honourable members, in the circumstance, we will have some challenges proceeding, but we can debate. Even if we are not going to take a decision, we can debate this matter. If it is a matter that cannot be debated, and Members agree that we constitute the House and take a decision, I am okay with it.

MR OKUPA: Rt Hon. Speaker, I am a member of the committee, but I find it very difficult to debate this matter. I think the best thing would have been to put the question because they are saying it is a classified arrangement. The details have not been mentioned so what are we going to talk about? If we had the quorum, the best thing would just be to put the question to it. What are we going to debate on it?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, given the nature of this matter, even the committee that examined it is a sub-committee that is easily vetted by different categories of people. So, let us move this way. Let us have the House properly constituted and we take this decision.

For now, let us pause this matter here, come tomorrow and take a decision on this matter. Thank you. I think let us go to the next item.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (CENTRAL GOVERNMENT) ON THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2016/2017

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The chairperson of the committee is not ready for all those reports. Therefore, can we go and see if we can be briefed on item 19. It is about time but let us receive a briefing on that item. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES BILL, 2018

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the Book of Exodus is already written in the Bible. So, you should not be leaving yet. 

Honourable members, we had a discussion on this Bill. Clause 8 particularly was supposed to be redrafted to capture the spirit of the debate. I want a brief from whoever was supposed to make me understand if there is a proper draft that captures the amendments that were proposed in clause 8. Do we have a redraft of clause 8? If the redraft is not there, let the Committee of the whole House report.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to allow the Committee of the whole House to report. I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We examined the Bill and we were not able to proceed with it. That is the report.

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Persons with Disabilities Bill, 2018” and could not proceed because the chairperson of the committee was not around. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, items 19 to 26 are Bills. We need to – because we are drawing to the closure of this particular session of Parliament – build our number of Bills. We have started with the Persons with Disabilities Bill, 2018. There is the National Graduate Scheme Bill, 2018; the Landlord and Tenants Bill, 2018; the Cooperative Societies (Amendment) Bill, 2016; the Law Revision (Penalties in Criminal Matters) Miscellaneous (Amendment) Bill, 2015; the Administration of Judiciary Bill, 2018 and several other Bills. There are about eight Bills on the Order Paper. I would like to suggest that tomorrow, we deal with Bills. After taking the decision on the classified expenditure, we will deal specifically with Bills so that we finish the ones we can. On Thursday, we can come back to the general matters on the Order Paper. It is so advised. 

House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 o’clock.

(The House rose at 5.55 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 3 April 2019 at 2.00 p.m.)


Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.


 

