Tuesday, 15 April 2014

Parliament met at 2.16 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this sitting. Very many Members have approached the Speaker that they need to raise some urgent matters for this Parliament, the country and Government to act on. For that case, there will not be much communication from the chair. Thank you.

2.20
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to raise a matter of public importance. Unfortunately, I do not see anybody on the Front Bench. (Laughter) So, I do not know whether you advise me to proceed and the matter will probably be sent by your desk or – in the circumstances, how do we proceed?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, maybe, we start with item No.3 for now.

LAYING OF PAPERS

UGANDA HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is the chairperson or any other member of the committee? Let us go to the next item.

FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson – this is Committee on Local Government Accounts. Can any of the members lay these papers? Member for Bukoto East -

2.21
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on Table the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General; 
    i) Bulambuli Town Council 
    ii) Bulengeni Town Council
    iii) Moyo Town Council
    iv) Mityana Town Council
    v) Pallisa Town Council
    vi) Kira Town Council 
    vii) Kibiito Town Council
    viii) Lwakhakha Town Council

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture those financial statements together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General for those town councils. They stand committed to the Committee on Local Government Accounts for expeditious handling.

SUB-COUNTIES’ FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2011 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

2.24
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table;
i)	Mabaale Sub-County – Kibaale District
ii)	Kisiita Sub-County – Kibaale District
iii)	Kiryanga Sub-County – Kibaale District
iv)	Kagadi Sub-County – Kibaale District
v)	Nkooko Sub-County – Kibaale District
vi)	Rubaya Sub-County – Mbarara District
vii)	Biharwe Sub-County – Mbarara District
viii)	Bubaare Sub-County – Mbarara District
ix)	Ndaija Sub-County – Mbarara District
    ix) Kyebe Sub-County – Rakai District
    x) Namwiwa Sub-County - Kaliro District
    xi) Bumaanya Sub-County - Kaliro District
    xii) Kagulu Sub-County - Buyende District
    xiii) Atego Sub-County - Nebbi District
    xiv) Alwi Sub-County  - Nebbi District
    xv) Panyango Sub-County - Nebbi District
    xvi) Wadelai Sub-County - Nebbi District
    xvii) Kabei Sub-County - Bukwo District
    xviii) Itirikwa Sub-County - Adjumani District
    xix) Kigarama Sub-County  - Sheema District
    xx) Itula Sub-County  -  Moyo District. 

Mr Speaker, all these financial statements are together with the report and opinion of the Auditor-General.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let the records capture the sub-counties’ financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General. It stands committed to the Committee on Local Government Accounts for expeditious handling.

Hon. Members, please, join me in welcoming senior security staff from the National Assembly of Kenya: Maj. (Rtd) Kirungu Madiba, Principal Security Officer; Mr Haruna Okal, Senior Security Officer; Mr Naman Agengo, Security Officer and Ms Asumpita Miano, Security Officer. (Applause) You are very welcome.

MOTION FOR THE PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON HEALTH ON ITS FINDINGS FROM ITS OVERSIGHT FIELD VISIT TO LIRA, OYAM AND GULU DISTRICTS

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I realise that the next item on the order paper has been called. That item is a very important report from the Committee on Health. Unfortunately, as usual, the Front Bench is almost vacant. Just as you called that item, the learned Attorney-General walked in. But I do not know whether he is an expert in this area or he can respond to issues that may arise from the debate.

That aside, I am raising a serious concern with regard to the seriousness of Government. We come here to discuss national issues for which we expect concrete responses from Government. Now, what business are we engaged in if the Front Bench is without ministers and the Leader of Government Business in Parliament?

Mr Speaker, guide me on whether we can proceed this way. And looking at the rest of the items on the order paper, it looks like you might be forced to adjourn the meeting of today, but which is going to be a waste of taxpayers’ money, Mr Speaker.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to genuinely thank you for keeping time and that is the way a good lawyer should behave.

The issue of timekeeping, for example, to me, a professional teacher is very important. Much as we talk about ministers, even we the Members must mind about time. Why were we elected by these people? There are matters of national importance here that have been halted because of absence of Members of the Front Bench. The time the Speaker entered here, we were only three Members.

Even me, sometimes I am late, but it can be justified. But still Members must be in the House. There are some Members who think about going for lunch after the bell has gone. This is very unbecoming to the guests who come here and those who watch our proceedings on UBC Television, if at all it is on now.

So, Mr Speaker, I move that we devise means of making Members and ministers to be in the House on time. Otherwise, we are not playing our roles. Yes, we might blame the Government Front Bench, but as Members, we have the obligation to be here.

I must say that I have seen the Speaker respecting the bell, which is sounded to let us come in here. But you look through the Chamber, even if we had business to vote on now, we cannot.

Mr Speaker, as you meet in the Parliamentary Commission, do something about this. Otherwise, ministers are disappointing us.

By the way, what do they do when they go to Cabinet? One day, I attended the proceedings for Presidential Affairs and got to know that Cabinet spends a lot of money in its meetings talking about issues of policies and so on, but their implementation is zero. So, it is high time you allowed backbenchers to sometimes take up the Front Bench on the government side. But ours are around.

I appeal to Members to keep time just like the Speaker does. The purpose of keeping time is to handle more business but look at the House. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Could I then use the powers conferred upon me to request the hon. Ssewungu to come and sit on the Government Front Bench? (Laughter)

MR SSEWUNGU: No, Mr Speaker, my seat is on this side. I would be willing to cross if my Chief Whip had not been around but for now, she is around.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we are all aware that this House was adjourned to today at 2 p.m. and it is now 25 minutes to 3 O’clock. That means we should have already been sitting for 35 minutes. But I can see that the Government Front Bench has only the Attorney-General. I am sure he is competent enough to take full charge of the matters that are before the House and report. Unless he is going to raise a disclaimer to what I have just said.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I do everything within my powers and capacity to meet every challenge that comes up that concerns the Government side. Where I cannot, I will ensure that appropriate action is taken. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But also, this is just to say – I will make this statement when either the Government Chief Whip or the Leader of Government Business is here – even if I make it now, it will not be useful because they are not listening. It is important that we keep time; 2 O’clock is 2 O’clock and my watch said that long time ago. I do not know what other people’s watches are saying at this moment. Mine said it was 2 O’clock about 35 minutes ago. That is why I came here that long time ago.

So, now that I am here, we should always know that House must start at 2 O’clock. At 2 O’clock, ministers and Members of Parliament, let us be here and transact business. Instead of getting into the night, we can start early and adjourn early. Otherwise, this is not good for our business.

2.36
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is unfortunate that the Government Front Bench is not well constituted and the Members are not fully constituted too. 

The guidance I am seeking from you is: chairpersons of committees sometimes take us up to almost the time when the bell goes. That is when committees start to summarise proceedings to adjourn. By the time Members move to take lunch, it will be already 2 O’clock. And by the time Members slope in here, the Speaker, will be already in the House.

So, I am of the view that you make an appeal to committee chairpersons to adjourn early or if there is a way the bell can be sounded earlier than 1 O’clock, for example, at 12.30 p.m., that will give time for Members to summarise their business in committees; that would work for us. 

Then, the other one –(Interruption)

MR LOKII: Mr Speaker, the honourable member has made allegations accusing the chairpersons of committees for keeping Members. As a chairperson, I want to testify that our members do not respect the rules of time in the committees. What would the chairman do when members who are supposed to be in a meeting at 9 a.m. come at midday? 

Is the honourable member in order to allege that it is the chairpersons who are delaying Members from realising quorum in the House? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, which committee do you sit on and what time did you stop today so that I can rule on that?

MS NTABAZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was the first person to sit in this Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which committee do you sit on?

MS NTABAZI: I sit on the Committee on Presidential Affairs.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What time did you adjourn the committee?

MS NTABAZI: We adjourned –(Interjections) Yes, the committee sat today; we were with hon. Ssewungu, the committee ended after the bell had gone.

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, the committee ended before the bell and I want to help my honourable colleague - she is a teacher like me - let her look at the Maslow’s Theory; you know about the bell and the dog. This bell goes at the right time and sincerely, we left before the bell went. Let us not accuse the committee. 

The fault is ours; not on the Speaker and the ministers. The Speaker takes his credit wholly and the ministers. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, each Member has a right to move a motion for adjournment of committee meetings once they are sensitive to time. So, it is not up to the chair to push the committee that far. You can ask for an adjournment and the committee will be adjourned. 

The point we are making here is that it is serious business for us to respect the time at which the House is adjourned. If it is adjourned to 2 O’clock, let us respect that. The time that the bell goes will not change because it alerts you that the sitting will start at 2 O’clock as usual. It is nothing new.

2.39
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to be guided on how we are supposed to proceed when it is the Executive that summons Members on days that are supposed to be for plenary.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Executive summons Members? 

MS NAMBOOZE: For example, I am the vice Chairperson of the Buganda Parliamentary Caucus and it has over 90 members. As we talk right now, the Members of the caucus were summoned by His Excellency, the President and most of them are at State House including members of the Front Bench - (Interjections)– with the absence of over 90 members of this House – (Interruption) 

MR MUWUMA: Thank you very much, Mr speaker. I rise on a point of order. Hon. Betty Nambooze, the MP for Mukono Municipality has just entered this House while you were already in the Chair, raising such sensitive issues like we are discussing now. Is she in order to begin referring to other Members who are not here when she is a culprit?
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the time for the sitting of this House commences at 2 O’clock and we should strive to respect that time. Let us proceed.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We are looking at a very passionate and important subject matter to be presented by the chairperson of the committee and it touches on health. A number of us have a lot of issues to raise across the country and we do not see the Minister of Health who is supposed to be here and probably help us with the puzzles we are having in our respective constituencies. 

I seek your guidance on whether we can proceed like this or we suspend for a few minutes for the minister to come or we have an explanation of how we shall have the responses to the questions raised thereafter. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will proceed with business, the learned Attorney-General has undertaken that where he cannot answer, he will inform the respective ministers to provide answers. Chairperson, please proceed.

2.42
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Kenneth Omona): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to present to the House a report of the Committee on Health on its findings from the oversight field visit to Lira, Oyam, and Gulu in Northern Uganda. I beg to lay a copy of this report on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the copy of the report.

DR OMONA: Madam Speaker, in accordance with Rules 175(2)(C), and 177 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, the Committee on Health is mandated inter alia to monitor the performance of the health sector and ensure compliance with approved plans and programmes. With the ambit of this mandate, the Committee on Health conducted a field visit to the three districts of Lira, Oyam and Gulu in the last week of January 2014. 

The purpose of the visit was to monitor the performance of the primary health care grants appropriated to the three districts as well as the funds voted for the two regional referral hospitals: Lira Regional Referral Hospital and Gulu Regional Referral Hospital. 

Specifically, the committee was interested in assessing how the region was addressing Hepatitis B, Nodding Disease Syndrome, functionality of the lower health facilities, HIV/AIDS services, medicine supply, blood supply, maternal health, referral systems and community participation in health care delivery.
 
In addition, the committee wanted to assess the impact of Indoor Residual Spraying that was piloted in Northern Uganda on malaria control. 

Lastly, the committee wanted to document innovations that the districts in Northern Uganda have put in place to improve health care delivery. 

We visited the health facilities and also met with the stake holders –(Interruption)

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The point of order I am raising is if the honourable member holding the Floor is in order to continue addressing you as a madam speaker, when in fact it is the Deputy Speaker, the man presiding over this House? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, please, take the advice from hon. Nambooze who knows I am a man. (Laughter)

DR OMONA: Mr Speaker, that was a slip of the tongue and hon. Nambooze knows that as a doctor, I am in a better position to identify and differentiate males from females. But I am very sorry. 

Going back to the report, the committee visited Lira Regional Referral Hospital, Oyam and Gulu Regional Referral Hospitals. The committee also held public hearings at Lira District Council Hall, Oyam District Health Office and Gulu District CAO’s Board Room. At these hearings were the chairpersons, district local councils, speakers of the councils, chairpersons of social services committees, residence district commissioners, the CAOs, directors of regional referral hospitals, principal nursing officers, DHOs, security officers and other members of the public and press. 

Mr Speaker, hon. Kenneth Omona and hon. Bitekyerezo on behalf of the committee, addressed the community in Northern Uganda using QFM Radio station in Lira where they received the concerns of the people through call-ins.

Findings and observations of the committee

In Lira, the committee found that Hepatitis B was common in the area. Health workers are the common targets of Hepatitis B and were exposed to risk, given that they provide front line services to patients.

At Lira Regional Referral Hospital, about 90 health workers including support staff had been vaccinated. However, in lower health facilities, workers were not yet vaccinated.

In Gulu, the committee also found that Hepatitis B was common. At Lacor Hospital, 18 health workers had been diagnosed with Hepatitis B infection. The committee noted that some interventions had been made to vaccinate some health workers at Lacor and Gulu regional referral hospitals but many remained unvaccinated and many more had not received the second and third doses as is required lest the vaccination becomes ineffective.

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government steps up interventions against Hepatitis B in Northern Uganda and as a matter of priority, earmarks funds to urgently vaccinate all health workers and caretakers of the infected persons both in public and private health facilities.

On human resource for health, the committee noted that in Lira Regional Referral Hospital, the number of staff was dwindling. In the year 2011, the hospital had 313 staff but in January 2014, the hospital had staff strength of 275, which affected the delivery of health care. For example, the committee found that the HIV and AIDS clinic was run 100 percent on donor support. Still at Lira Referral Hospital, the committee found that the hospital had specialists who were not recognised and as such, not paid by Government.

The committee further found that some senior consultants had been transferred from Lira Regional Referral Hospital to other places such as Jinja Regional Referral Hospital but these had refused to move to their new stations opting to join private practice within Lira. The local leaders recommended that since the said doctors had refused to move to their new stations, they should be retained at Lira Regional Referral hospital even though they run their private clinics. These were the views of the local leaders there.

In the lower health facilities, the committee was informed that absenteeism by staff was a major hindrance to delivery of health care. 

The committee also got confusing reports on the impact of the recent mass recruitment of health workers in both Health Centres III and IV. The committee was informed that the intervention did not lead to the decongestion of the higher referral facilities. Some of the causes identified were as follows: 

One was the attitude problem. The committee members were informed that patients were not willing to go to health facilities that are not labelled hospitals but prefer going to hospitals.

Two, was lack of critical cadres of health workers. The committee was informed that in the Lango sub-region, only four health centres IV were conducting surgeries. Others did not due to lack of competence and other critical staff such as anaesthetists, nurses among others.

Thirdly, was staff absenteeism where staff operated private clinics or were pursuing further studies. The committee received reports in Gulu that some doctors who had been recruited to work at health centres IV as surgeons were transferred to district hospital level where there was an enabling environment to conduct surgeries.

The committee further found that the cadre of nursing assistants that was phased out was still being used - (Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am trying to find out from the chairperson of the committee. He keeps referring to civil servants working in hospitals as cadres. Is it a new term in the civil service or an old term from the service where I served because when you refer to them as cadres, I keep getting confused. Can he clarify on the issue he is talking about?

DR OMONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to appreciate the concern of my senior colleague, hon. Wamai. It is true that the word “cadre” is used in different circumstances but in this case, under the profile or level of skill of health workers, we refer to the different levels of training as cadres. For example, you can talk of a senior clinical officer as a cadre. This is how we refer to them and it is on record. When I say we –(Interjections)– I mean those who use English. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

DR OMONA: In these circumstances, I mean the different levels of training of health workers. Thank you, Mr Speaker. I had just said that the committee received reports in Gulu that some doctors who had been recruited to work at health centres IV as surgeons were transferred to the district hospitals where there was an enabling environment to conduct surgeries.

The committee further found that the cadre of nursing assistants that was phased out –(Applause) - was still being used in the region in health centres III.

Mr Speaker, I thought they were stamping for me for reading cadres. I had not known -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is true.

DR OMONA: Thank you. Mr Speaker, in all these circumstances, there does not seem to be replacement for these cadres. In addition, the committee found that the health centres II in the region were providing very fundamental health care services. For instance, it was indicated that all health centres II conducted deliveries.

The committee noted that the leadership in the region had made health one of the key priorities under the Peace Recovery and Development Plans (PRDP). As such, the health centres II and III were equipped. PRDP funds were used to construct staff quarters at the lower health facilities. The local authorities were concerned about the recent government pronouncement that health centres II were being phased out. They recommended that instead of phasing out health centres II, they should be upgraded to health centres III.

For the above, the committee recommends that one, Government expedites the enactment of a policy on performance contracts to address the problem of absenteeism and poor work attitude.

Two, that the monitoring and inspection functions of the Ministry of Health should be revived and the ministry be made to perform its role effectively. In addition, the local government health monitoring and supervision structures should be revamped.

The other was that the cadre of nursing assistants should not simply be phased out. Rather, the nursing assistants should be given an opportunity to upgrade their skills to provide better services. The Ministry of Health, Health Service Commission and Ministry of Public Service should facilitate regional referral hospitals and national referral hospitals to fill vacant positions and promote health workers who have attained higher qualifications.

Lastly, on this, Government should ensure that all health centre IV theatres are functionalised to effectively engage the recently recruited doctors.

On blood supply, the committee noted that Gulu hosted the regional blood bank and Lira hosted facilities dependent on blood supplies from Gulu, Mbale or Kampala. A proposal was made by the health facilities in Lira that Lira be designated as a blood collection and distribution centre. It was indicated that with that arrangement, Lira would get better blood supplies.

The committee was also informed that during the school holidays, there is always shortage of blood as the major donors who are the students cannot be easily reached. This suggests that dependence on students for blood donation is risky. 

Moreover, the committee further found that malnutrition was a major threat in Northern Uganda, which required immediate response given its effect on blood donation, HIV/AIDS programmes and the Nodding Syndrome.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Health and Uganda Blood Transfusion Services study the feasibility of designating Lira as a blood collection and distribution centre for Lango sub-region.

The committee also further recommends that Uganda Blood Transfusion Services enhances its blood donation campaigns to target more blood donors.

The Office of the Prime Minister should expeditiously cause the implementation of the national nutrition plan.

Finally, on this, Mr Speaker, we also recommend that the Ministry of Health integrates nutrition services in all health facilities. 

On medicine supply, the committee got reports that the supply of medicines by the National Medical Stores to health facilities in Northern Uganda had improved. However, some challenges were highlighted and these include the following;
    1. Drug stock-outs at regional referral hospitals due to high turn up of patients. Patients still go to regional referral hospitals as their first point of service.
    2. Undersupply by the National Medical Stores on some drugs.
    3. Supply of drugs with a short life span.
    4. Limited capacity at lower health facilities to quantify and place orders of drugs.
    5. The push system pushing medicine, to lower health facilities, that was not required and failing to push the essential medicine.
    6. Some health workers stealing public drugs from public health facilities.
    7. Failure by the National Medical Stores to supply reagents and other vital supplies such as HIV test kits.

The committee, therefore, recommends that:
    1. The National Medical Stores and District Health Officers should regularly meet to discuss challenges associated with drug supply in lower health facilities.
    2. The capacity of lower health facilities to quantify and order the necessary drugs through recruitment and training of the relevant health personnel.
    3. The supply of laboratory reagents and other vital medical equipment and health management information systems data tools should be prioritised by the National Medical Stores.
    4. Oversight, monitoring and supervision should be enhanced to stop theft of drugs.
    5. Health Management Committees in all the health facilities should be operationalised to support effective oversight of drug supply and management.

On the ambulance system, the committee also found that there was no functional ambulance system to underpin the referral system. The committee found that, in Oyam, there was some ambulance system operating under donor and community projects. In other health facilities, the ambulances lacked maintenance and fuel. In some areas, the patients were required to fuel the ambulances.

Therefore, we recommend that the referral system be reviewed and sensitisation of communities on the levels of healthcare be undertaken for effective utilisation of the current health infrastructure.

In addition, we recommend that the enactment of the National Ambulance Policy should be expedited to address the current ambulance crisis in the country.

On the impact of Indoor Residual Spraying (IRS) on malaria control, we found that in Lira, where the IRS was not carried, malaria was still the leading cause of admissions. However, in Oyam and Gulu where the IRS was piloted, malaria had drastically reduced. The leadership of Lira informed the committee that the communities were waiting for IRS and the district leadership was supporting this IRS. 

In Oyam, the leadership indicated that not only were people supportive of IRS, they also wanted outside spraying with DDT like it was done in the U.S to eradicate malaria.

The committee recommends that IRS should resume, which has proved to be effective in the reduction of malaria and should be rolled out to other regions in Uganda. 

On HIV/AIDS services, the committee found that the prevalence of HIV in the districts visited was on the increase. The committee also found that there were HIV/AIDS services from health centres III upwards. The committee also noted that Gulu Regional Referral Hospital was a hub for early infant diagnosis of HIV.

However, the committee noted that a number of challenges still faced the anti-HIV programmes in the areas visited. These challenges include:
    1. Shortage of testing kits, which was virtually in all the centres that we visited.
    2. Malnutrition.
    3. Low involvement by male partners in seeking medical care and in some instances, male partners share medicine with their spouses.
    4. High level co-existence between HIV and TB.
    5. Inadequate counselling services in the areas visited. 

For instance, with regard to Elimination of Mother to Child Transmission (EMTCT) where pregnant mothers who are found positive are immediately enrolled on treatment, the committee was informed that these mothers were asking for more time before they are enrolled on Anti-Retroviral Treatment (ART) to enable them first negotiate with their husbands. This suggests that EMTCT programmes without a strong component on male involvement and adequate counselling may lead to gender-based violence.

The local government of Oyam complained to the committee that excessive alcohol consumption in the area may have increased the transmission of HIV. Parliament was urged to enact laws or cause the implementation of laws that regulate consumption and sale of alcohol on top of the Enguli Act.

The committee, therefore, recommends that:
    1. National Medical Stores should procure and supply more HIV test kits to lower health facilities.
    2. Male involvement in HIV/AIDS programmes should be enhanced through legal, policy and other mechanisms.
    3. Malnutrition should be addressed by Government to give impetus to ART.
    4. More locally generated resources should be invested in the HIV/AIDS programmes.
    5. The Enguli Act should be revised and implemented to activate its potential to reduce HIV infection in Uganda.
	
Mr Speaker, look at the upgrading of health centres IV to district hospitals and some of the issues that the committee came across. The committee received many requests for upgrading health facilities, some from health centre II to health centre III and others from health centre IV to general or district hospital. 

The committee noted that the policy on district hospitals was not clear to many district authorities. It was not clear whether every sub-county must have a health centre III facility and every district, a district hospital. The committee was informed that the presidential pledge to upgrade the health centre IV in Oyam to a district hospital status had not been effected.

We, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Health should disseminate the criteria for upgrading health facilities from one level to another.

The Ministry of Health should implement the presidential pledge to upgrade Oyam Health Centre IV to a general hospital if that was a genuine pledge.

Primary Health Care Funding
 
In all the districts visited, the complaint about inadequacy of district primary healthcare grants was uniform. Another related complaint was the funding sent to NGO or mission hospitals. For instance, a concern was raised by one stakeholder in Gulu as to why Government should fund Gulu Independent Hospital and yet, the cost of services extended remains high and out of reach by the common person.

The committee, therefore, recommends that PHC grants to districts should be improved and disbursed in a timely manner.

We also further recommend that the Ministry of Health should work with those NGO hospitals such as the Gulu Independent Hospital mentioned here to target grants from Government to ensure that the cost of medical care by these facilities is lowered to make it affordable by the local people.

Nodding Disease

The committee was pleased to find that the Nodding Disease had been contained. For instance, the 473 cases in Gulu District were responding positively to treatment. We were informed that no new case had been registered in the last year. However, a need for a special education centre and nutrition programme for victims of Nodding Disease was suggested by the local authorities.

The committee, therefore, recommends that a nutrition programme should be introduced in the affected areas.

Village Health Teams (VHT)

The committee found out that VHT had been established in the districts visited to facilitate health service delivery. The teams had, for instance, been helpful in mobilising communities for immunisation and IRS in the districts where the project was piloted.

However, the committee noted the following:
    (i) There was no uniformity in the composition of these VHTs, whereby some villages had two while others had three or more.
    (ii) There was no uniformity in the motivation of the VHTs; those recruited under donor-funded projects were better facilitated than others. And that VHTs requested better facilitation in terms of allowances, uniforms, identity cards, among others.

Our committee, therefore, recommends that the institution of the VHTs be strengthened through policy and budgetary means.

Supervision of Private Clinics and Herbalists

The committee received complaints that there was inadequate supervision and regulation of private clinics and herbalists. Whenever patients were mishandled or delayed at these facilities and eventually died at public health facilities, the latter rather than the former would be blamed. It was even indicated that some herbalists had acquired medical diagnostic equipment but nobody was supervising or monitoring these facilities.

We, therefore, recommend that Government should intensify supervision and monitoring of private health facilities and the providers. And also, that Government should put in place policy to regulate and control alternative or indigenous medicine practice.

Intensive Care Unit at Lira Regional Referral Hospital

The committee found out that a state-of-the-art intensive care unit had been established in Lira Regional Referral Hospital with sophisticated equipment. However, the unit was not functional due to lack of adequate oxygen supply and human resource.

The committee recommends that Government should consider building an oxygen plant in Lira Regional Referral Hospital, which will in turn supply the entire region.

The X-ray Unit at Gulu Regional Referral Hospital

Gulu Regional Referral Hospital which should have an X-ray unit did not have it. In 2009, the Italian Cooperation and Government had promised to build an X-ray unit in this facility. However, it took time for the project to take off. Later, the contract was awarded to Lamba Construction, which did shoddy work, leading to the cancellation of the contract when construction had reached foundation level.

The committee recommends that Government should take up the project to ensure that it is completed.

Immunisation of Refugees from South Sudan

The committee was informed by the local authorities in Gulu that refugees from South Sudan had entered Uganda, following the outbreak of conflict in South Sudan since December 2013. The local authorities feared that the refugees may not have been vaccinated against killer diseases.

The committee recommends that Government should put in place measures to address sanitation in refugee camps and vaccinate the refugees from South Sudan against the killer disease vaccinated in Uganda.

Innovations made to Improve Healthcare Services in Northern Uganda

The committee found that Gulu District was piloting a project on result-oriented based financing as a means of improving quality and quantity of health facilities.

Mr Speaker, under this arrangement, he who performs best in terms of quality and quantity of healthcare services delivered is motivated with more funds. 

The committee recommends that Government should study the result-based financing and if found effective, it should be rolled out in other districts in the country.

In conclusion, we want to say that from the findings of the field visit that we had, the committee came to the conclusion that a lot needs to be done in the health sector in order to improve the healthcare service delivery. All stakeholders must be involved – stakeholders at the local or community level, district authorities and at the national and global levels. These should include both the political as well as technical professional ones. 

The committee also came to the conclusion that with more vigilance, more funding, more accountability and partnerships, health sector challenges can be addressed.

Finally, Mr Speaker, the field visit enabled the committee to learn from the perspective of primary healthcare workers and local authorities. To that extent, the committee hopes that the implementation of its recommendations in this report will lead to the improvement of the healthcare delivery in the country.

Mr Speaker, therefore, we beg this House to adopt the report of this committee. Thank you for listening to me. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, committee chair for that comprehensive presentation.

Hon. Members, the motion is for the adoption of the report of the Committee on Health on its findings from its oversight field visits to Lira, Oyam and Gulu District. That is the motion we are debating. Debate is now open. We will limit the time; contributions will be three minutes for each Member. 

But before we get to that, let me recognise – in the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have the ministers of the students guild and staff of Entebbe Fisheries Training Institute. They are here to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

We will take only three minutes starting with the Member for Lira Municipality.

3.15
MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for presenting the report, but I notice that there are a lot of concerns to be raised. 

I support the committee’s position on Lira Referral Hospital having the ability to collect and distribute blood. Often times, we run into difficulty and we have a regional referral hospital but it cannot meet the needs of the communities within Lira itself and beyond, within the Lango Sub Region.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Mr Speaker, –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Second Deputy Prime Minister, on what point do you rise?

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: No, I want to explain –(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have information or something else? (Laughter)

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I want to give information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, give us the information. (Laughter)

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to inform my colleagues that the Government is in the House. Absence of specific ministers should not deter the House from proceeding. That is the information I want to give.

MR AKENA: Thank you, the Rt Hon. Second Deputy Prime Minister. I was actually proceeding before I was interrupted.

The concern I have on malaria is that the spraying was only done in some areas. Within Lira Municipality, we are surrounded by swamps but there has not been any spraying. However, to control malaria you need a consistent programme of breaking the cycle of the mosquitoes to the people and on top of that, you need some prophylactic treatment. So, this one-time project and then you stop and say the results are good – people are constantly dying of malaria! Malaria still remains a huge problem and we cannot just handle it in a haphazard way.

On the point of health workers not moving, I have some sympathies towards those health workers. You will find that for somebody to re-locate, they have to move with their entire family. When you look at the results in the last examination, you will realize that the quality of education is different for those within Lira Municipality and for those even slightly outside the town. So, if you expect a person with a young family to relocate and be able to meet rent charges, because Government has disposed of most of the Government houses, meet the school fees dues and be able to raise their families, that is definitely a problem. So, in order to tackle our health issues, we need to look at this matter holistically. 

The committee raised the issue of malnutrition. Nobody wants to be malnourished; it is just a serious problem coming as a result of poverty. So, if you are not going to address poverty and you think you will be able to deal with the health issues, you are just running round in circles. Previously, there were two wards in Lira Referral Hospital for malnourished children supported by UNICEF. However, there is a problem of extreme poverty so Government has to really look at this matter holistically, if they are going to deal with the health question effectively.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I get confused on how medicine can run out and National Medical Stores cannot respond. (Member timed out.)

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have listened to the Leader of Government Business in Parliament and I thought it passed more like a joke, yet I want a response that is more serious.

In that report, the committee talks about very serious issues including matters of life and death but as we talk, we do not have any of the ministers holding that mandate here now. This House was treated to a constitutional amendment, literally, to get more ministers so that they can do Government work very effectively by being present everywhere. So, really, is it sufficient to just tell us that Government is present as if we are in my village in Serere where people fear that Government is watching them left – (Laughter) – and right, without having a specific person who can explain why, for instance, my district, Serere, has no ambulance up to now? Is this a debate they want to postpone in the name of “Government is here”?

Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance on whether we need to treat the response of the Rt Hon. Second Deputy Prime Minister as satisfactory.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, before you came in, I had ruled on that issue. I said that the people who are here would take the responsibility of passing on the messages to the responsible persons and that at an appropriate time, this response will brought to the House.

We have in the House His Excellency the Vice President, the Deputy Prime Minister and many other ministers. Let us proceed with this business and receive what we are can receive and pass on the necessary information to the respective centres.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I stand to add to what hon. Alice Alaso said and my previous concerns on this matter. This is – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I had already ruled on your previous concerns.

MR AMURIAT: This is Parliament, Mr Speaker. When we are kept waiting because there is no responsible minister to answer our questions instantly, it serves like a waste of time of this House. You can imagine the Rt Hon. Moses Ali or his His Excellency Edward Ssekandi may not have full knowledge of the Ministry of Health. That is why we have a Minister of Health and not the Prime Minister serving as well as the Minister of Health.

Mr Speaker, if this House has to be taken seriously by the Executive and if this House has to exercise its independence as Parliament, I think some sanctions –(Interruptions)

MR NDEEZI: Mr Speaker, I am sorry for disrupting my senior colleague. The honourable member knows very well that once the Speaker has ruled on a matter, that ruling is final. In order not to offend my friend, I am not raising a point of order but I urge him to respect the Speaker’s decision. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, what are we debating? We are debating a motion for presentation, consideration and adoption of the report of the Committee on Health on its findings from its oversight field visits to Lira, Oyam and Gulu districts. We do not need a minister’s response to take a decision on this report. We can adopt the recommendations of the committee and that will be it. 

This is property of this House not of the Executive. That is what we are processing now. So, we make our comments and adjustments to these recommendations and determine how to pass them. It will be up to the Executive to respond to them when they are adopted. So, why should we water it down by waiting for people who are not here? The report is already before the House.

3.20
MS HELEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. It is very unfortunate that the issue of ambulances is becoming nationwide. You can imagine a poor person may be moving from the constituency of hon. Alaso in Serere to Soroti with a patient who is very sick; you are supposed to fuel, you reach Soroti and the patient dies. You need to bring back the body. I think Government has really to take this as a serious issue, that ambulances are very important equipment in healthcare and this affects all of us. 

The issue of the village health teams; you find that these people are voluntary people but those who are lucky to have NGOs, as the report states, really get some kind of facilitation. But the majority do a lot of work to mobilise people for immunisation, family planning, HIV/AIDS but they get peanuts, which are not even known, according to the community because I have been able to move to some hospitals. 

So, I think the government should try to appreciate uniformly those who mobilise for us people to give us services. A structure should be put in place on how the VHTs are supported.

I also want to bring the issue of training of the health workers. Mr Speaker, as you are aware, the ministry of education does the training of health workers and it hands over to health; but the quality of the people who come out does not meet the standards of the day. You can go to a health centre and the person who is handling you is almost not aware of what he is supposed to do. So, I think we might need to change the policy and take back these people to be trained by the Ministry of Health. I am proud to say my mother is a nurse. She was trained by the Ministry of Health and up to today, she is my nurse and I think that it is a very good thing that we need to consider. 
 
The report did not bring the challenges of the patients. That should also come out so that we have our recommendations because many patients have challenges when they are in the hospitals. We need to bring it out. You already talked about the late coming of the health workers. What is the impact of that to the patients who come to these hospitals? We need to see how they are addressed in the hospital. 

I also want to talk about the issue of the small numbers of health workers in hospitals. They are very few; you find one doctor is diagnosing and is supposed to run to the theatre; how does this person make a miracle to do all that even if he is hard working? At the end of the day, you reach some hospitals and the doctor has not even had lunch. (Member timed out.)

3.28
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr speaker. I would like to thank the chairman and the committee members for this very elaborate presentation. I am concerned about three issues. 

First of all, we are decrying a fact that we lack manpower in our medical units but this has been worsened by private practice being carried out by medical doctors who are on Government payroll. So, when we are talking about staff, we should take into account the number of hours they put in their place of work. 

One thing, which has become so common today is that medical workers use government facilities at institutions of referral. For example, today if you go to a national referral hospital like Mulago, you will only go there to make an appointment and you will be referred to a particular doctor in his private facility.
 
So, we need to differentiate that much as the committee has come up to say that in the interest of the service and in order not to have exodus of medical personnel that those who are allowed to carry on with their private practice are continuously seen on payroll - I think that is a dis-service to this country because when we are talking about corruption, we are not only talking about monies that go missing. We are also talking in terms of the input, the time factor that a medical worker should be able to put in his place of work. 

The second issue is that of ambulance services. Ambulance services in this country have remained a thorn in our flesh. There are many patients whose lives otherwise would have been saved, but they end up dying because of lack of swift and suitable transport to take these sick people to the nearest place where they can get attention. 

You find in medical units ambulances are there in name but at the end of the day, you are again asking the poor peasants who cannot even afford to raise a litre or two of diesel in these vehicles that, “If you have a patient, please, first fuel the vehicle.” Surely, isn’t that adding insult to injury? Let Government come up with a meaningful insurance policy in the area of health so that a person who really falls sick knows that in one way or another he or she will be helped through ambulance services to be delivered in the nearest medical unit. 

The third issue, which is a concern that has been raised by the committee is the fact that district referral hospitals are being crowded as a result of acting as the first call of reference. Why is this happening? This is majorly happening because although Government in its own wisdom thought creating and building health centres II and III will be able to help in that regard, the truth of the matter on the ground is that these are white elephants. You go to a health centre II, you will be lucky if you find a nursing assistant who is able to give you Aspirin or Panadol when you are complaining of headache even if the real cause is malaria; you will be lucky. So, the issue is, let us not cry about these structures which are seen mushrooming in the countryside. Let us be concerned. (Member timed out.)

3.32
MS SARAH KAYAGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Manafwa): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. I will address myself to the vaccination for Hepatitis B. The way we are handling this problem is actually accelerating it and making it worse. When we visited West Nile, health workers had been vaccinated once. They were given one dose and yet, they are supposed to be given three dosses. By the time they come to give the second dose, the first dose is already expired and that has been put to waste. 

Secondly, they only consider the health workers who are employed in those hospitals but some of these referral hospitals, we send our students who are doing health courses to do their practicals from there and these students are not considered. There have been reports that some of these students succumb to this problem and some of them end up dying. My proposal is, the Ministry of Health should work together with the teaching institutions so that these students, before they are deployed to these hospitals, are vaccinated against Hepatitis B. 

Thirdly, is the issue of the workers who are being paid by the donors; health workers who are on government payroll are always demoralised when the health workers who are paid by the donors earn more money and yet, work fewer days than those who are being paid by Government. 

On the issue of HIV, we lack youth-friendly services in our country where you find the young children below the age of 18, 15 and 12 are accepting ART services together with their parents, together with the elders. You find a small boy of 13, 14 years lining and sitting together with their mothers, uncles and grandparents.  

This has stigmatised children and some of them have run away and never returned to receive their treatment. I propose that Government should come in to create youth- friendly centres in all our health units to accommodate these young people and if resources are not yet available, we should create a specific day in a week to consider the young people in receiving their ART services. 

Lastly, is the issue of the ambulances. This has put a lot of pressure on Members of Parliament. (Member timed out.)

3.35
MR INNOCENT OULA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good job they have done. On the ambulance, I would like to go straight to the issues. Proposal, let the Ministry of Health produce the sustainability plan for managing the ambulances at sub-counties and district levels by decentralising money for fuel. That is the first point. Secondly, ensure sustainability through maintenance of those ambulances.

Three, VHTs are doing a wonderful job. Recently, in Apal, two women produced and they died because the cord got stuck. Apal to Lacor hospital is about 46 Kms and by the time these ladies ran on a bicycle to reach there they were dead.

So, if fuel distribution is decentralised, this problem can be solved. Let them give Shs 20,000 motivation fees to these VHTs, the reason Mulago is congested – I talked to the medical team; the regional referral centres have no operational capability and if the capabilities are there, they are being underutilised and patients from the referral centres are coming to Mulago and that is why the situation is bad. Mulago is congested.

I therefore appeal for the regional centres to be operational to reduce the burden on Mulago Hospital. Thank you.

3.37
MR PETER LOKII (NRM, Jie County, Kotido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the committee for a good report.

Mr Speaker, on the question of ambulances, must it be a vehicle? This is because in the case of Kotido, every time there is an ambulance, it is the district chairman who uses it to attend workshops. (Laughter) So, must an ambulance be a vehicle?

I want to propose that for the rural areas and in order to support the VHTs, let ambulances be popularised in the name of these motorcycles with three wheels. These should be able to help because in terms of the fuel cost, you do not need to raise a loose minute of Shs 500,000. Just Shs 10,000 can be able to move - (Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, my dear brother, for giving way. Mr Speaker, the information I want to give is that technically, tricycles are vehicles. 

MR LOKII: Okay, but I am talking of the ease of maintenance, the cost and the ability to be able to keep it within a village setting. I think it is important that we think of something that can go down to the people. 

This raises the question of the regional hospitals. It is like the regional hospitals are the catch point for everyone. Nobody wants to go to the health centre IV in Kotido; they want to go to Lira Regional Referral Hospital. So, why don’t we strengthen the district hospital so that the cases that can be dealt with at the district level are dealt with at that level? I want to raise a question, what is the impact of the Shs 2.5 million we give the doctors to work at health centres IV? I think that also needs to be evaluated so that we see whether we are really making progress or not.

The second question is that of drugs, which has been raised by the committee. Must National Medical Stores be in Entebbe? Can’t we have a branch in Gulu like we have a branch of Bank of Uganda? Can’t we have a branch in Mbale so that when the drugs are over, we are able to access them easily? Why should everybody wait for Entebbe? If distance is the problem or if the cost of operations is the problem, that could be cut down by bringing these services a little nearer to the people but the question of lack of drugs remains outstanding. 

How much of these drugs does National Medical Stores give to the district health units, for example? This is because in Kotido, Health Centre IV, I always witness drugs being brought. They are brought for a quarter but before three weeks are over, the drugs are finished. The question is, who swallows these drugs? Are all the drugs that are brought swallowed? Do they find their way elsewhere? I think we need to think of something. The other one –(Member timed out.)

3.40
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. In its conclusion, the committee states that a lot still needs to be done in the health sector. I would like to entirely agree with the committee. What is represented by Lira, Oyam and Gulu is actually the situation obtaining in the entire country. A health system that is unable to move patients from where they are to the health unit is a dead health system. 

In our country, today, I really sympathise with Members of Parliament who have substituted the role of Government in providing ambulances. They have faced the brunt of procuring an ambulance, maintaining it and running it and you will agree that this is not the role of a Member of Parliament. We are forced to do this because we feel for our people.

I would like to urge Government to immediately revitalise the ambulance system by providing the ambulances, providing fuel for them and providing maintenance so that we may be proud of an ambulance system.

The other issue I would like to challenge Government on is whether there is health planning in this country. The example that the committee brought out; the ICU in Lira that was constructed at a colossal amount of money is just sitting there unutilised - what is the problem? No oxygen supply. 

The other problem is no supplies. This tells a lot about the inefficiencies in Government. Before setting up a unit like this - and I think it was probably out of a loan - we should have known how this unit would be run. We should have identified the personnel to run this unit. But the government has failed to put all this in place.

Finally, Mr Speaker, it is a long time since IRS was carried out in this country and it was conducted in model districts. Trials were done in a number of districts in the North and North East. This IRS stopped at that level and it has never been heard of.

The chemical that is used in IRS lasts for just a certain period of time. And so –(Member timed out.)

3.43
MR JULIUS MAGANDA (Independent, Samia Bugwe County South, Busia): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for this wonderful report and the recommendations that they have come up with. This report is just a sample from Gulu and Lira but you will find that all the outcomes from their findings capture the entire country.

One question I would like to raise to Government and especially to the Minister of Health, who is with us right now is; who is supervising and monitoring all these programmes that are channelled through the ministry? I wonder whether the minister is paying attention.

There is one thing that I have come to realise and it is that Government has come up with mitigating areas where they try to support communities through engaging with the private health operators; either private clinics or hospitals and there is money, which is sent to those health centres. The problem is whether there is a monitoring mechanism to see whether these private health centres have anything that is reduced on the cost of accessing medical services. 

This is a very big problem because this money is taken through primary health care. If we really see that there is no value for money, we would rather have this money returned to Government to support other government programmes that are needed at health centres II, III and IV. These can be enhanced and we get value for money, which can be directly felt by the people who are working for Government.

Another issue is this push system on the acquisition of drugs to health centres. The problem is that there have never been enough drugs mobilised and when the requisition is made from the national drug stores, there are not enough drugs at the district level or the health centre. The problem comes if Government is unable to mobilise enough drugs within its stores and I would really encourage the minister to have these programmes run at regional centres. 

In addition, we should allow private players within the market so that we do not limit the districts to accessing drugs strictly within the government system. Rather, they should also be able to get these drugs through private operators so that we have enough at the district level. (Member timed out.)

3.46
MR ODO TAYEBWA (FDC, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a very nice report from the committee. Even if it has visited the three districts of Lira, Oyam and Gulu, it has touched all the issues affecting the whole nation. Take, for example, the issue of reduction in human resource; last year, we increased the salaries for doctors and other health staff but then, you can now see there is a reduction in human resource in some of these health centres. I believe that there are some pertinent factors that we did not talk about. For example, in my constituency where we have Bushenyi Health Centre IV, we are supposed to have two doctors, but we do not have accommodation for staff. I believe that much as we are increasing the salaries, some facilities like accommodation for these staff members should also be put in place because if a doctor or a nurse is to do his or her duties very well, he or she should reside at that station. It is a big challenge that when someone is not residing at that station, they will not perform the duties that they are supposed to do as doctors or nurses.

I went to Sri Lanka last year when I was a member of the Committee on Health. We found that doctors are easily retained because there are some incentives that are given like postgraduate studies. If you are a nurse and you are a diploma holder, then you are assured of studying for a degree on government sponsorship. If you are a doctor, then you go for masters on government sponsorship and so on. Some of these incentives are very necessary to retain these doctors and nurses at our health centres because health is very important for our people.

When you look at VHTs, these people are just working on voluntary basis and giving them only bicycles is not enough. These VHT’s should be given at least some remuneration per month because they do a lot of work in sensitising people when there are government programmes and also in helping some of these sick people to be referred. So, it is very important that Government comes up with a comprehensive programmme on health and not just looking at salaries. 

Research should be undertaken because we are helping some health centre NGOs by giving them some funds but you find –(Member timed out.)

3.00
MS SARAH NYIRABASHITSI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good report. I have some issues to raise.

First, surely, these doctors who work in the government hospitals and own their private hospitals, don’t you think they are playing double standards in one way or another? In the private clinic, you will find there are problems and our people will be dying there because he will be concentrating in the government hospital or the other way round. 

So, as a committee, you should have come up with a recommendation and something should be done on this because it is a big problem not only in Oyam and Lira but countrywide.

Secondly, I agree that we should revamp the local government health monitoring and supervision structures because that way we will be able to fight the herbalists and those other people who say they are doctors when they are not. If we do not carry out the monitoring and supervision, it is very hard especially for the health centres that are far from the trading centres or from town. So, it is important that we revamp this sector.

On the issue of ambulances, surely, I think most people have talked about it but much as they will give us these ambulances, some of us do not have roads where these ambulances will pass. It is very painful by the way. If you took an ambulance to Mugahinga National Park – supposing a tourist got a problem while there - you have nowhere to pass because the road is not there. Much as we are crying for the ambulances - we need them – and if I was appointed a Minister for Health, I think that I would make sure all these hard to reach areas get ambulances. (Laughter) 

On the issue of primary health care, much as they put the money to the district, I think that even town councils should be considered to get these funds for primary health care.

Finally, on the blood collection centres, I saw a very bad situation when we had the war in Congo and there were very many people who were coming to Kisoro who were hurt. We had to move all the way to Mbarara to look for blood. Something has to be done to bring it closer. They said that they were bringing it to Kabale but it is still far from Kisoro; so, something has to be done. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.53
MS CHRISTINE ACAYO (NRM, Woman Representative, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion and I would like to commend the committee for the comprehensive report. I agree with the committee that the stock-out of drugs is not only in the districts of Oyam, Lira and Gulu but also in my district, it is very common. One of the reasons that I found out for the stock-out of drugs is late deliveries of drugs. UWOPA has been to the National Medical Stores and we were briefed on how deliveries are done. We were told that it is delivered every two months but of late, two months elapse and the National Medical Stores fail to deliver the drugs on time.

This is a serious issue and I think that the Minister for Health has to tell this House what he is going to do to address this issue because they have been in the know that drugs are delivered every two months but on the ground, that is not the situation and something must be done to avert that problem.

I would like to agree with the committee that when you move around in the districts of Lira, Oyam and Gulu, you really see this infrastructure in the health centres; the staff houses are there, health centres have been constructed through PRDP – even in my district, this infrastructure is there but most of this infrastructure remains a white elephant. Much as Government has made effort to recruit health workers, the issue of health workers continues to remain a problem and it affects service delivery. 

It is only recently and you watched on television how in Pader, a health centre closed because the only health worker was going on maternity leave –(Interjections)- sorry, in Kitgum, the health centre had to close. 

I am proposing a policy shift. Here in Uganda, we have classrooms and health centres being constructed but we do not cater for the equipment and staff of that very facility that is being constructed. I am proposing that we should have a policy where every budget that we pass for construction of a health centre or classroom, there must also be a budget for the manpower and for the equipment. Otherwise, we can spend billions on the facilities but they remain white elephants and do not enhance health service delivery.

Lastly, on Hepatitis B, I would like to agree with the committee that we need to scale up sensitisation. This problem is actually bigger than the statistics we are seeing. On the ground, we see very many people being buried and on the medical form, they have written, “Hepatitis B.” So, we need to scale up. (Member timed out.)

3.57
MS CONNIE NAKAYENZE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for the work well done. However, I have a few concerns.

The first one is on nursing assistants. It is true in the report that the nursing assistants still exist in some health facilities. And they recommended that they could go for further studies in order to upgrade to the required level. However, I would like the House to note that there are still institutions that produce nursing assistants. If the ministry is not aware, let them be informed and do something about it. As long as they are passing out, they will continue being a problem.

Secondly, I would like to react to the National Medical Stores regarding the stock-outs of drugs. A few months ago, we were in Busia and we discovered that there were some drugs which were not there. When I called NMS, a gentleman told me that the medicines were available. But I wish to inform this House that it seems that NMS stocks the drugs at their headquarters but sends very little to the facilities. That is why when we call them, they say the drugs are there and yet they send out less. A case in point is when they told us that they needed 1,000 doses but they were sent only 300. Moreover, on the sheet it is recorded that “100 per cent fulfilled”. So, something must be done to investigate NMS so that they do things right.

On VHTs, like the committee mentioned, they really do a commendable job. But unfortunately, being volunteers, they are constrained by certain things. Like the case in Mbale, many of them move through bad terrains and on bare feet. Besides remuneration being given to them as a motivation, could these people be availed gumboots and umbrellas? This is because many times they have asked me to do and on a few occasions, I have bought for a few. But most of them are suffering and yet the Ministry of Health is not considering them despite them playing a very vital role that is saving many lives and sensitising as well as educating the communities. So, if this is done, I think we shall see health improvements in our villages. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.59
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We thank the committee for its work. However, I will start with the issue of the Nodding Disease Syndrome; the committee said that it is under control in Gulu. My question is: How are we controlling the syndrome while we do not know the cause of the disease?

As you are aware, in Gulu District, in Odek – your constituency, is where an NGO, Hope for Human has created a home and that is where, with the help of that neuro-surgeon doctor from the US, they are trying to contain the symptoms of the disease. 

However, I wish to inform you that I just returned last night from Kitgum and yesterday but one, I visited children with the Nodding Disease Syndrome with another group of doctors. The situation is escalating; the worst is that we have those children who have been raped and now, we have the so-called “grandchildren” of Nodding Disease Syndrome whose status is not established and whose help is not anywhere near the government programme. The grandparents are suffering looking after their own raped daughters and grandchildren. We saw this and we shed tears.

I would like to recommend to the committee that you include it as a recommendation that Government comes to this House with a comprehensive status report on the Nodding Disease Syndrome. This is because I am aware that a lot of research is going on undercover and the cause of the syndrome is not yet established. So, we cannot say scientifically that the situation has been brought under control when we do not know the cause.

In the report, I have also seen that specialised health workers in Northern Uganda are not recognised and neither are they on the payroll or getting any facilitation; that is from the report. And yet, this House is puzzled with payment to the ghost workers who cannot be traced. Then you wonder whether it is deliberate or it is an oversight. Why should we pay ghosts and leave out the specialised health workers who are doing their work? This gap needs to be narrowed and addressed with immediate effect.

I would also like to report to the House that the issue of IRS in Northern Uganda, particularly Kitgum District, people are still sceptical about allowing it. My house was sprayed early morning yesterday but many people have shunned it. I think we need a bit of sensitisation – (Member timed out.)

4.03
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH (Dr Michael Bayigga) Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am speaking as the Shadow Minister for Health and the only minister for health in this House. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, aren’t you member of the committee?

DR BAYIGGA: Yes, but I am speaking as Shadow Minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no. You know the rules. Let us hear from Kigulu. At least, you have introduced yourself, that is good enough. (Laughter)

4.04
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the committee for the good report. I will start with the establishment of a blood bank in Lira. I agree with the committee and say that most of us are blood donors but we find problems upcountry but fail to get blood in most of these health centres and yet, it is here in Nakasero. It is really unfair. So, I agree with the committee’s recommendation that we establish a blood bank in Lira. However, it should not be only in Lira but rather in all regional referral hospitals. This will save us from trailing from either Lira or Jinja up to Nakasero to pick blood. (Dr Bayigga rose_) Please, hon. Minister, please bear with me. That is to do with the blood bank.

The other one is to do with the ambulance system. When a colleague talked of having tricycles working as ambulances, I sympathised with the people of Mayuge who are in the islands, people of Namayingo and those of Alebtong. Given the roads we have, if you use a tricycle, by the time someone is delivered to Jinja or Lira, they will be no more. So, I think as we push for the streamlining of the ambulance system, it is not fair to keep four ambulances based in Lira or Jinja or Gulu when a district hospital does not have any. By the time a patient is delivered from a health centre III to the regional referral hospital, they could have passed on. So, I pray that we decentralise the ambulance system to reach out to the marginalised communities.

The other issue is to do with re-training and training of nursing assistants. Last year, I was happy when the health training institutions considered nursing assistants who were trainable for admission in training institutions. I think that is the way to go because some of these people are committing a lot of time and effort to treat our people. Training them is one way of recognising and appreciating their effort. In that regard, I agree with the committee that they should be retrained.

On the issue of indoor residue spraying, I want to appeal to Government that we roll out this exercise to all districts in the country. This time, even hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi who used to be a stumbling block has toned down. Now that he is with us and Government, let us go full blast to save the money we are spending on malaria. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.07
MR STANLEY OMWONYA (NRM, Okoro County, Zombo): Thank you, Mr Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we should draw to a close, unless we are going to change the time to two minutes.

MR OMWONYA: Mr Speaker, I also would like to add my voice to that of other Members in appreciating the chairperson and members of the committee for doing a thorough job.

I have one or two issues to raise. One is about the staffing of health centres. It is true health centres III are supposed to have 19 staff but recently, when I visited some of the health centres III in my constituency, I found out that these centres are heavily understaffed. Instead of each of them having 19 staff, there are only 10 or even less, and yet nurses and other medical staff are undergoing training. It is unfortunate that those who are trained are never employed by Government. This is a very serious matter and I think Government should come up with a deliberate policy of ensuring that nurses and other medical staff who are trained are employed by Government.

Two, Mr Speaker, let me talk about the upgrading of health centres III to health centres IV. I agree with the committee report that Government comes up with a clear policy on how this upgrading is going to done. In my constituency, for example, we have only Nyapeya Hospital, which is being run by the missionaries. (Member timed out.)

4.09
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues in thanking the committee for a very good report. I have some observations to make. 

The committee mentioned absenteeism and late-coming. This calls for more effort from the monitoring and inspectorate department of the Ministry of Health, to ensure they observe this issue, which has far reaching consequences on the users of our health facilities.

Secondly, Members have talked about the supply of drugs. It is true the supply has increased, but there is still a problem of supplying drugs to some health centres, which are not requested for. This is a matter that the people at the National Medical Stores should investigate; they should supply only those drugs requested for by the various health centres.

Thirdly, we have talked about issues concerning these health facilities but there is a problem of nutrition. We need Parliament to come up with a report in respect to nutrition. My district, Bushenyi, has been mentioned as one of the places, which are affected by malnutrition and yet we are the food basket of this country. If we get a report on malnutrition and discuss it, we shall be able to find out which other places are affected by malnutrition.

Mr Speaker, Members have also talked about village health teams. It is true they are doing commendable work, but the inspectorate department of the Ministry of Health should do some follow-ups. In some instances, some of these teams have turned out to be senior health officers – (Member timed out.)

4.12
MR HATWIB KATOTO (NRM, Katerera County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will begin by lamenting. I do not know whether we are being punished because the President comes from our region. When you visit some of the health centres in our areas, the situation is appalling –(Interjections)– my area is Katerera County, Rubirizi District. (Laughter) Doctors and nurses are paid but they are permanently not at these health centres; for example, there is a health centre in Munyonyi, Katanda Sub County. Should we increase the pay and train other nurses when those already employed are not working? For sure, we are being unfair to this country.

Mr Speaker, there are these village health teams. These teams are doing a commendable job because they move from house to house. However, they are not being paid and this sometimes discourages them. I remember at one time I had to meet them. They told me they had been given bicycles which are now old and yet they are not being paid, yet they are assisting fellow Ugandans. I think we should consider the plight of these people who do a lot of work.

Despite the labeling of the drugs, drugs are being sold in shops but with nothing being done about that. Since the time Ministry of Health started an operation to arrest those who sell labeled drugs, I have never seen any of the culprits being committed to prison. So, what should we do? For the last 10 years, I have not heard of someone being convicted. You can imagine one person stealing drugs that can treat 1000 people who die because of lack of drugs. You here can afford to buy medicines for yourselves but there are many people out there who cannot afford medicine. (Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, the future Hansard readers may find a problem when they read the Hansard of today and they come across the question that our colleague asked: “Are we being punished because the President comes from our region?” The readers will want to know who was punishing whom and why. So, may I seek clarification from hon. Katoto on who is punishing his region?

MR KATOTO: It is Ministry of Health and some other social workers or public servants together with our ministers who do not consider our region. When I move to other regions, you find they have several doctors and nurses but in our areas, you find that we do not have even one or any qualified doctor. (Interjections) (Laughter) So, that is why I am saying that we are being punished.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand on a point of order. The honourable colleague holding the Floor is insinuating that the Minister of Health, who, fortunately, also comes from the west is the very one who is punishing his own area. 

Is the honourable colleague in order to put the integrity of the honourable Dr Ruhakana Rugunda, who is actually from the west, to question insinuating that he intends to even punish His Excellency the President of this country? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member was expressing himself.

MR KATOTO: Thank you for your wise ruling, Mr Speaker. I am telling you it is not a joke. When you go to Northern Uganda, you find that things are okay, but when you go to Katerera. (Laughter) (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you should know that this is the close now.

4.16
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. From the onset, I would like to observe that actually this does not sound like a health unit. Because a health centre or a hospital for that matter without a latrine where a visitor must help himself and there are people who are sleeping there being admitted and said to be treated in that environment is appalling. I think this is not a hospital. 

I share the sentiments that Members have expressed in this place. Going through the health centres in my district, I noticed that there is total lack of supervision. The only health centre IV, which we have in Soroti District had a doctor who was supposed to be a resident doctor but was never there for three years because he was at school and he was earning salary and the DHO seemed to be helpless. He could not do anything about it. So, I think the Ministry of Health has to step up its supervisory role and make sure that these people perform. 

The other issue is about the accommodation of the doctors. Many of these places do not have accommodation; where there is accommodation the doctors opt to surrender it to the junior staff, for example, the nurses. So, you find that the doctors are not able to be accessible at the time they are needed. 

Finally, I want to come back to this House; it is good that we are expressing such passion about the health condition of our people, but we are the people who have the authority to appropriate money to make these conditions better. But what do we do as a House? Whenever the supplementary comes, we are dishing money to State House. Recently - my colleagues can testify - we have gone out to popularise the Kyankwanzi revolution. How much money went in there? Shs 4.5 billion! What could it have done in the health sector? (Interruption)

MR KATOTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is the hon. Member of Parliament in order to insinuate that we use Government money for Kyankwanzi Resolution when we actually contribute every month towards our resolution? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I am not aware of any vote that has been passed by this House to facilitate the operations of a political party, for example, NRM. So, I cannot attribute that to any factual issue that has happened to this House unless any Member has information that this House passed Shs 4 billion for the operations of NRM as a political party. So, let us leave that at that.

I will have the Leader of the Opposition.

4.20
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the committee for the very resourceful report and the committee is specific about the areas they visited but the debate is about the usual things we have said in this House over and over again. If you played this tape, and the previous tapes, we talk about the same things; we only give examples about hospitals in our localities; they are the same problems. 

Some time back, I was in a committee which visited hospitals in the central and eastern regions under the office of the LOP. The report that was written was tabled here, I think a month ago or sometime last year by the Shadow Minister for Health and things in these hospitals are the same. 

The problems are basically the same, the decay is the same. The point is; why do we keep talking about the same things over and over and nothing is done?
 
Since I became Leader of Opposition, I discovered that actually the Clerk extracts most of the things we agree on here and forwards them to the government but nothing is done. 

In our laws, we are supposed to have what we call Treasury Memoranda where Government comes to us and explains or says, “We have done this, we have not done this” for whatever reasons. Government never does that but we continue sitting here and lamenting while we should be obliging Government to come back regularly and tell us what they have done on the issues we raise in this House. Take the NMS, for example, when in the long run we discovered it is a major problem. NMS is a major problem for two things – (interruption)

MR MULIMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The only sector which has no eyes in respect to a political party, in respect to areas, in respect to regions, which unites us all is health. I have looked at this report; although the sample frame was only three districts, the findings are a representative of the whole nation. I was wondering why the committee did not make reference to the strategic plan under implementation today.

I agree with you, things were as bad as they are now a few years ago before Government came up with what we call “Health Sector Strategic Plan (HSSP).” The information I wanted to give you is that, the committee has given us an evaluation of the HSSP and I think the rating is that we are operating far below average. Things were bad when we did not have the HSSP; we now have it and nothing is going on well. That is the information I wanted to pass on.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much for the information. I was saying the National Medical Stores - we were shown by all hospitals where we went. We went to about 22 hospitals and the NMS is a monopoly. All the money for medicine is not sent to the ministry or hospitals. It is sent to the NMS and they are a monopoly. When it is time for them to send medicine, they send at any time they feel like. Sometimes they may send medicine, which is not needed in those hospitals. 

Their medicine is more expensive than, for instance, medicine from the Joint Christian Medical Stores in Nsambya. The medical people were asking why we don’t destroy the monopoly of the National Medical Stores so that hospitals can also buy from a competitor. Parliament must change that law that we are discussing - and we want to dismantle NAADS. We must dismantle the policy on National Medical Stores –(Interruption) 

MR MUKITALE: This is the first time I am giving information to my good friend as the LOP. Mr Speaker, the review of the health delivery system in medical stores has come a long way. I was in the private sector under the Uganda medical programme when we still had Central Medical Stores. I worked in medical stores and we made those proposals to make some of those reforms. The challenges under budgets going to hospitals and districts were even more. I would like to encourage members that we take a quick study of where we have come from and actually, as Chairman Committee on National Economy, in the previous years, we recommended decentralising other government purchases to standards, quality and good prices. There is a bigger gain in us procuring those drugs and branding them the way we are doing. 

However, the challenge you are talking about where every district health officers and every hospital person wants to be a buyer is a bad procurement practice and is too expensive for Government. Moreover, we would not be very sure of the drug quality. 

I would like to plead with the House, kindly do not revert that. Instead, let us find what improvements we can make to that arrangement. You get the best price because you are buying in big quantities or making a bulk purchase. Actually for us who studied the system of the push and shove, it is the failure of the end users who fail to order online in time for what they need and it is an area we can discuss.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much for the information although I do not agree with it -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Information from Obongi.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and my senior Leader of the Opposition. The information I would like to give is about equipment. We pay attention to medical supplies in terms of drugs but there is also an important element of equipment. The Joint Medical Stores, which my Leader of the Opposition mentioned, needs to be considered seriously because they are doing a good job in the maintenance of equipment.

I went to Moyo Hospital, I moved in all the health centres in Obongi, I went to the director health services, I came to Arua Regional Referral Hospital and found large quantities of equipment that were not working and the government facilities or the government framework for maintenance for this equipment is very sickening. Many of the problems we have are due to the fact that we do not have technicians in our staff lists. We need to revise the staff list. If you go to a health centre, you will ask for doctors or nurses but not biomedical engineers. Technicians are required even at health centre IVs and other health facilities. I thank the Joint Medical Stores; please recognise and support them.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much, hon. Fungaroo. We visited Atuturu Hospital in Kumi where the National Medical Stores supplied diagnostic equipment and a wrong paper. After two years, they had not changed that paper so the machine was there redundant and the paper was also there in the store. That monopoly is definitely not good for this country. I think we should decentralise or set up regional national medical stores. Let somebody from Kaabong collect medicine from Soroti or Mbale not from Entebbe because when somebody is dying, you cannot wait. You need medicine there and then so -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do they take medicine from Entebbe or does the National Medical Stores supply to the various places?

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Speaker, the district orders and then National Medical Stores delivers the medicine from Entebbe all the way to the district. So I think we should consider this and give Joint Medical Stores, the Christian one, an opportunity to serve and supplement the work of the National Medical Stores.

The other point is the issue of malaria and nets. Nets were distributed but I do not know whether all MPs got the nets distributed in their districts. At least my district has not got any and there are also some districts, which never got those nets which were being distributed; the 20 or 22 million nets.

Lastly, when I was growing up in Samia-Bugwe South, our small medical facility had an ambulance in the 60s and that ambulance never collapsed. It was always there at Lumino. Today even the hospital does not have an ambulance and there are many hospitals without ambulances. If we cannot manage those expensive ambulances, maybe the idea of our hon. Member from Jie should be considered. We could have these tricycle ambulances maintained by the community under the leadership of the VHT and I think they would work. As long as you give those pikipikis or motorcycles to the community, they will maintain them and the VHT would be in charge and we would have solved a lot of problems because we have failed to maintain ambulances –(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the LOP for giving me the way. I would like to give information to the Leader of the Opposition that two years ago, Government bought two ambulances for Amuru district local government and the ambulances were used for less than three months. One of them has only a tyre missing and the district cannot afford to buy only a tyre for the ambulance. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, the government needs to streamline how ambulances are supposed to be used because sometimes it is the negligence of the district local government. District local governments have got budgets for car maintenance and servicing and we cannot expect the central government to go and maintain the vehicles supplied to the districts. Let the districts streamline and take care and control of their ambulances. Thank you and this is the information I wanted to give to you.

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and the Leader of the Opposition for giving me this chance to give further information. Mr Speaker, this situation is not going to change and the issue which my brother here has raised cannot be blamed on the local governments because the primary health care budget has even dwindled. 

The gap between what should be expected - Shs 63 billion is not going to be met even in the next year’s budget. According to the budget framework paper, only Shs 15 billion is being provided. Therefore, do not expect any increment in activity or more expenditure in terms of repairing ambulances or even buying tricycle ambulances. It cannot happen because what they have is even compromised in respect of what we are expecting.

Actually, even the budget for Health has dwindled to 6.2 percent down from 6.8 percent of the national resources that we are going to spend. So we are going to continue to lament and I implore my brothers and sisters in Parliament to cry plasma quickly so that the tears can dry and then we work. Thank you very much. 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you, I am finalising and I am not accepting hon. Fungaroo’s information. I mentioned the VHTs. My mother refers to the VHTs as doctors but the VHTs are supposed to be for preventive medicine. I think if need be, the ministry should consider training one VHT per village who is a paramedical and the others can be support staff. Otherwise some of them are now pretending to be nurses in the villages and this is a serious matter - (Interjection) - sorry, I am not accepting information.

Finally, I want to urge the chairman of the committee to consider the proposals that I have made as they might help in your report. Thank you very much.

DR OMONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I want to thank the Members of the House for the in-depth consideration and appreciation of the report that was presented to the House. Let me respond to a few issues raised by colleagues that concern the committee. First of all, I want to appreciate hon. Mulimba who I think is not here. All this that you are talking about is checking against the implementation of the health sector strategic plan and we just did have to mention it because making all these references here with figures, we would have a very huge volume of the report. 

I also want to thank the Leader of the Opposition for the concerns raised. First of all, I want to thank you for the special report tabled to the House and indeed this report has been referred to our Committee on Health and we are going to do due justice on this report and look at what is on the ground and report to this House on what we see on the ground vis-à-vis those highlighted in that report. We have found that report very useful to us. 

On the National Medical Stores, what we know as a committee is that it was established under a review of how supplies in this sector would be implemented and I want to assure you as a committee that we have found that this institution - the National Medical Stores - has actually done a lot. What this House can do to help the National Medical Stores probably is to look at their operations and revise them but also give them more money to buy more drugs. They cannot supply what they cannot afford. They supply from what this House supplies to their vote. I think that it is important because sometimes they may give the supplies in time but only supply according to their pace - (Interruption)

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Speaker, you will notice in that report that in all hospitals, the medical officers told us that most of their money remains. They will have a budget of Shs 100 million and they get supplies of Shs 60 million or Shs 70 million. So, the balance of Shs 40 million remains in the National Medical Stores. They do not know whether that money is returned to the ministry or it is kept by the medical stores. So, it is not a question of money but of supply and theft if the medicine has arrived. 

MS ONGOM: Thank you so much. Additional information on the medical stores is that when we go to our health centres and hospitals, they say that they request for drugs in time but the medical stores push to them what they had not put in their requisition because there is a detailed requisition of whatever items they need but at the end of it all, they are given maybe condoms or others that they have not requested for. So, you end up finding that the hospital or health centre has got no drugs simply because they have given them what they had not requested for. So, this needs to be clarified.

DR OMONA: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. The issues that you are raising are true that we also find in these facilities. I will ask the front bench here which I am not part of but I am just seated here –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, you need to wind up.

DR OMONA: - to report on the question of release of funds. Sometimes, their releases delay and therefore also affect the supplies from the National Medical Stores. I hope that the minister will respond to this.

Then maybe on what hon. Asamo raised on the question of the challenges of patients, our committee was not able to pick out all the challenges but we took it that the challenges facing the sector are ultimately consumed by the patients. So, all these challenges are surely challenges of the patient.

Mr Speaker, I want the House to seriously consider the amendment proposed by hon. Beatrice Anywar that we include that Government comes to this House with a comprehensive report on the status of the Nodding Syndrome in Northern Uganda. I think that our committee will warmly take that recommendation.

Mr Speaker, with this, I want to thank the House for supporting and enriching our report with these observations and recommendations. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is there any statement from the Government? If not, we process the report as it is. Hon. Members, the motion is for the adoption of the report by the Committee on Health and its findings from the oversight field visit to Lira, Oyam and Gulu districts. It has made findings and recommendations for the adoption of the House in their report. I am now open to any suggestions or improvement. There has been an improvement that has been agreed upon by the chairperson and that is on the comprehensive report on the status of Nodding Syndrome in Northern Uganda. The Member for Serere District.

MS ALASO: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to propose an amendment and additional recommendation under the proposal for the National Medical Stores drug supply – that segment there. The amendment that I wish to propose is that Parliament – subject to improvement but this is the drafting - calls for an urgent review of the operations of the National Medical Stores with a view to addressing delays in supplies, dealing with monopolistic tendencies and reviewing performance in regard to funds released to NMS against the releases of drugs. That is just the thought process. 

The debate about the performance of the National Medical Stores is something that this House has had for the last probably 10 or so years, including the proposal that the drugs be pushed to health facilities but that has not cured it. Hon. Mukitale said that at the health facilities, the money will be stolen, at NMS, the maximum the health facilities get is up to probably up to 60 percent of the money we vote for here. So, there is still a huge problem and that is why I am proposing this review. I was even wondering whether the committee itself would do that for us and interact with medical stores, the entities that they supply to against the budget that we will have released here so that we come up with a very informed decision. Even the question of monopolistic tendencies – I think inadvertently, we actually created a monopoly in NMS which is now becoming too difficult for us to work with and that is the reason that I make this proposal. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the National Medical Stores is a Government institution and so you cannot call it a monopoly. It is the only Government institution supplying drugs and so, it is not a monopoly because it is by law doing what it is doing – it is a department of Government; unless you also think that the Ministry of Defence is a monopoly because it is a Government institution and so you cannot call it a monopoly. 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I said monopolistic tendencies. I just talked about tendencies because as we talk, there is almost no leverage for health facilities to acquire medicines elsewhere. So, we are stuck with a situation where if the National Medical Stores cannot deliver the drugs, even if we voted money, even if they choose to deliver only 50 percent, we are stuck with dying people.

So, what I am thinking of is that in their usual conduct of operations, they are bringing in the tendencies of the absence of competition. Yes, we did not want competition but it is costing us heavily and if we review and look at it, we may propose to them some cures or moderation of sort.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Hon. Members, what is being proposed is a complete area of its own. Can it be contained in this report of the same committee or should we when we adopt their report, make a specific request which I will direct from the chair that they should interact with the National Medical Stores and present a report here on what is happening there – all those issues that you have raised so that it does not become part of this thing because it is a standalone issue? 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I take your guidance; I think it even gets more prominent if we do that. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I also think so. Let us take recommendations. I have no more guidance left on –(Laughter)

4.45
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the chairperson and his committee. However, to your recommendation No.6, I would like you to add: “Any affirmative action should be instituted to facilitate recruitment of bio-medical engineers and technicians to service and maintain the medical equipment such as ultrasound scans, solar panels and other small things in health centres.”

Mr Speaker, sometimes we blame the government when something has been done but for example, when you go to a health centre, you may find the whole system not working because of a nut. The doctor was trained to operate a human being and not a machine.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, when you talk of “bio-medical” engineers, would that not be limiting? What if you just talked of engineers and technicians? 

MR FUNGAROO: Yes, engineers and technicians. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

Lastly on this, we agree that technology is advancing but I was shocked to find a system procured with huge sums of money – a communication system based on a radio call – though we have mobile phones, radio calls are still essential especially in places where the network is not good and the military uses them. But all the health facilities in my district, including the Director of Health Services of Moyo - I came to Arua and they have a radio call system bought by the Ministry of Health but they were not working just because of battery problems or even a plug which they could not fix. Therefore, this Parliament should include on the staffing list technicians and engineers so that every health centre should have this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, the point is made. Would you like to respond?

DR OMONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will begin with hon. Fungaroo. About technicians in health facilities, I know that every region has a workshop which takes care of all these medical equipment – (Interjection) - they are supposed to. But whether they do it or not is not the issue we are debating here. 

Mr Speaker, by and large, I think I should take note that most fundamental – in addition to the debates we have had – is to include hon. Anywar’s recommendation to ours.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On the Nodding Syndrome and the issue of equipment technicians? I think it is also a valid point.

DR OMONA: Yes, this is equally important - (Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: The issue of the regional workshops is what I would like to clarify here. After I visited the regional workshop in Arua I was stuck; they did not have fuel to move around. And there are some on-spot small inconveniences. For example, if the generator – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Fungaroo, we have already agreed on putting that in the recommendation. So please, let us leave that for now.

DR OMONA: Mr Speaker, our committee will take the additional recommendation by hon. Fungaroo and the recommendation by hon. Anywar. And with those amendments, I now beg that this House – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we have another recommendation from Isingiro?

4.51
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to make a very humble recommendation in addition to what has been put across. One, the ambulance system is not good yet; we already have pick-ups - I do not think these are ambulances and even Government appreciates the fact that they are not actual ambulances. We should emphasise the fact that patients need to be taken – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the recommendation?

MR BYARUGABA: That a more appropriate ambulance in form of covered vehicles be purchased and not pick-ups. I am opposed to having pick-ups and we all continue saying that we have “ambulances” in health centre IVs and remember that this was an issue which was alluded to by one of the – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, there was a recommendation that the ambulance system should be reviewed; does that capture your point?

MR BYARUGABA: Yes, thank you.

DR OMONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. If the House may recall, in the previous ministerial policy statement, we have also hinted on having an appropriate ambulance system. The House may also wish to know that when you talk about an ambulance, it is not just a car or necessarily a bicycle but an entire system. In some places like Kigezi where there are too many hills for the vehicles to climb, you have the ekigagara which they use for carrying patients uphill. So, all these should be taken to mean the ambulance system. In some places, even boats are used. So I think the spirit of this is captured in our recommendation.

4.53
MR JOHN BAGOOLE (Independent, Luuka County, Luuka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On missing supplies, I want to add another recommendation that I think will be no.6 that: “All health management committees in all the health facilities in Uganda should ensure that doctors and health workers in hospitals and health centres should not run private drugs shops and clinics within a radius of 20 kilometres from the government facility.” My justification is that some doctors and health workers have been doing it deliberately not to include some drugs on their requisition orders to National Medical Stores because they want patients to go and buy from their clinics or drug shops. And they even recommend to patients those particular places.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am aware that you have ruled on the position of ministers being in this House but I am seeking your guidance because some of the information being aired out by some members is not correct but the Prime Minister is not bothered. Like, I know for a fact that these days the National Medical Stores requires procurement plans from all these health centres. So, the push down strategy does not even apply. But I see that they are not bothered yet this information is actually getting out on the Floor of the House on the basis of which we are making decisions. So, I wonder whether we are actually proceeding rightly without the responsible minister. Again, I know you already ruled on this matter. Some of this information can be – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member for Jinja Municipality East, this is not the right time to bring out that argument because we are concluding the debate.

DR OKUONZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to give information to my colleague here but also to the chairperson of the committee because eventually the committee will have to look at these suggestions. 

The information is about the dual-practice policy – because what he is talking about is about somebody who works in a government hospital and at the same time owns a private clinic –(Interjections)– it doesn’t matter where. It can be just next door or 20 kilometres away. I recall when I was still in the ministry – it is unfortunate the minister is not here but I think the chairperson may know something about this – there was a dual-practice policy which allowed health workers who are licensed to privately practice during their free time. That “free time” means that as a medical officer, you report on duty at 9.00 O’clock and knock off at 5.00 p.m. and you have the whole evening and night to do private practice. That was allowed and it didn’t include emergency calls because that is part of the service to be offered. And when you have a call usually in the evening or at night, the following day that medical officer is supposed to be free and they can make use of that free time for private practice because the money that they are given is usually not adequate. So, this was allowed at the Ministry of Health as part of a policy. So, I want to seek clarification and perhaps also give information for you to find out if this policy is still operational. If it is still there, then this recommendation has to be radically modified. Thank you.

DR OMONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I may inform colleagues that the proposal made by hon. Bagoole, which had also been proposed by hon. Nyirabashitsi about barring doctors from practicing in other facilities - indeed there is no law that ties a medical worker to strictly work for only public health facilities. When this proposal came back a few years ago, many health workers proposed opting out of public facilities because they think they can better use their free time to do other things. In this report, we have hinted that the health facilities should revitalize to ensure and monitor that work in their facilities goes on. So, what health workers do during their free time should not be our issue. But they can be monitored to ensure the time in which they are supposed to be at the health facilities is utilized productively. I think we should not take that recommendation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there is a proposal that has been accepted in regard to the issue of the Nodding Syndrome and that of the inclusion of technicians in the process of recruitment. Those are the amendments that have been captured. I now put the question for the adoption of the report as amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Second Deputy Prime Minister, are you rising on the same matter? No, we are going to next item, please.

5.00
GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Not on this report, Mr Speaker. I am only wondering about some comments from my colleagues. As Deputy Leader of Government Business in Parliament and Second Deputy Prime Minister, how should I behave in the House –(Laughter) - in order to please or to make the colleagues on the other side know that I am actually serious? How should I behave because it seems my presence offends some colleagues? Some of them said that I am not bothered. What should I do? Should I stand on my head to prove that I am serious? What is it? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Second Deputy Prime Minister, a point of order could have cured that kind of situation. But don’t worry. Thank you. Let us go to the next item.

Hon. Members, I have indicated that the chairperson of this committee, hon. Dr Omona, will go and interact with the National Medical Stores, present all the issues that have been generated in this debate and come back to Parliament with a more comprehensive response on this subject and dealings with the National Medical Stores on how it relates to drug supply to the country. So, we will give you a timeframe. How much time do you need to do this because we need that information urgently?

DR OMONA: Mr Speaker, I propose three weeks.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, we should get this information in three weeks’ time because you will just interact with the National Medical Stores. Okay in three weeks we should expect a report from the committee on this issue of national medical stores. Thank you.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have noticed that the frontbench of the Government side is again dwindling yet I had earlier on indicated that I would raise a matter of national importance. I am now seeking your guidance on whether I can quickly do that before the Government frontbench gets empty.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the issue you raised with me is very important. Can I suggest that you raise it tomorrow when all the people have been informed that this matter is coming up? Okay, let us take on the next item.

MOTION FOR THE PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE FOLLOWING REPORTS:

5 (1) FOURTH REPORT BY THE PAN-AFRICAN PARLIAMENT DELEGATION ON THE SEVENTH ORDINARY SESSION OF THE SECOND PARLIAMENT OF THE PAN AFRICAN PARLIAMENT HELD IN MIDRAND, SOUTH AFRICA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Sam Otada, it seems these issues are related. So, the idea is that you give a comprehensive presentation covering all the subjects and then we debate because if you are to segment them, it will not make a lot of sense, let alone using the time properly. So, we will call all the items under five and you present the reports sequentially on 1, 2, 3 and 4 before we open discussions. Just capture one by one and then we will conclude on that.

5 (2) THE FIFTH REPORT BY THE PAN AFRICAN PARLIAMENT DELEGATION ON THE PERMANENT COMMITTEE SESSION OF THE THIRD PARLIAMENT OF THE PAN AFRICAN PARLIAMENT HELD IN MIDRAND, SOUTH AFRICA FROM 22 TO 31 AUGUST, 2012

5 (3) THE SIXTH REPORT BY THE PAN AFRICAN PARLIAMENT DELEGATION ON THE FIRST ORDINARY SESSION OF THE THIRD PARLIAMENT OF THE PAN AFRICAN PARLIAMENT HELD IN MIDRAND, SOUTH AFRICA FROM 3TO 20 OCTOBER 2012

5(4) THE SEVENTH REPORT BY THE PAN AFRICAN PARLIAMENT DELEGATION ON THE PERMANENT COMMITTEE SESSION OF THE THIRD PARLIAMENT OF THE PAN AFRICAN PARLIAMENT HELD IN ADDIS ABABA, ETHIOPIA FROM 11 TO 15 MARCH 2014

5.04
MR SAM OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryandongo): Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for according us this opportunity. I rise under Rule 32 of our Rules of Procedure and you will agree with me that this House is in breach of that rule because these four reports have been with us for the last two years contrary to Rule 32 but suffice to say, I would like to encourage colleagues that these reports are actually posted on your iPads and I am sure you will get them from there because we don’t have hard copies going around.

Let me start by thanking the honourable members for sending the five of us to the Pan African Parliament and actually, I want to render the apology of the leader of our delegation, hon. Onyango Kakoba who with the other colleagues are away for the Election Observer Mission under the AU in Algeria. 

Just very briefly like you have guided, Mr Speaker, the issues more or less are interrelated. So, I will not go word for word and I will start with the report of the Seventh Ordinary Session of the Second Parliament of the PAP held in Midrand on 21st – 31st May 2012 coming forward. 
The programmes that were held and the business that was transacted by the Seventh Session are all enumerated there. But let me just point them out briefly: the meeting of committees on administration and financial evaluation was held; the opening session and swearing in ceremony was also held; meetings of the regional caucuses were held; global African Diaspora Parliamentarians’ Summit was held; presentation and debate on the report of the outgoing Executive of the PAP was held; presentation and report of the final evaluation report of the committee on Cafe was held; elections of the members of the PAP Bureau was held; and the handover session which was peaceful suffice to say of the Bureau of the PAP was held.

A meeting of the Women Caucus was held; a joint meeting of the Bureau of the Regional Caucuses was held; meetings of the permanent committees to elect new leaders were held; joint meetings of the Bureau of PAP and the bureau of committees and caucuses were held; presentation and adoption of the 2013 budget of the PAP was done; presentation and debate on boosting the intra African trade was held; presentation of the newly elected office bearers of the PAP organs to the plenary was done, and the  official closing of the session climaxed the ceremony. 

Page 4, His Excellency President Idriss Deby, the President of Chad, who is the Chairperson of the Economic Community of Central African States, was the guest of honour and advised that Parliament, which is the Pan African Parliament, will remain toothless for as long as it does not have full legislative powers and hon. Members, I want us to take note of that. 

He pledged to support the amendment of the protocol establishing the Pan African Parliament in order to transform the Pan African Parliament into an institution with full oversight powers of the legislature and he urged other countries to do the same. And, Mr Speaker, I believe that he urged the other countries through the respective national parliaments and in this regard, he was speaking to the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda as well. 

Page 5 is about the five members whom you elected and the different committees that we were designated to. The meeting that was held of the Global African Diaspora Parliamentarians was very successful and it urged, on page 6, the need to agree on concrete steps that will ensure that all Africans are integrated into the African society by granting dual citizenship. And I think here, they are speaking to all of us to enforce the dual citizenship issue. The other issues basically are diverse, affecting the African people. 

I want to move to page 7. We elected the President of the Pan African Parliament and this is the Speaker who presides over the House. This was none other than hon. Bethel Nnaemeka Amadi from the western region who was elected President of the PAP taking over from hon. Dr Moussa Idriss Ndele from Chad who unfortunately passed away in a gruesome accident. It is important to know that the newly elected President of PAP, hon. Amadi from West Africa, was fully supported by the entire House and by the Ugandan delegation and that the term of office is three years and is rotational by region. So, in the next election, we shall have another region that will be coming up. 

Uganda was honoured in page 8 to be elected Chairperson of the Women Caucus and that is hon. Sarah Kataike Ndoboli before she was then recalled home when she got appointed minister. 

On page 9, I want us to interest ourselves in bullet 5, an observation that we made about the job opportunities. The job opportunities that are out there for all the member states are supposed to be on equal distribution basis but if you look at page 9, Uganda falls under the Eastern region and according to the arrangement that we have, the Clerk of the PAP must send out to all the member states notifications to clerks of the member state Parliaments about availability of jobs and that these jobs should go round in equal distribution. It is unfortunate to note here that the southern region took 26 jobs, the northern region took three, the central region took seven, the western region took 12, and the eastern region took only 10 slots. So, the distribution of staff by region reflects unfairness for some regions especially northern, central and eastern. The host region which is southern took the lion share of 26 and I thought that is a point for our Clerk here to note. 

Recommendations on page 10 

The delegation wishes to make the following prayers: 
    1.  The Minister of Foreign Affairs makes a six monthly report to Parliament on the status of the various protocols and the AU treaties signed by Uganda but not ratified or domesticated.
    2. The Government puts in place the mechanism to follow up AU protocols and implementations of PAP resolutions that is the Maputo Protocol. And for those who are not familiar with it, the Maputo Protocol underpins the point that all member states, while making their budgets like we are about to get into the budget making process, should allocate 10 percent of their national resources to agriculture. This was passed in Maputo, adopted by all heads of state and were expected to implement it.
    3. The Uganda government approves the revised protocol by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government in July 2012 which will lead to the transformation of PAP into a legislature with oversight powers. Suffice to note that this process of transforming PAP is ongoing and only requires the member states to support it with its logical conclusion. Right now, the PAP only is consultative and advisory in nature and that does not give it the teeth to have legislative oversight on the African Union.

    4. Uganda ratifies as a matter of urgency the African Charter on democracy, elections and governance and I want to underscore the fact that this charter that came into force in January for over a year now in March of 2013 underscores the point about term limits for all member states and many other issues to do with elections, to do with democracy, to do with good governance and as hon. members will understand, you know what we mean by all these areas. 

    5. Parliament takes up vigorously the popularisation of the Pan African Parliament to the population through seminars, workshops and through the media. 
    6. Civil society and the media get involved in the transformation of the Pan African Parliament and begin to identify areas where Uganda can reap the benefits of economic integration through trade and commerce.
 
    7. The Permanent Representatives Committee (PRC) and the Council of Ministers must coordinate with PAP in order to enhance the ratification and domestication processes.

    8. Before the Ugandan delegation leaves for summit meetings, they must interface with members of Parliament for briefing. This is a recommendation.
    9. Parliament looks into the matter of providing medical insurance for its members while in South Africa. This matter is very urgent. I would like to report, Mr Speaker, that this has been overtaken by events because the Pan African Parliament and the African Union has actually provided medical insurance for all of us when we are in South Africa. 

    10. The Parliamentary Commission makes budgetary provisions for the PAP activities and again, Mr Speaker, I believe that this has also been overtaken by events as this is a report of 2012. I would like to believe that as members of the delegation, when we compare ourselves with our colleagues from other countries who go to that Parliament, we think that our Commission here has done a good job in allocating resources to enable us do our work. So, this has also been overtaken by events.

In conclusion for report one, the delegation wants to thank the Rt Hon. Speaker and the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker and all hon. Members of Parliament, the Clerk and the Deputy Clerk for the facilitation and confidence bestowed on us to enable us represent you in the PAP. The delegation also wishes to thank His Excellency the President for responding to our appeal for emergency funding for one of our colleagues, hon. Barumba, who got an accident and was flown to South Africa.


Finally, the delegation wishes to remind the Speaker about the importance of adopting the Pan African Parliament practice of time allotment for debate; that is not more than three minutes for contributions and not more than five minutes for summary by the presenters.

We further propose that the Order Paper for each day be given two days earlier, and this is in line with our rules so that Members sign up to contribute to the debate on the areas of their interest. Since Uganda has a large Parliament, this practice, if adopted, will give opportunity for more Members to make contributions to the debate on the Floor of Parliament and in an orderly manner. For God and My Country!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR OTADA: Mr Speaker, I want to lay on Table the report of the Seventh Ordinary Session of the Second Parliament of the Pan African Parliament held in Midrand South Africa from 21st to 31st May 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR OTADA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I now move to the reports of the permanent committees, the Session of the Third Parliament of the PAP held in Midrand South Africa from 23rd to 31st August 2012. I will again run through this report but before I do so, I would like to report that among the things that have been overtaken by events is hon. Cecilia Atim Ogwal, who was our leader of delegation because since she was appointed Opposition Chief Whip, she is no longer able to do what I am doing right now. But I am sure with your discretion, Mr Speaker, you will allow her to make some interventions because ideally, she is the one who put these reports together as our former leader of delegation.

Mr Speaker, I will not walk through the preamble and synopsis because it is just about the committees that were held and the retreat of the bureaus, what we discussed there and the Committee of Co-operation, International Relations and Conflict Resolution that did some work. I am mentioning this because of issues of conflict on the African continent, which this committee superintends.

On page 3, the committee carried out the following activities:

    1. Considered and adopted the Memorandum of Understanding on co-operation between the PAP Committee on Co-operation, International Relations and Conflict Resolution and the AU Peace and Security Council drafted by the Institute for Security Studies experts. That is one thing that the committee discussed. 

    2. The committee received presentations and debated the report on peace and security in Africa.

    3. The committee considered the report of the First Meeting of the Coordination Cooperation Committee of the PAP and the Inter Parliamentary Assembly of the Orthodox. 

    4. The Permanent Committee on Justice and Human Rights. Mr Speaker, this committee is chaired by none other than hon. Onyango Kakoba, the MP for Buikwe who was elected by the members there. One of the thematic areas that they discussed was press freedom. They also debated the PAP fact finding mission to Mali and the report of our financials for 2013.

The other committees that did their generic work include the Permanent Committee on Rural Economy, Agriculture, Natural Resources and Environment who held their meetings and discussed a number of issues. The Committee on Trade, Customs and Immigration - this one I may want to point out because of the importance of trade. There were presentations of papers by researchers followed by discussions on the following issues:

    1. The policy research programme for the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa and African Union Commission (AUC) in preparation for economic reports on Africa; status of the economy on the African continent.
    2. Aid effectiveness/aid development. This is a topical issue that was discussed. This Parliament may also want to look into these issues and the way forward for the WTO; reforming the decision-making process. You may wish to know how the WTO negotiations take place and the reforms that we want to propose.
    3. The committee work plan.

On page 4, the Committee on Monetary and Financial Matters discussed matters of the status of funds of the African Union. Suffice to note, Mr Speaker, that we are always talking about African solutions for African problems but then you find that in this report, the AUC is funded by foreign assistance or development partner assistance to a tune of 69 percent and the African states only fund the AUC by a meagre 31 percent of the AUC’s budget. 

I believe it is a matter of concern as to whether member states are making their annual remittances or subscriptions with the African Union so that we can have an African Union that stands on its own and is not supported by donors.

The Committee on Health received and debated a number of issues: sexual reproductive health in Africa, and the status of education on the African continent where the point about quality was underscored. Is Africa educating people who only want to know how to read and write or are we educating people who are aspiring to be doctors, architects, pilots of tomorrow and professions like those? So the issue of quality was underscored that as we debate, we should not only look at provision of UPE or USE or any other sort of free education but look at the quality more than anything else.

The Committee on Transport, Industry, Communication, Energy, Science and Technology discussed a number of issues, among others the African Maritime Charter that should come into force. This may not concern Uganda so much because we do not have any maritime dispensation to talk of like our friends in Tanzania and Kenya who have the high seas but obviously, we must adopt such a charter because as a landlocked country, we are affected more by issues of maritime.

The Committee on Rules and Discipline also discussed issues. I want to report that none of us was engaged on issues of discipline so we were okay. I also want to point out that there was an annual Clerk/Secretaries-General Consultative Dialogue. This is important to note on page 6 because the Clerks Consultative Dialogue was an activity that was held in the session of the PAP in August of 2012 and the theme was strengthening linkages between the Pan African Parliament and the national parliamentarians.  

I think this is the crux of the matter why our clerks were invited and I would like to register the delegation’s appreciation and gratitude following the attendance of Mrs Jane Kibirige, our Clerk, which sent a very good signal because some other countries failed to send their clerks and as you can imagine, the bridge between the PAP and the national parliament is an important thing if we are to achieve the African dream.

Below are the recommendations which the clerks arrived at and I think this is important:
    • PAP to compile the sessional reports and attendance list of MPs and send them to the respective clerks of the national parliaments. This, again, is about accountability; some colleagues go and they do not stay there full time and yet they have taken per diem. 

    • Urge clerks to communicate to PAP when a member ceases to be a Member Of Parliament – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Otada, from the report, we have heard that at least our members of the PAP do not do that; when you leave it like that, it would seem also that some of our members do that. 

MR OTADA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. Uganda actually is always appreciated for staying the whole course of sessions and committee meetings. So, we are not part of those who abscond. Most obliged, Mr Speaker. Thank you. 

    • The clerks were urged to communicate to the Pan African Parliament when any member ceases to be a Member of Parliament. This, again, was a point of contention where somebody ceases to be a Member of Parliament but still wants to go the other side and do work.

    • The clerks emphasised the issue of the composition of PAP delegations, to the effect that PAP delegations should have at least one woman member. This is embedded in our Treaty that establishes the PAP, that at least we should have a woman. There are some delegations that would send five people and all of them are male. That would be against us. We are compliant; in fact, we are more compliant than the rest.

    • PAP members should be accountable to national parliaments and the populace through presentation of reports, and be active in the country’s agenda. To this end, Mr Speaker, I want to urge this House and to also urge the chair to support us so that we can have resources to organise meetings and let our colleagues know the enormous work that is out there for us to do.

The Speakers’ Conference 

This has actually become annual. The annual Conference of Speakers of African Parliaments was held in Midrand at the seat of the PAP from 30th to 31st August. The conference was attended by, among others, the Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga and the Speaker of the East African Legislative Assembly, hon. Margaret Zziwa, who attended in person and presented a paper. The theme was: “The Role of Parliamentarians in Promoting Intra-African Trade to achieve Development and Employment in Africa.”  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, this is very important because we realise that intra-African trade, which is basically trade between the 54 African states, stands at 11 per cent and yet trade between Africa and Europe, for example, is at about 70 per cent. You can imagine if we cannot trade with our neighbours around, why do we find it very easy to trade with people who are offshore and yet matters of logistics should come into play. This explains the poor infrastructure on the African continent, this explains issues of quality and so many things that we can think of. It also explains why there is no peace in Africa for the most part because if you have neighbours as trading partners, then you will have everything to lose if you conflict with your neighbour. So, this was a very important thing that we also need to take care of. 

Mr Speaker, I think I should rush to the last page. During the conference, the following presentations were made by various presenters upon which the recommendations were drawn:
    • Overview of the factors mitigating against intra-African trade with specific reference to small and medium enterprises in Africa; 
    • Intra-African trade, development and employment; 
    • Status on the review of the Protocol to the Treaty establishing the African Economic Community relating to the Pan African Parliament. This is basically to review our status on whether we should be legislative or still remain advisory like we are right now. It was discussed by the Speakers.
    • The status of ratification of the African Union instruments with particular reference to the Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance and the African Charter on the Values and Principles of Public Service and Administration (the role of Parliamentarians).

	In the PAP, Mr Speaker and honourable members, we believe that African countries must put a lot of emphasis in building the people who actually hold the memory of our government, and these are civil servants. Politicians come and go but civil service must be built so that the institutional memory remains and Africa can drive its agenda with people who have the memory of the institution. 

    • A view from civil society on the state of ratification of the African Union instruments. There are so many charters that are out there and I will point out some of them. 

The Speakers’ Conference presented a unique opportunity to establish formidable partnerships on some of the emerging economic challenges in the African continent to stimulate economic growth in the respective countries especially with the recent African agenda on boosting intra-Africa trade. There is that agenda that the Heads of State discussed and we must interest ourselves in knowing how we can trade between ourselves. That will definitely bring on board issues of value addition, which all of us in our respective constituencies are always yearning for.

In conclusion, the delegation wishes to draw the attention of the august House to the urgent need to ratify the Treaty on Human Rights and Democratic Governance and Elections because Uganda now holds the chair of the Committee on Justice and Human Rights through hon. Onyango Kakoba. It will be very embarrassing if the matter is discussed under Ugandan chairmanship and we have not ratified it.

The delegation further wishes to implore the Speaker to allow members to debate the issue of transformation of the PAP as a fully-fledged legislature with oversight powers and create opportunities through workshops for PAP members to sensitize stakeholders and the population on the benefits of PAP to Uganda and the value of continental economic integration. The Speakers’ Forum has now become an annual event. I want to thank you, Mr Speaker, and I also want to thank the Rt Hon. Speaker, Rebecca Kadaga, for blessing us with her presence and making a very good presentation there. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table the report of the PAP on the Permanent Committee Session of the Third Parliament of the Pan African Parliament held in Midrand, South Africa from 23rd to 21st August 2013. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable member, would you like to make a quicker summary of the next one?

MR OTADA: Yes, Mr Speaker. This one is on the First Session of the Third Parliament of the PAP held from 3rd to 20th October. Just for the information of members, we have two statutory committee meetings which are in March and August and we have two statutory sessions which are held in May and October. This was the sessional committee meeting of October 2012. 

Mr Speaker, I will run through this report. I will give this as information: one of the MPs, who was elected to replace hon. Sarah Kataike, was sworn in during that session, and is none other than hon. Jacqueline Amongin.

Also during that session, His Excellency Dr Thomas Bonny Yayi, Chairperson of the African Union and President of the Republic of Benin, was the guest of honour. In his speech, he reiterated the main objective of the African Union, which is geared towards building an Africa which is united, peaceful, stable, secure and prosperous to ensure Africans themselves assume their destiny to a face myriad of challenges which include poverty, death from preventable diseases, widespread armed conflicts, corruption and impunity with a view of building a new Africa.

He pledged his support for the adoption of the draft AU Protocol that will give the Pan African Parliament legislative status with oversight powers. This was the President of Benin who pledged to give us the support.

Still on page 5, there was a very important motion that was mooted by hon. Cecilia Ogwal about the 50th Independence Anniversary of Uganda. This had never happened in the history of the Pan African Parliament but she did it and allowed Dr Idriss Ndele – the former President of the Pan African Parliament – to move that motion. It was seconded and debated and Uganda was praised and congratulated on our jubilee celebrations and for making significant strides. So, I thank hon. Ogwal for mooting that motion. 

Committee Reports Presented and Debated At the Plenary

There were a number of reports presented and debated. I want to point out that there was a presentation and debate on making investments work for Africa: the parliamentarians’ response to land rushes. You all know the problems we have of land in Africa. 

There was a report on the planning workshop on the campaign for media freedom in Africa. I thought I should also point that out because we have challenges of media freedom in Africa. There are several resolutions and charters that we have that promote freedom of the press but we are busy violating them.

Moving on to page 7, I want to congratulate my sister, Jacqueline Amongin, who upon arrival at the Pan African Parliament mooted a motion for the formation of the Pan African Parliament Youth Caucus. She moved this motion and it was unanimously supported. When this organ was put in place, as democracy demands some other people who had not even thought of it jumped on it and she was not elected as president but instead as the first vice president of the PAP Youth Caucus. A certain honourable member from Niger took the presidency.

One of the observations we have made is that due to the different times of elections in the member states and appointment of posts of members to executive positions, – like they did with hon. Kataike – PAP receives new members during every session. This goes to explain the very high turnover of Members of Parliament in a parliament that receives members from countries with seven years’ tenure, four years’ tenure, five years’ tenure, and some are appointed ministers and do not appear and others are suspended due to different reasons. So, we have a parliament which is not cohesive and always lacks institutional memory.

Recommendations

Mr Speaker, the delegation wishes to make the following recommendations:
1. 	Since the Committee on Justice and Human Rights is chaired by Uganda, the Government of Uganda should ratify and domesticate as a matter of urgency the African Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance.

2. 	Parliament takes up, vigorously, the popularisation of PAP to the population through seminars, workshops and talk shows. The Forum of Speakers has pledged to take up this challenge. This was in the last report that I just read.

3. 	Government should update Parliament every six months on the status of various AU protocols and treaties signed by Uganda.

4. 	Uganda, through the EAC, take the lead in the promotion of continental economic integration through trade.

In conclusion, the delegation once again thanks the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker, the Members of Parliament and the entire august House for supporting us. I would like to lay the report on the First Ordinary Session of the Third Parliament of the PAP held in Midrand South Africa from 3rd to 20th October 2012 on the Table. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR OTADA: Mr Speaker, this is the last one. This is a report on the Permanent Committees Session of the Third Parliament of PAP held in Addis Ababa on 11 to 16 March 2013. These were committees.

Issues Arising from the Dialogue 
There were several dialogues like harmonisation of and co-operative governance between PAP and other relevant AU structures. What we actually did was to decide that we should not always be going to the seat of the PAP; we should once in a year visit the African Union Commission (AUC) so that we can align our activities of PAP with the AUC, who are like the ministries for the African continent.

Issues that arose 

There were a number of challenges that were pointed out that require attention and these include: 
1. 	Administrative structures of the PAP are not effective because of funding issues. 

2. 	Lack of sustainable institutional memory because of the frequent changes of members due to the different dates of election in Member States, like I just explained. 

3. 	Lack of political will hence PAP involvement in the electoral observer missions is limited. I will have to explain this. In the past, PAP used to constitute its own observer mission to go and observe elections and later report to Parliament. However, since the elections in Zimbabwe, where PAP went and later issued a statement stating that the elections were not free and fair and yet the AUC reported that they were free and fair, the AUC who are our funders decided to arm-twist us. They said that the only way that PAP can observe elections is to go together with AUC so that we can issue one report. That did not go down well with PAP in terms of separation of powers that we always advocate for. So, the likes of hon. Onyango have gone under the banner of AU and may not have much to say.

4. 	There was the issue of lack of synergy between the AU organs resulting in loose coordination between them.
5. 	The AU legal instruments are drafted without the PAP input, which is basically the core of our work here. The policies and legal framework – model laws - should be drafted by PAP and then sent to AUC so that it can adopt them. We just always see model laws coming up out of the blue and this weakens the PAP significantly. 

Areas of Collaboration between the PAP Committees and the African Union Commission
Following the discussions during the workshop, the PAP committees agreed on the following recommendations:
1. Consolidation of the existing initiatives 
    • annual joint consultative meetings. 
2. Conflict management 
    • exchange of analyses/information on conflict situations and on efforts deployed. 
3. Post conflict reconstruction
    • Strengthening capacity to implement the African Union post-conflict reconstruction and development policy framework.
    • Carrying out needs assessment in countries emerging from conflict, and this needs to include specific needs of women, girls and children.
    • Resource mobilisation for the African solidarity initiative, which is an initiative that was established by the Heads of State.

Mr Speaker, I also want to point out that all these reports we have been making over the years have not been in vain; there is a bit of improvement. In the last meeting that was held in March this year and also October last year, we were able to discuss – although post-mortem style - the budget of the AUC. This is an improvement because it never used to happen before. We are now pushing for a status quo where we discuss the budget before it is passed. That is where we are headed and we need your support. 

The African Union Peace Support Operations and the African Defence and Security issues were discussed and several other things. 

Mr Speaker, in conclusion, I want to point out areas that relate to charters that need ratification, which should be the interest of this House because that is our work. In the education subsector in particular, we are looking out for a mechanism that will promote the ratification and implementation of the different charters of the African Union with member states and at the regional level, in particular the charter on African cultural renaissance - How do we keep the African culture going through this charter? This charter has not yet been adopted and once it is adopted, we shall pray that it is ratified by this Parliament.

There are also several other meetings that took place for many committees. As you know, we have statutory assignments in the different committees; I do not want to bog you down with all the issues that we discussed on health, tourism, trade, education, transport and industry. 

As I wind up, I would like to make one appeal: whereas we are doing our work at the PAP, we are constrained because much as the African Union is constrained financially, the PAP most definitely is constrained financially and in this regard, we need the support of the Parliament of Uganda. There are parliaments that have offered to host PAP delegations on benchmarking visits, which are supported by that Parliament as a friendly institution, to really help the PAP members go out there to the various countries to attend workshops and meetings supported by those parliaments. So, I would like to implore this Parliament; if there is a budget somewhere, it could go a long way to continue underpinning the fact that we are friends of PAP.

Finally, I would like to report that there are countries that do not send Members of Parliament to the PAP for several reasons. One of them is the lack of resources. You find that members cannot come to the PAP because of financial constraints. In that regard, I want to thank this Parliament and all of you for supporting us. We are one of those countries that are regular there and this has not brought any shame to our country whatsoever.

I also want to report that there are parliaments that do not have their members there because of conflicts. Countries like Mali, South Sudan, Libya and most of the countries involved in the Arab Spring are not there; they were automatically suspended or ejected under the charter, which we were urging the House to adopt - the Charter of Elections, Democracy and Good Governance. Under that charter, it is clear that any outfit, be it a rebel outfit or any other group of people, who try to access power by overthrowing a legitimately elected government is not recognized. Also any country that goes into a conflict definitely has their membership suspended. 

I am happy that Uganda has always kept its membership.  I just want to urge colleagues that let us build on the democracy and cohesion that we have because these portray us on the African Continent as a country that should be well sought after.

I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Pan African Parliament on the Permanent Committee Sessions of the Third Parliament of the Pan African Parliament held in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia from 11th to 16th March 2013. I beg to lay and thank you very much for listening to me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, you have before you two reports of the ordinary sessions of the Pan African Parliament. There are recommendations that come from our members that represent us there and also attend the permanent committee meetings. 

I have heard about issues to do with making the Pan African Parliament a real legislative body with full legislative powers. There is the issue of the ratification of the African Charter on Elections, Democracy and Human Rights. There is also the issue of investment and intra-Africa trade. The question of how to regulate membership since members keep moving in and out - some are appointed ministers, elections are not at the same time. So, the turnover issue was brought up - how do you maintain the issue of institutional memory of the Pan African Parliament - and also lack of synergies. Those are some of the issues that have been raised.
 
Honourable members, as you know, this is another parliament and its activities are reported to this House mainly for information purposes but also for members to engage in terms of better understanding of the PAP issues. So, maybe questions can be asked and some contributions made to this and then we can proceed to adopt the report. We will have a limited debate on this issue because it is already coming to 6 O’clock.

MS ATIM ONGOM: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. As you will realise, the delegates of PAP report to this House and by order of this House, before any committee reports members have to sign and own their report. In this particular one, I notice that only one document has been signed and the rest are not signed.  So, do they own these documents and how will we know they are authentic? I seek your guidance whether it is not necessary for them to sign these reports.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, what do you say? (Laughter) What I can say is that this is not a typical committee report and so it does not fall within the category of the committee reports.

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, the office of the Clerk to Parliament and the offices of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker received the authentic, original hard copies of these reports, fully signed. So, probably what you have received on your iPads does not bear the electronic signatures but all the original reports are with the Clerk and also the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker have copies of those reports, fully signed. All these reports were compiled under the leadership of Mrs Ogwal –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Under the able leadership of –(Laughter)

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: I just wanted to be humble. So, it was done under my leadership and I ensured I whip all the members to sign those reports. There is no member who did not sign any of the reports that were submitted to Parliament. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, but as I said, this is not a typical parliamentary committee report; it is like a report by a delegation. Can we have some debate on this issue? How much time will each member take? Okay, two minutes each.

5.53
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I also would like to thank our members who represent us in PAP. We are happy that you have represented Uganda very well. I am aware that you have a lot of responsibilities there. Some of you are chairpersons of committees; that did not come for nothing but it was because you are doing a very good job. Thank you for representing us very well at PAP level.

Mr Speaker, one time I met with some MPs from the South African Parliament but one of them seriously complained that PAP is becoming a burden to South Africa; they almost facilitate the entire PAP presence there. So, I would like to know whether our Parliament is subscribing yearly for our members to attend and participate in PAP activities. I did not hear that from the presenter of this report. Sometimes it is very shameful when we attend other parliaments or the regional groups that we attend and our Parliament or government has not contributed. When they begin to talk about those issues, you begin to feel small; so, you carry the shame of the country. I want to know whether our delegation is very safe when in South Africa. 

Secondly, I would also support their recommendation that the PAP becomes a binding institution. If we can give them our recommendation that we shall support them so that PAP becomes a legislative assembly, they can make laws other than just going there and giving advice, which may or may not be taken by our governments. We are wasting a lot of resources keeping these people there; at least they must do something, which is meaningful other than just going there and having reports for formality. It means that this institution would have had less input to our country. Therefore, I support their request that we recommend them to become a binding institution so that they can even make laws that can unite the whole of Africa. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.56
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank our delegation to PAP for the reports that we have received. 

We appreciate that the functioning of some of these parliaments - super national bodies - is unique to some of us. We may not understand it fully as probably our colleagues who are there. The issue arises in the recommendation that PAP should have legislative power; I think the most common practice of all parliaments is to legislate or make laws. Probably, the second definition that I found somewhere was that there is also a game of playing cards, which is called parliament.  If we are to go by the definition of legislating and making laws, then I think it will apply to PAP also. However, my question is: how many legislative bodies are we going to have? We have our parliament and we have EALA which also make laws, now we have the Pan African Parliament which also makes laws. I would like to understand which kind of laws would be for PAP. Otherwise, we are having legislation everywhere. 

Secondly, there is the issue of ratification of these human rights and democratic governance protocols or treaties like the African Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance. Our Constitution, I think objective No. XXVIII about foreign policy objective, says, “Uganda shall actively participate in international and regional organisations that stand for peace and for the wellbeing and progress of humanity.” Unfortunately, as it was noted before, the ministers are not here but I would have wanted to know why it has taken Uganda so long to ratify these documents. What could the problem be? If other members have done it, what is Uganda doing - (Member timed out.)

5.59
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the members who represent us in PAP for making us proud and giving a good image because they have been appreciated.
 
However, there is an issue of high turnover. I do not know whether it was raised for us to take it up so that we can make some further recommendations, for example that a policy be brought out so that we address the issue of high turnover? 

I would like to seriously note that while our members are making us proud, there is disrespect from the Front Bench. As we started, some members came in but right now everybody has run out. Are they disrespectful to the Speaker or to Parliament itself? The behaviour of members of Cabinet is unbecoming. I think the image we are portraying to Ugandans should be corrected and this should be noted with a lot of concern. I thank you so much, Mr Speaker.

6.01
MR VINCENT MUJUNI (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Allow me join colleagues in thanking first and foremost, hon. Sam Otada, for the presentation and the good report.  I note with concern a number of issues, and you could maybe help me understand two things. 

One, what is the role of PAP in conflict resolution? Just last year, there was the Arab Spring that started from Tunisia on to Egypt, Ethiopia and there was a lot of conflict. How do you assess your positions and your sittings there in South Africa vis-à-vis the conflict in Africa? I am aware in your presentation you said that one of the presidents made a statement that we need African solutions to African problems, but who on earth cursed Africa to the extent that even when you are seated in that big Pan African Parliament you can never suggest a solution to African problems? 

Secondly, I also note with concern that a lot of protocols have not been domesticated and maybe we still continue to make many of them. What happens just in case a country adamantly, willingly or unwillingly fails to domesticate some of these? What are the sanctions? 

Thirdly, I have noted that even in areas where there are conflicts, you suspend Members of Parliament. Is that a solution to African problems? Instead of actually helping members who have been embroiled in a conflict understand their conflict and also help them get out of the conflict, you just suspend them. (Member timed out.)

6.03
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the chairperson for this report. I have three or four things to note. 

One, some few months ago while out of Uganda, I did watch or observed on the internet a special session being accorded for hon. Cecilia Ogwal by the PAP in appreciation of her good services and exemplary work. However, this has not been captured here in this report yet we would have loved to also associate ourselves with her good repute. She is a seasoned leader –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think you heard that she wrote the report. 

MR MUWUMA: That is why we are saying that we would have wished to see this report - (Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, this report covers activities up to 2012 and the tribute was paid to me in the last session; so, that will come in the later reports. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is up to 2014.

MRS OGWAL: No, it is not up to 2014; the seventh report captures up to –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So there is a mistype.

MRS OGWAL: There is a mistake but you will definitely get details when you read the later report. Thank you.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you very much; I am grateful for that information. 

The other issue is about positioning ourselves. I want to say that as Uganda, we are not being strategic when it comes to competition for international job opportunities. They are telling us here that 26 staff out of 58 were from the southern part of Africa and only 10 are from the eastern parts of Africa and Uganda does not surface anywhere. Can we look at repackaging and rebranding to ensure that we compete internationally for these job opportunities? Otherwise, we may not be fairing very well. 

On interest, Mr Speaker, I happen to sit on the Committee on Appointments and when we were considering and approving the ambassadors, they all assured us of their competencies in marketing Uganda and doing whatever it takes to ensure that our country shines. However, in this report, they report that our mission in South Africa is not interested at all in whatever happens in PAP or whatever PAP does. It is here in the first report. I want to appeal to them, if they are listening, to take keen interest in the issues affecting or concerning PAP such that they do whatever is required. 

Mr Speaker, the other issue is to do with –(Member timed out.)

6.06
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank hon. Otada and our distinguished representatives to PAP. 

Looking at the last report that you presented, on page 5, 5.0 says, “Workshops with UNAIDS and Wateraid. Mr Speaker, the PAP members also attended workshops with members from UNAIDS and Wateraid.” - (Interruptions) – I am reading what is in the report and it says, “Madam Speaker”. Can you turn to page 15 of the report where I am reading. My concern, Mr Speaker, is that we are not told of the lessons or best practices or important resolutions that came out of these workshops. I think this section does not belong to this report. Otherwise, we have very good reports from our distinguished delegates.

Mr Speaker, I am concerned and want to support the recommendation that the Minister of Foreign Affairs should make a biannual report to Parliament on the status of the various protocols so that they can be domesticated. This is of great concern. We, on the Committee on Human Rights, have sometimes interacted with the Minister of Foreign Affairs and we know that there is effort being undertaken to come up with an inter-ministerial committee to handle these protocols. However, there are challenges faced by the various departments involved in implementation. Of course, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs take the coordination role, but this area really needs to be worked on. It would help if we required the minister to bring these reports to Parliament.

In the same breath, I would like to support the recommendation that Government should put in place a mechanism to follow up all the protocols for implementation – (Member timed out.)

6.08
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the team that represents us at PAP for the job that they are doing. We feel so proud of you. I want to comment on two issues. 

One is the issue of ratifying the African Charter on democracy in connection with good governance. I think that the Government of Uganda needs to take this matter very seriously. Even in the East African region, we seem to have problems. When we associate with SADC, we seem to have the same problem. I think we risk being isolated over time by insisting on archaic practices of entrenching constitutional dictatorships. It is wrong and it is looking ugly in the region. I think that the person who represents Government in this House had better say to Government that we look horrible with our stance on endless terms for the President.

The second issue is the question of trade and trade negotiations. Mr Speaker, this is a very technical area and I think that we need to call upon Government to really invest in this area. In the region, it is very clear that Uganda is not maximising the benefits that arise from the opportunity accorded by ESAMI down in Arusha. The ESAMI has developed very good customised programmes to train people in the area of trade negotiation. Some of the things we go for, including some of the loans, are really bad and at the end of it, we do not benefit much. So I would like to encourage Government to benefit from the trainings that have now been developed to help African countries revamp their capacities in trade negotiations.

Lastly, on the issue of intra African trade, I think Uganda has refused to be - (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members, for this debate. Can I now process a decision? (Mrs Ogwal rose_) Do you want to summarise? Yes, please give your contributions and we conclude this matter.

6.10
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to contribute to this debate. 

First of all, I just want to express my gratitude to Members of Parliament of the various committees because they were able to send delegations to the Pan African Parliament when we were in session, and they even visited individual committees and saw us in action. You made us so proud to come and associate with us in PAP.

Secondly, I want to highlight one of the issues, which I consider to be very important but because hon. Otada had to shorten his submission, he left it out. This is the question of the sixth region. The Pan African Parliament, together with the AUC, have now decided that the Africans in the diaspora who have made it on their own - some of them are now Speakers and Deputy Speakers and holding very high political positions in their countries where they are now citizens - should be embraced and they should constitute what we call the sixth region. So, when we have sessions, we can invite them to come as delegates.

In fact, I would like to mention that in the fourth report, when we held the meeting we had a member from the Polish Parliament representing the European Union, a member from the Parliament of Brazil and other members representing parliaments of the Caribbean continent and also the parliaments of North America. So, that is how we want to focus on how we can utilise the experience and exposure of Africans who through circumstances are forced to live where they are now living but they have been able to make a breakthrough. People like the Obamas; we want to involve them in getting their experiences and exposure to help Africa move forward. I think that is one aspect we do not want to leave out.

The second aspect I do not want to leave out is the fact that Ministry of Foreign Affairs should be called to account. Sometimes we get so embarrassed in the foreign forums when we hold meetings and then they present lists of countries that have not ratified some very important protocols and Uganda is one of them. 

It so happened that when we were in Addis Ababa, the list came out and our own member is the chairman of the Committee on Human Rights. I had put down my name to make a contribution but when we realised that the list was circulated, I had to quickly mobilise the members to exit from the conference in order to visit the Embassy in Addis Ababa. That was tactical; otherwise, how would I contribute when I am from one of the countries that have not ratified this very vital protocol? So, it is one of the areas that the foreign affairs ministry could really help us present a good image outside the country.

Thirdly, I want to also say that the national parliaments should own Pan African Parliament activities. The practice has been the up-bottom approach. In other words, decisions come from the AU to the national parliaments and we leave out the grassroots. So, the ordinary Ugandans in Dokolo, Masaka and Kisoro do not know about Pan Africa. We talk about Pan Africa and even as Members of Parliament we are just beginning to understand what the Pan African Parliament does. There is no avenue where an ordinary Ugandan can be exposed to what is happening in Pan Africa or an avenue to get them to know what value they get from what goes on in PAP.

Mr Speaker, I want to say that Ugandans have made a footmark in the Pan African Parliament. In fact, the debate on Uganda’s independence celebrations was spectacular and everybody appreciated it. They gave us two hours and it was a very high profile debate. Uganda was appreciated for the role it has played and continues to play in stabilising the continent. Although I disagreed with quite a number of aspects, I had to put on a brave face as a Ugandan and not be seen to be on the other side. (Laughter)

I plead with the current delegation to maintain that spirit. We decided that we leave anything to do with politics outside so that when we are there, we speak one language. Even if you disagree with some issues, this is not the forum where we discuss our differences. So, I think this is very important and it is a culture we should adopt. We can always come back and debate our differences on the Floor of Parliament here but when we are out there, we are seen as Ugandans. So, that is one area I want to share with you. 

I was very delighted that His Excellency the President paid us a visit during the last session and it was also the session where I was bowing out. I think he was proud to hear that Uganda, as a country, had done very well in the Pan African Parliament and also in sponsoring so many AU projects in the African region, particularly, AMISON in Somalia and now our engagement in Sudan. Although I disagree with so many aspects of it, but when you hear Uganda being praised for being in Sudan I have to shut up and keep quiet. (Laughter) These are some of the excitements that we go through and it is not very comfortable for some of us. 

I also think that we should realise that in the Pan African Parliament, we develop concepts from the global perspective. We have come to realise that it is only Africa where there are now primary raw materials and the whole world is running to Africa in order to grab as much as they can, from minerals to land. So, we have been warned on how we can protect our land. Land grabbing is one disaster that is happening in Africa. On the issue of climate change, we should approach it from the continental perspective. These are all very serious issues, which I think that Uganda should take up and make sure that we make our contribution.

Finally, one of the meetings focused on the MDGs. Parliament is supposed to drive the MDG agenda. It is surprising that we talk about MDGs. We have the Parliamentary Forum on MDGs but the Government does not want to bring to us the programme targeting MDGs so that Parliament can make an input. This is one area, Mr Speaker, that you should help us. 

Right now, we are designing strategic plans for the post 2015 agenda. We pray that the Government brings on the Floor of Parliament that strategic plan so that we can make an input and we can know and measure how that programme is going to push Uganda out of poverty and all those programmes that have been put in place. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member and former leader of this group. You have now passed the torch on. 

Honourable members, I think that it is also important to be creative; for example, after a session in Midrand or wherever the session has been held, just orally come and say that we have just come back and these are the issues we discussed while you wait for the formal report. The House would then get to know what was discussed informally. 

It is also good to be creative in these matters so that we do not wait for two or three years before these matters are raised. At least, we will have a summary in two or three minutes of what was discussed, what decisions were taken and if you have documents to lay, instead of waiting for foreign affairs, you could also lay some of these documents on the Table for the consumption of the members. 

Honourable members, thank you very much. Let us process this decision. There are four reports and I will put questions to each one of them. The motion is for adoption of the following reports: The 4th report by the Pan African Parliament delegation on the Seventh Ordinary Session of the Second Parliament of the Pan African Parliament held in Midrand, South Africa. I put the question for the adoption of the report.

(Question out and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The second is the 5th report by the Pan African Parliament delegation on the Permanent Committee Session of the Third Parliament of the Pan African Parliament held in Midrand, South Africa from 22 to 31 August 2012. I will put the question for the adoption.

(Question out and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The third report is the 6th report by the Pan African Parliament delegation on the First Ordinary Session of the Third Parliament of the Pan African Parliament held in Midrand, South Africa, 3 to 20 October 2012. I put the question for the adoption.

(Question out and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The last report is the 7th report by the Pan African Parliament delegation on the Permanent Committee Session of the Third Parliament of the Pan African Parliament held in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia from 11 to 16 March 2013. I will put the question for the adoption.

(Question out and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members.

6.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR NORTHERN UGANDA (Mrs Rebecca Otengo): Mr Speaker, you can imagine the kind of promotion that I have got today. You know that I always sit at that corner and hon. Odonga Otto calls it purgatory. That is where we sit with the former Leader of the Opposition. 

I would just like to appreciate hon. Otada for having presented these reports very clearly –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you now speaking as acting Leader of Government Business?

MRS OTENGO: Actually, as the Prime Minister. (Laughter) I would like to thank hon. Cecilia Ogwal. I always tell people that I do not doubt her capacity; she just needed to put it in the right position. I would like to thank her for having led this team for all this time without conflict. Sometimes you take it for granted that you can lead without conflict but we already have some kind of example around us, which we are trying to grapple with. We want to thank you so much.

I also want to thank the team for being accountable and also being Ugandan when they are out there. I would like to testify that when hon. Cecilia Ogwal is in this local politics, she is the biggest headache you can have around you – you know she is my mother – but when she is out, she is the biggest asset you can have around you to represent Uganda and I would like to thank her for that. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, at the beginning you ruled that we will have to listen and process the issues that have been brought out for the right ministries, departments and agencies. I would like to make this undertaking because most of this goes to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. I want to thank you for having accepted us to take note and take the issues to the right ministries, departments and agencies. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. For your information, tomorrow members wanted to raise some matters, which I now draw to your attention to alert the responsible ministers so that they are here tomorrow and they can deal with them under urgent matters of public importance. The first one is hon. Otada on the issue of floods and storms. He is going to raise it tomorrow. Hon. Connie Galiwango from Mbale has issues to raise. Hon. Betty Amongi on the issue of these sports people in Kapchorwa. Hon. Milton Muwuma has an issue to raise. Hon. Mateke from Kisoro has issues to raise. Hon. Namayanja from Bukoto East also has issues to raise. So, we shall start at 2 O’clock tomorrow and the ministers should be here to deal with these issues.

MRS OTENGO: I am most obliged, Mr Speaker. However, I request that maybe we could have some highlights so that we are able to see where it goes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The ministers should be here. I am saying that there are going to be questions to be raised.

MRS OTENGO: Most obliged. Tomorrow is question time for the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will start at 2 O’clock. The Prime Minister’s Question Time is at 3 O’clock.

MRS OTENGO: Most obliged.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, we will start at 2 O’clock with these issues. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 6.25 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, April 16 2014 at 2.00 p.m.)
