PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTSECOND SESSION - THIRD MEETINGTHURSDAY , 13 APRIL 2023PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA8003Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.Thursday, 13 April 2023so that we can finish because that is the most important issue. In April and May, we mainly look at the budget. After the ministerial policy statements, we shall look at committee reports that have a very big implication on the budget. Some are to do with accountability and oversight reports, which the committees have done. We shall get all of them so they can guide us when debating the final budget. Honourable colleagues, I wanted to inform you about that. Please check with your committee chairpersons on how far you have gone with the sectoral committee report. Matters of national importance?2.29MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter relating to your communication and I seek your indulgence.While the sectoral committees are sitting to consider the different ministerial policy statements, the standing committees are also sitting at the same time. I seek your guidance, Mr Speaker, on whether it is not procedurally right to ask the chairpersons of the standing committees to halt their meetings so that the sectoral committees sit this weekend and we conclude the ministerial policy statements. That is the indulgence I seek.IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentSECOND SESSION - 28TH SITTING - THIRD MEETINGParliament met at 2.24 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, I welcome you to today’s sitting. As you know, we are in the budgeting process and according to Rule 149 of our Rules of Procedure, we should have the ministerial policy statement reports tabled on the Floor by the 20th of this month so that from the 18th, 19th, and 20th, we shall be handling committee reports on the ministerial policy statements. I would like to urge all the sectoral committees to work through the weekend. Do whatever you can to finish the reports because we do not have any other gap beyond the 20th.A schedule has been issued; so, Clerk, ensure that all the chairpersons receive this schedule. We have scheduled when you will be presenting. There are committees that will present on the 18th, 19th and 20th.  Please, let us do this. If there is any work that the standing committees are doing, I request that you allow Members to join the sectoral committees this weekend 8004 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTDisclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament. COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, the problem we have in Parliament is that you want commanding language. I requested the leadership of the standing committees to halt their meetings. I do not want to direct you because you are honourable members. Otherwise, members of the standing committees know that they can only do their work once the sectoral committees have managed the budgets. Therefore, I would like to emphasise it as Hon. Solomon Silwany, our Commissioner, has brought it out; standing committees should allow Members to first process sectoral committee reports. It is for just a few days, and then you can continue with your work.Hon. Mugole, you should come to the microphone only when I have allowed you, but you can have a temporary shelter on the Front Bench and then I will allow you.MR KOMAKECH:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise under rule 52. Last week, Mr Speaker, you instructed the Minister of Internal Affairs to come up with a ministerial statement this week. You gave him strictly one week. The week elapsed on Wednesday and today, when I look at the Front Bench, I do not see the Minister of Internal Affairs with that statement.Also, last year, in your wisdom and wise ruling, you asked the Attorney-General, when I raised a matter of national importance regarding land evictions in Puranga Subcounty, to come up with a report to this House but up to now, he has not. Mr Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that you invoke your powers so that the minister and the Attorney-General present to this House the issues I raised? Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, when we make a commitment here or give guidance, it is very important for it to be followed. Clerk, capture those issues so that they are on the Order Paper after we have sorted sectoral committee reports. On top of the sectoral committee reports, the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development needs to expeditiously handle tax bills since they have to be considered before the appropriation. Tax bills should be given serious priority. Finance committee, where you need our support, as the leadership, we shall support you; but expedite the process of the tax bills.MR MUGOLE: Mr Speaker, the procedural matter I would like to raise emanates from last week’s session on Thursday, 6 April. I did not attend Parliament; I was on another assignment in Mutukula. However, I received phone calls from my constituency that I had been thrown out of Parliament due to indecent dressing –(Interjections) – yet I was not here.That is bad reporting. I have found the people who produced the report and they have apologised to me but for purposes of the Hansard, I would like to state that I did not attend Parliament on that day. In fact, I had a function in my constituency - the Women’s Day celebrations. My constituents even wondered why the ever-smart man was thrown out of Parliament because of indecent dressing. The procedural matter I am raising is – this information inferred that you, the Speaker, do not know your Members of Parliament because they referred to an audio, although in the audio you did not mention the person you sent out. It actually insinuated that I was here yet most women here have attested that I am one of the smartest MPs. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, I am afraid of my fellow male MPs saying that I am smart, for very obvious reasons. I do not want men to say so. This has caused disrepute to me in my constituency. Mr Speaker, I suppose you ought to be clear that I was not the one; I was not here and this does not concern me. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Yes, honourable member, that was so detailed. Next time you should invoke Rule 55, which is a statement of personal explanation in our Rules of Procedure.8005THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 13 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.Honourable colleagues, you know, we have new rules. Some of you have got the old rules. So, it is very important that you do that. But for the record, the colleague who was not properly dressed - sometimes I do not want it to be raised by Members. I just told the colleague: “Honourable colleague, please go out because you are not properly dressed.” And that was not you; you were not here. So, for the record, whoever is saying that Hon. Mugole was chased out of the House is wrong. He is one of the smartest Members and we are proud of him for that. (Laughter) [Member rose_]Honourable member, a point of clarification applies to a Member who is holding the Floor, and he is no longer on the Floor. So, honourable colleagues, regarding matters of national importance, I will start with Hon. Sarah Opendi.2.36MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue that I am raising regards the continued violation of the rights of some Women Members of Parliament by security officials and RDCs - (Interjection) - yes. Just last week, the Minister of General Duties, Hon. Kasule Lumumba, updated us on the progress of the Sustainable Development Goals and one of the 17 SDGs is on gender equality and ensuring that there is peace, and that women are able to exercise their fundamental human rights. The Women Members of Parliament are also elected. Last year, a Woman Member of Parliament organised Women’s Day celebrations and spent her money, but the night before the event, the function was cancelled by the RDC –(Interjection)– yes, it was that bad. I left it to pass thinking that this year would be better. Mr Speaker, you have seen Women MPs continuously being harassed. We had Mityana last week, we had Luweero, Ngora and Kasese. A Member of Parliament is number 17 on the Order of Precedence in this country; an RDC is number 33 together with the district chairperson. Why should the Women Members of Parliament continue being Members of Parliament when they are being harassed and cannot exercise their rights? A Member of Parliament organises a fundraising -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prayers?MS OPENDI: A Member of Parliament organises a function and she is harassed. My prayer is that the Minister for the Presidency - (Interjection)- there is information coming in; what can I do? Can I take-?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will allow one from Ngora.MS OPENDI: There are two. Okay, thank you. MS STELLA APOLOT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am here as a testimony that I organised Women’s Day celebrations in Ngora District last year. The RDC, a one Mr Ekom blocked it at 9.30 p.m. and there was no compensation, and no reason given. This very year still, Ngora has not celebrated Women’s Day in a proper way. The Ministry of Gender has directed us, the Women Members of Parliament, to be in the lead for the Women’s Day celebrations. We have a letter directing us that the Shs 3 million should be utilised in consultation with a Woman Member of Parliament. I subscribe to the Forum for Democratic Change, and these RDCs use it against us. The whole country knows we have 32 Members of Parliament in FDC; we have over 50 in NUP. So, why should we be blocked yet we were given the mandate of the people? Mr Speaker, my prayer is that the Minister in charge of RDCs should call them to order.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, when giving information, you do not add prayers. (Laughter)  8006 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTDisclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament. [The Deputy Speaker]Hon. Sarah, can you conclude?MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As the chairperson of the Uganda Women’s Parliamentary Association, I pray that the Minister for the Presidency comes here to explain to Parliament why Women Members of Parliament are continuously being harassed by the RDCs. Secondly, the Minister of Internal Affairs should also come here to explain what the police is using to block Women Members of Parliament from either having fundraisings or mobilising women for any activity. Those are my two prayers. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Government? LOP, since it was a matter of national importance and your Member has spoken, let us just hear - because once you involve two ministries, it is better we look for the centre of power.2.41THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Mr Speaker, it is unfortunate that my colleagues, especially the Woman Member of Parliament from Ngora and the others, have been mistreated on such a day when you were encouraged by the minister, and also have the obligation to celebrate that day, as a woman. And when we talk about women, all women must be involved to celebrate their achievements -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, allow her; she has just started speaking.MS NAKADAMA:  The achievements of women in our country and the world over. So, it is unfortunate that you have been mistreated in such a way. The RDCs are not supposed to discourage or refuse women from celebrating their day. Mr Speaker, I am going to take this up in my office and call the people who have been involved in this; but I have said it here that RDCs are not supposed to stop women from celebrating their day. I thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Now, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, it is very important for you and the minister from whom the honourable member wanted answers to arrange a meeting between those ministers and UWOPA, so that the affected Members are part of that meeting and are given an explanation as to why this is going on. If they do not want them to hold such a day, then they should be told instead of them wasting resources and time and they do not do it.Therefore, UWOPA, we shall be in touch; if it necessitates coming back here, we shall give you space. However, we are now going into the budgeting period and I do not want to lag on other issues when we have the budgeting period. Hon. Janet Okori-Moe? 2.43MS JANET OKORI-MOE (NRM, Woman Representative, Abim): Thank you Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent importance concerning the continued restlessness arising from insecurity caused by armed cattle raiders being experienced by the communities of Abim District.Abim neighbours Agago and Otuke. So, when you hear Agago crying, it means Abim has cried already. The armed rustlers have continued to launch attacks on the people of Abim almost on a daily basis, stealing the remaining livestock. These days, raids take place even during daytime. A few families remained with some oxen just for ploughing, which they normally tie with chains and lock with padlocks. However, of late, the rustlers come with tools, cut off the padlocks and drive the animals away. We wonder whether those are still rustlers.Mr Speaker, the rustlers seem to have come with a lot of vengeance. They scatter in small groups and attack from any side. Abim District has lost lives and a lot of property to this vice. Some people have suffered injuries from bows, arrows and gunshots – the latest victim being COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR8007THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 13 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.David Ogwang of Oringoadinga Village in Alerek Town Council –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please say your prayers.MR OKORI-MOE:  Mr Speaker, the latest development is that they even enter houses and collect household items - mattresses, saucepans and everything. My prayers are:1. Government should tailor disarmament to focus on the hills of Abim, where the raiders seem to be hiding;2. Government should reinforce and boost the security of Abim as a matter of urgency so as to secure the lives and property of the people, especially now that they are in their gardens;3. Government should, as a matter of urgency, consider deploying additional soldiers to Abim, especially those specifically trained in managing challenging terrains;4. The Ministry of Works and Transport should consider rehabilitating Morulem Airstrip in Morulem Town Council so that even the aircrafts being used in disarmament operations are able to land for emergency support and reinforcement;5. The Ministry for Relief and Disaster Preparedness should provide emergency food relief and non-food relief items to families whose homes have been burnt and whose household items have been rustled; and 6. Finally, Government should take the security of Abim seriously, bearing in mind its uniqueness of being a community in Karamoja that is not armed but struggles to survive amidst insecurity caused by the rustlers year-in and year-out.Mr Speaker, Article 36 of the Constitution –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, we cannot. Please!MS OKORI-MOE:  Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, these are questions you should put to the Prime Minister so that you get a detailed response. Once it has such a huge detail – there is a difference between you raising a question on the Floor and the answer you get. You can raise it and it is noted, but the quality of the answer you get also matters.2.48THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (DEFENCE) (Mr Jacob Oboth): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I acknowledge the concerns of the Woman Member of Parliament for Abim. In fact, when I came in, I met Hon. Noman and the Woman MP. The Karamoja challenge of raids - is not recent. How I pray that we shall finally find a secure, reliable and cost-effective way to handle this matter. Of course, there is retaliation by some of the cattle rustlers. It is a matter that we are handling, but we want to stop handling it in an ad hoc manner.As a way forward, I want to inform the honourable members that by next month, the issue of manpower – we shall have many of the recruits passed out. We shall have them –(Mr Olanya rose_)– these are not charcoal matters. (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of order?MR OLANYA: Mr Speaker, the matter on the Floor, concerning raids, is very serious. Three weeks ago, the same issue of raids were even happening in Acholi subregion, whereby the Karamojong came and looted household property. These are not the normal raids that we used to see.Right now, the honourable minister is talking about manpower. We are aware that Uganda has taken about 12,000 soldiers outside the 8008 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTDisclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament. [Mr Olanya]country. Internally, we are suffering because we lack soldiers to take care of our people. Is the honourable minister in order to brag that next month we shall get more manpower, yet they are exporting our soldiers and serving other people? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, first, let us stop indicting the whole region of Karamoja. When we use the language of “Karamojong,” it does not augur well. There are good people. It is like we indict - no, honourable member, I am not accusing you. I am saying we should specify the criminals. Some might be from Karamoja and others might take advantage and all that. Hon. Oboth, the honourable colleague has asked: are you in order? Come and answer for yourself. Why do I answer for you? (Laughter)MR OBOTH:  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. First of all, I gave a preamble that this is a very complex matter that has a historical factor. Just this week, an MP from Kumi – Dr Okaasai – called me. In an island called Tisai, several raiders went and took a lot of cows. The second day, they did the same. The Uganda Police Force and the UPDF went there and have now closed the gaps. Therefore, we are taking –(Interjections) – Mr Speaker, I am very well informed on the issue of security. I am told that a committee of this Parliament will be going to Karamoja this month, on the 23rd. We are looking at going on the ground with them to see the loopholes there and cover them.However, the commitment is that I have taken the concern. I am going to talk to the division commander and see how we can help – right now, as I leave the microphone. So, I was very much in order.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Olanya, Hon. Oboth has said he was in order. (Laughter) Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there were issues beyond security that the Member raised. Any comment? I can see the minister for works is here.2.54THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, there are about 13 aerodromes that the ministry is supposed to rehabilitate, but because of the resource constraints, we had identified four for a start. However, given the urgency of this problem in Abim, I will go and discuss it with my technical people and see if we can rearrange and delay the fourth one and maybe see if Abim can be among the first four. We will do that. 2.55THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): We allocated food last week to those areas. I think it will be delivered this week. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, in the public gallery this afternoon are law students of King Caesar University in Makindye Division, Kampala District. They are represented in Parliament by Hon. Derrick Nyeko and Hon. Shamim Malende. They have come to observe the proceedings of this House. Please join me in welcoming them. You can stand up. (Applause)2.55MR JOSEPH KOLUO (Independent, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a very important and urgent matter of national importance regarding the rampant cattle raids in Magoro Subcounty and Tisai Islands in Kumi. Last week, unknown cattle rustlers raided a huge number of animals in Magoro Subcounty. To mention but a few, the following people lost cows totalling 27: 1. Mr Osirima Charles of Magoro Town Council - 10 cows; 2. Mr Okou Nico of Magoro Town Council – five cows; COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR8009THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 13 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.3. Mr Ikuta George of Omasia Parish – nine cows: and 4. Mr Osiya Joseph of Oigo Cell – three cows. The situation is worrying. It is causing a lot of panic among my people. We are in planting season now but instead, people are now moving into camps.I have three prayers –(Interjection) – yes, information is welcome, my brother – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Silas Aogon, by the way, on matters of national importance, I do not allow information but let me say this: I have around five colleagues who have issues to do with cattle rustling. I do not know whether we should allow all of them to speak - because there are also other issues we need to handle. I have these Members on the list: Hon. Silas Aogon, Hon. David Lagen on the same issue, which also applies to Hon. Judith Achan and Hon. Janet Okori-Moe of Abim. There are very many Members ready to speak to this same issue. Now, I think what we can do is use one minute each; I mean for those whom I have registered here. This will save us from interruptions on points of information. So, I implore you to also raise your prayers and we capture them because you are on the list. Otherwise, for now, Hon. Koluo is on the Floor. MR KOLUO: Thank you. My prayers are:  1. The Government should compensate the victims who lost their cows as soon as possible;2. We have a brigade in a place called Ongongoja. Some of the commanders should be taken to a very strategic place called Alereituk, which these people use to enter Magoro and Tisai Island in Kumi; 3. The UPDF is trying to do good work, but the local people are asking for a local solution. The local people should be allowed to get armed; only three sections of the locals –(Member timed out.) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the colleague finish his point. Conclude that point. MR KOLUO: One section should be in Magoro. Another in Palam and one section should be in Okore. I am very sure and confident that our people would help to contain this situation. I thank you. 3.01MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. The raids in Kumi, according to the report from the communities, started on the 6th of March. The Government took a lot of time to respond. It was just yesterday that we learned that there was an arrangement to bring about 30 UPDF soldiers to contain the situation. However, all the same, what we have lost, as Kumi, is more than 357 heads of cattle, which is a huge number. We are already down with poverty, meaning these raids are dragging us into the worst kind of poverty by taking away all the animals. We are here crying but they have not even compensated us for the animals we lost before. The Attorney-General has been dodging us and now the Government cannot even help us; they are not responding. On the island of Tisai, where this issue is, people are complaining that when UPDF soldiers are deployed, they go asking people to feed them. Between the people and the Government, who takes the taxes? This is a very big concern, Mr Speaker In terms of prayers, the people need urgent action in terms of medicines, food, and also money. There is nothing in their pocket now because they have been going to the markets to sell these animals to raise some money; they do not have money now. When we had COVID-19 here, people were given Shs 100,000 - I hope the Prime Minister is listening and will respond to this - send 8010 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTDisclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.money to our people because they are doing badly. The last one is compensation. Kindly, compensate our people quickly because the people of Kumi, up to now, have not been given back their animals; their original compensation. I want to take this opportunity to ask you, Mr Speaker, through your good seat, to remind Government that we are part of the Government of Uganda – (Interjections) - trouble only; we are coming back.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was that part of the prayer? Honourable colleagues, these issues really - I can see the emotion with which colleagues speak because they are painful stories. Most of you have shared with me on this matter in the office.3.03MR DA VID LAGEN (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the same note, allow me to raise the issue of insecurity in my area. This issue should never be taken for granted. I am speaking with pain because my people are suffering. Government programmes are being interrupted. Children are not able to go to school. The cattle raiders waylay children on the road. Houses are being burnt. As I talk, people are being displaced. In Adilang and Omiya Pachwa, we have a number of community members who are being displaced. The raiders have started moving from door to door.  If you refuse to come out and open the kraal for them to take the cattle, they fire at you with bullets.On the 10th of this month, a gentleman called Charles Oyet was shot at in his house because he refused to come outside and release the cattle. On the 9th, they uprooted the entire cassava garden. On the 11th, they invaded one of the subcounties and took over 16 heads of cattle. Today, in the morning, people from one of the subcounties ran from the garden and over 100 youths gathered out of anger to revenge. I had to talk to the local authorities to stop them because we still believe the Government can take immediate action.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prayers?MR LAGEN: My humble prayers: I am very happy that the Minister of Works and Transport is here. One, we have been crying for security roads to support the UPDF, and this has been a song but no response. The minister must respond today; what is happening?Two, the Office of the Prime Minister should respond immediately, especially to the people who are displaced. They need support.Three, the nine subcounties in Agago are asking the Government to give them iron sheets so that they get out of grass-thatched houses. Mr Speaker, these people are burning our houses; it is not safe for people to live in grass-thatched houses. The Government should give all the nine subcounties iron sheets.Mr Speaker, it is very good that today, we are going to talk about the supplementary budget. In this supplementary budget, Agago should be considered a special district and some of the money should be allocated to it because, for a very long time, the Government programmes are not being implemented there effectively. As I talk, many of our children are not going to universities because their cattle have been taken yet our community is poor. Can the Ministry of Education and Sports consider giving special scholarships for senior six candidates so that our district benefits like other districts? This is my humble prayer. I beg to submit. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Rt Hon. Prime Minister? - Shadow Minister of Defence, would you like to say something? [Ms Rukia Nakadama rose_] Rt Hon. Prime Minister, come after him because you will need to respond to what he will say.3.07MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The events in Karamoja and the surrounding [Mr Aogon] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR8011THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 13 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.areas of Lango, Teso, Acholi and Sebei, actually call into question the commitment of the Government to protect all citizens.Mr Speaker, we have seen and we have been around. Events have happened in other parts of this country - issues of insurgency - and the next day, deployment is massive. Events have happened in other countries. Once Uganda learns that people are dying in other countries, we are so fast to assemble our troops and take them there to fight. Right now, in Somalia, we have more than 6,000 soldiers and the African Union can only foot the bill for 3,000 of them who are there. We have demanded that the 3,000 that are redundant in Somalia be brought back because the question of Karamoja is simply a question of deployment. Can the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, make a commitment that those people in Karamoja matter to this country and that their property matters to people in charge of the Government? That should be the commitment from the Government to ensure that there is adequate deployment. Otherwise, we have soldiers and the capacity to do that. Where is the political will? The Prime Minister should answer this. MS NAKADAMA:  Mr Speaker, as you saw on that list, we have many equations concerning security and these are very serious matters being raised by Members of Parliament from that region. I know I have the minister here - Hon. Oboth can answer some of them. However, I am giving guidance that you allow the ministry to come up with a detailed statement on insecurity in those areas because these are very serious matters – (Interruption)MS ABER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. We have had the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs visiting these areas, we have had meetings in these areas, we have compiled reports and these reports are available. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, where there is theft, raping women, burning houses, killing people - this is not theft. What we are trying to say here is that we need to change our approach. We need to declare these people a rebel group and start serious action against them. Otherwise, it is not a pleasure to keep standing up here and talking about cattle raids. We need security beefed up, we need a robust operation and we should not handle this issue as if it is just common theft. This is a serious rebellion and rebel activity, which is taking place in this country. Just yesterday, they killed someone in my constituency in Namokora. They keep on shooting people, women are being raped and you see children remain orphans. These are serious matters we are talking about. Thank you.MS NAKADAMA:  Mr Speaker, if the ministry could come up with action points on the issues that are being raised - not just to talk about it here. My guidance is that the ministry should come up with detailed action points on the issues of security in the areas that have been mentioned.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Oboth, do you want to contribute to that?3.12THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (DEFENCE) (Mr Jacob Oboth): Mr Speaker, the solution is coming and I want to agree with Hon. Lillian Aber. What I said here is that we need do it better than we are doing in an ad hoc manner. I hope we shall get the support of this House and the Members of Parliament from that region. I suggest, Mr Speaker, if permissible, that we have a consultative meeting of all Members of Parliament from that region, and draw a programme because what is happening there is not being handled as a war. It is a fully-fledged war that threatens the livelihood of our people. It is a fully-fledged illegal activity, which is beyond just cattle rustling. 8012 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTDisclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament. [Mr Oboth]I hope when we get into fully-fledged operations, we shall balance the equation of the issues of human rights – not as if others who are being killed are not humans. I pray the Members of Parliament give me the opportunity to invite them to our ministry and the Ministry of Internal Affairs so that we meet and agree. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, as a security sector, please engage. Honourable colleagues, as you have heard, our committee will be going to Karamoja and they have already informed the minister. So, let us also give them time. These are very serious issues. We shall always give you space once they come up and see how best we can work together to have them settled. Colleagues, I will handle the rest of the issues during Prime Minister’s Time. Matters of national importance, I shall handle them under that time. Point of procedure from Hon. Balimwezo?MR BALIMWEZO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, I raised a matter of national importance and you ruled that the Minister of Education and Sports would give us a statement today. It was a matter concerning schools extending learning hours.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, would you like to say something?3.14THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true the honourable colleague raised the matter and it is an issue we are discussing as the top management of the ministry. We will be able to give an answer to the country on the position we have agreed on. I thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, prepare in one week to give us the statement. Next item.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF PAYMENT OF SALARIES OF SCIENTISTS UNDER UGANDA PRISONS SERVICETHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On this matter, I talked to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development but there were still some gaps within the statement, which we agreed upon after looking through. However, they have to first look at it and handle it. I hope we shall handle it next week. Next item.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE DESTRUCTION OF COFFEE SEEDLINGS IN THE GREATER MASAKA SUBREGION3.15THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Mr Speaker, I made a call to the Rt Hon. Leader of the Opposition over that matter and I spoke to the leaders in Masaka. We agreed that we need more time to get the version of the affected people because the statement I was going to bring here was only from the Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA). I felt it fair to listen to the affected people and give you a balanced account. I beg that you allow me two more weeks, as I agreed with the Leader of the Opposition and Hon. Florence Namayanja, the Masaka City Mayor, to come and report on this issue of the apparent conflict between the nursery operators and UCDA. I beg to request. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, you can sit nearby because there is a matter which colleagues have been concerned about as far as funding of the agriculture sector is concerned. We want to know the status of the funding of the agriculture sector and the releases made to the sector because we appropriated money and the things we thought would be handled - we do not see anything. Are you being funded as we appropriated?MINISTERIAL STATEMENT8013THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 13 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, allow me to make a statement formally showing you the releases we have got to date and the constraints we have. We really have very serious constraints given the demands we have from the country. So, if you allow, next week, I can make a statement of the money we have been given. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is Hon. Janet Okori-Moe here, the chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries? - It is okay, honourable minister. Next item. When you raise your hand or finger, I do not know what you mean. Here we stand up to raise a certain point; either procedure or order. Hon. Luttamaguzi, I can see you are standing up. What should I do for you? (Laughter) The minister has not given any statement but just requested for an extension of time. Okay, let us listen to you.MR LUTTAMAGUZI: Mr Speaker, I am requesting the minister to come with a report in regard to goats’ distribution in Karamoja. We have heard several reports regarding the goats, which were not distributed in Karamoja. Since it falls under his docket, he should come with that report too. Thank you, Mr Speaker.  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. No, honourable member, after iron sheets, we shall go to the goats. (Laughter) MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, for the record, we did not distribute any goats in Karamoja; at least, not to my knowledge. It could be another programme perhaps under the Office of the Prime Minister or another ministry. 3.19MR ENOSI ASIIMWE (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise under rule 52. When the honourable minister was asked to make a statement on Masaka Nursery Operators – at the same time, we requested for a statement regarding the supply of seedlings to farmers. We were looking at the amount of money that we allocated in the previous budget relating to tree seedlings and the Speaker instructed that you come with a statement regarding coffee seedlings supplied to farmers; unfortunately, you could have left by that time. I do not know whether he is able to respond or not.MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, for the record, I prefer the “corner” that was my first seat when I entered Parliament. So, I beg that you maintain my kibanja  here –(Interjections)-  I was here before you, Hon. Mbwatekamwa; so, just be calm. (Laughter)I made a statement on the Floor on the maize seeds. It was discussed here and we got a commitment from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development here on the Floor. Based on that, the National Agriculture Advisory Services (NAADS) instructed the suppliers to release the seeds. Many of you have picked them and some of you told us that because of the erratic seasons, you agreed to keep them for the next season. It is logical and understandable.On the issue of coffee seedlings, there was also a decision on the Floor here that we allow UCDA to supply. Mr Speaker, you were the one in the Chair then. Based on that, last season, the supply was done. Until we get another commitment, we cannot be sure that we shall supply because these items, as I said last week, were removed from the budget of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. So, until we get a policy change or a resolution of Parliament that is consented to by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we cannot guarantee the regular supply of seedlings as it used to be. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, let us handle these issues when handling a statement related to releases to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. We shall deal with all those details. Hon. Opendi, you had a procedural matter?8014 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTDisclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My procedural issue is in regard to the way we proceed in this House. When a Member raises a matter of national importance and the minister is asked to bring a statement, the Clerk should immediately put that on the Order Paper.I raised an issue regarding the students’ loan scheme. Some of the students have even dropped out of school because they could not afford the fees. They went to first year hoping that they could be taken on in the second year by the Higher Education Students’ Financing Scheme. The minister came with a statement and it is now four weeks – he would come and go away. Is it not procedurally right that the Minister of Education and Sports is asked to come and explain why we do not have funding for this students’ loan scheme? I am crying even on this supplementary budget. Mr Speaker, you have students even from your own district, who found their way into university doing sciences - which are priority courses for this Government - and they cannot proceed. Some of them have admission letters but have failed to join universities because they could not be accommodated. So, is it not procedurally right that we have that response from the Ministry of Education and Sports regarding the Higher Education Students’ Financing Scheme? Or if the minister has the response, he could give it and we see how to move forward.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, do you have the statement ready?3.23THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang): Mr Speaker, the matter of Higher Education Students’ Financing Scheme is one I can give an answer to even now.First of all, I acknowledge the challenges of the Government of the Republic of Uganda as far as the performance of our economy is concerned. However, I also acknowledge that, as a Minister of Education and Sports, our request for the funding of the Higher Education Students’ Financing Scheme, was placed and we have a funding deficit of about Shs 24 billion, for which the finance ministry has not given us the money. So, for that matter, what can you expect the Ministry of Education and Sports to do if we do not get the funding? Also, that is why I said that we are aware of the challenges the Government is facing generally because the cuts are all over the Government. I thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, take up that matter. Next week on Tuesday, update the House on the same. Let the acting LOP say something.3.24MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buh-weju County, Buhweju): Mr Speaker, every minister that stands to speak says that there is a problem with finances. They say the economy is not doing well. Don’t you think that proce-durally, we need the Minister of Finance, Plan-ning and Economic Development to come and tell us the status of the economy? When you say there are no medicines in hospitals, they say there is no money. How is the economy far -ing? I think we need to know the status of the economy so that we can know where we stand and plan accordingly.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, the Committee on National Economy gave a report on that. You may remember when we handled the Budget Framework Paper and I advised you, honour -able colleagues, in your debate, to refer to the committee’s report on the state of the economy. We are now going into the budgeting process and we should have everything. Of course, the economy keeps changing and evolving. You cannot ask for a statement every day.I would think that we need to look at it very closely, especially when handling these policy reports. We also expect the Committee on Bud-get to give us a status report on releases. Those MINISTERIAL STATEMENT8015THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 13 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.ones would give us a better picture – why did you release money for A, B, C and D and not release money for A, B, C, D? I think that is what we shall look at. The Chairperson of the Committee on Budget is not here but I will first ask for their report. Once it is ready, we will give it priority as it will enable us to discuss the status of our fi-nances very well.Hon. Macho, is it a procedural matter?MR MACHO: It is a procedural matter under rule 42. Mr Speaker, I thank you for guiding the House well. My mood is not good at all be-cause yesterday was a sad day for the people of Busia Municipality. The enforcement officers of Uganda Revenue Authority invaded a taxi park and started torturing citizens and journal -ists. Mr Speaker, I am asking whether we are pro-ceeding well when the journalists of this coun-try - first of all, the other day, we saw pepper being sprayed at journalists. Yesterday, it was at the journalist in Busia. David Owori, a jour -nalist with NTV , is missing up to now. Cameras were taken away from all the seven journalists. As I talk, even Kenyans who do cross-border trade are afraid to cross into Uganda because the rate at which the enforcement officers were shooting at Ugandans was terrible. The Ken-yans thought that there was war in our country. Therefore, I do not know whether we are pro-ceeding well by not talking about such a very important matter that concerns my people. Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable col-leagues, I now want to be very clear on the point of procedure. Rule 78(4) – interruption of debate – provides: “Where a Member interrupts debate on a point of procedure, the Member shall state the rule of procedure he or she deems to have been breached by the Member holding the Floor or the procedural matter he or she wishes to be ruled upon, before subjecting the Member to the Speaker’s ruling.”For a point of procedure, a Member must be on the Floor. I now want to go to the strict interpretation. If you do not have anyone holding the Floor then do not raise a point of procedure because it has to do with the conduct of a person holding the Floor. We have tried to be lenient but I have seen that it has become a shortcut for us to sub-mit and find a way of smuggling -(Laughter) Honourable colleagues, you will allow me to apply your own rules, which you made, for us to be able to move forward. I have tried to be lenient but I have seen that we are abusing it. Let us move on. Honourable, I will give you space under Prime Minister’s Time and I noted you down as hav-ing a matter of national importance. Next item?MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE RE-PORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON EDUCA-TION AND SPORTS ON THE FAILURE BY GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA TO SECURE THE GRANT PROVIDED BY THE GOVERNMENT OF THE PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF CHINA TO CONSTRUCT TWO REGIONAL STADIA: BUHINGA IN KABAROLE DISTRICT AND AKII-BUA IN LIRA DISTRICT3.30THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMIT -TEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mr Cuthbert Abigaba): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing us to present this report of the Committee on Education and Sports on the failure by the Government of the Republic of Uganda to secure the grant provided by the Government - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure?MR SILWANY: Thank you. Mr Speaker, I recall very well that when this matter of the construction of the two stadia came up, I raised an issue – and I am on record – and the Speak-er guided that when this matter comes up, the 8016 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTDisclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.committee would handle all stadia in the coun-try. That would include our only stadium in Busoga; the dilapidated Bugembe Stadium. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for you to go as per the earlier guidance that this stadium of Busoga is included in the report? Thank you, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon-ourable member, I think that this would apply after reading the report. Let us first listen to what is in the report. If they did not touch this issue, we can ask them.MR ABIGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am here to present a report of the Committee on Education and Sports on the failure by the Government of the Republic of Uganda to se-cure the grant provided by the Government of the People’s Republic of China to construct two regional stadia, that is, Buhinga in Ka-barole District and Akii-Bua in Lira District.Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the re-port and minutes of the various meetings we conducted. Mr Speaker, during the House’s proceedings of 15 September 2021, the Fort Portal Central Division MP, Hon. Alex Ruhunda, raised an urgent question on delays by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to adhere to the House’s instruction to present progress reports on the construction of Buhin-ga Stadium in Kabarole District and Akii-Bua Olympic Stadium in Lira District, through a grant from the Government of the People’s Re-public of China. Relatedly, the same matter was raised by the Fort Portal City Woman Member of Parlia -ment, Hon. Linda Irene, during the House’s proceedings held on 30 September 2021.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, kindly go to observations and recom-mendations and we open the debate.MR ABIGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will go to page 5 of the report, which highlights the methodology, the various entities we met and the visits we conducted. 3.0 Findings, observations and recommenda -tions3.1 Delays in fast-tracking implementation of the presidential pledges to construct the two regional stadia, that is, Buhinga and Akii-Bua –(Interruption)MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As the honourable member talks about delays in fast-tracking the implementation, a matter was presented on 15 September 2021 and the com-mittee report is being presented today in 2023. Mr Speaker, is it in order for the Committee on Education and Sports to continue violating our rules that a matter is referred to them but they take two years to present the report? Honestly, Mr Speaker, is it in order? This is not the first time, Mr Speaker. The report I know was completed in November 2022. So, is it in order for them to continue violating the rules of this House that a matter is referred to them and they take years to report back? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, do you want to say something about that?MR ABIGABA: Mr Speaker, it is true the matter was referred to us in 2021 but as a committee, we need to acknowledge that we had very many assignments from this House and we did our work. This report was ready by last year but it has been on business to follow for about six months. However, we want to apologise if the honourable members feel that there was a delay; it was not intended. Mr Speaker, we have a number of reports, which are ready for presentation and –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, a committee report should take 45 days. You took over one year to finish your work. That is unacceptable. I would guide that next time you have too much work, form subcommittees from the committee. That is how PAC and the Committee on Tourism, [Mr Silwany]8017THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 13 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.Trade and Industry do it. You would form subcommittees; it does not have to be a full committee to process a report. A subcommittee can do it.Where you feel that your committee is overwhelmed, come back to the leadership, we can reassign that assignment to another committee. We have other committees that can provide support. Otherwise, form subcommittees, which process and submit reports to the main committee for adoption before bringing it here. Sometimes we have all these issues because we have taken a very long time.Honourable colleagues, let us do away with it together with the National Council of Sports so that the debate is the same.MR ABIGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for accepting my apology. We shall do better.Mr Speaker, this is a report on the delays in fast-tracking the implementation of presidential pledges to construct two regional stadia: Buhinga and Akii-Bua. In a meeting of the Committee on Education and Sports held on Tuesday, 23 November 2021, the committee was informed by the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development in charge of planning, Hon. Amos Lugoloobi, and the then State Minister of Education and Sports, Hon. Obua Denis Hamson, that the two regional stadia: Akii-Bua and Buhinga, were presidential pledges made on 18 March 2010 and 29 September 2012, respectively. The meeting was further informed that the two regional stadia prominently featured in Cabinet meetings under the Ministry of Education and Sports to be financed under the Forum for China Africa Cooperation (FOCAC) for the period running 2018 to 2021.As a committee, we observed that the idea of constructing the two regional stadia had long been conceived by the Presidency prior to the consideration of the same as proposed interventions at the 7th Ministerial Conference of FOCAC that was held in Beijing in 2018, and the renegotiation of the same at the 8th Ministerial Conference of FOCAC that was held in Dakar, Senegal in November 2021. The committee further observed that the laxity by the relevant Government institutions to fast-track the implementation of presidential pledges on the construction of the two regional stadia could have prompted His Excellency the President to seek support from the Government of the People’s Republic of China at the 7th Ministerial Conference of FOCAC held in Beijing in 2018. The committee recommends that the Ministry for the Presidency should always liaise with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Education and Sports to expedite the execution of presidential pronouncements. Secondly, Mr Speaker, is about the late submission of priority projects to Government of China for financing. The committee noted that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, in his letter dated 14 August 2019 - and the letter is annexed to the report - to the Minister of Education and Sports, and as had been guided, stated 30 August 2019 as being the deadline for submission of the feasibility studies, concept designs and environmental and social impact assessment in respect of the two sports stadia - Akii-Bua Stadium and Buhinga Stadium - for review and onward submission to the Chinese authorities for financing.In response to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Education and Sports, Mr Alex Kakooza, in a letter dated 25 May 2001 - and the letter is annexed - submitted the final feasibility and detailed proposals for the two stadia. As a committee, we observed that the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Education and Sports delayed by a period of one year and 8018 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTDisclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.nine months to submit final feasibility study and detailed proposals for the two stadia to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for onward transmission to the Government of the People’s Republic of China for financing.The committee further observed that the delay in the submission of key documents by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development could not be justified since the letter dated 14 August 2019 by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development clearly prescribed 30 August 2019 as the deadline for the submission of the documents.As a committee, we recommend that the Office of the Auditor-General audits the entire process that is accountable for delaying to cause expeditious production by the two consultancy firms on feasibility studies, concept designs and environmental and social impact assessment reports for the two stadia in readiness for their submission to the Government of the People’s Republic of China for financing. Mr Speaker, the third is about the exclusion of Buhinga Stadium and Akii-Bua Olympic Stadium from the list of projects to finance during the 8th Ministerial Conference of FOCAC, held in Dakar, Senegal. The committee was informed by the Minister of Education and Sports that during the 8th Ministerial Meeting of FOCAC held on 29-30 November 2021 in Dakar, Senegal, the matter of financing the construction of the two stadia was tabled for renegotiation. Attempts have been made by the Government of Uganda to follow up on the same matter and the various letters that were written are attached. The committee noted that there has not been any commitment from the Government of the People’s Republic of China in listing the two stadia among the priority interventions during the 2021 to 2023 FOCAC cycle. The committee was however informed by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that the Embassy of the Government of the People’s Republic of China indicated that grant resources available for the FOCAC cycle of 2021 to 2023 would not target infrastructure development projects but rather be committed to addressing concerns in the health sector, particularly the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and that any support during the 2021/2023 cycle would only target those that have a direct impact on Ugandans.The committee observed that the Government of the People’s Republic of China had absolute preserve and right to determine grant resources and specific intervention areas and that delays by the Government of Uganda to expedite the submission of key documents in respect of the two stadia in time for financing during the FO-CAC 2018/2021 cycle could have motivated the non-inclusion, capacity building and infra-structure development initiatives by the Chi-nese Government from the list of priorities in the FOCAC 2021/2023 cycle.The committee recommends that since the Gov-ernment of Uganda failed to ensure the timely submission of key documents as a requirement for financing the construction of two regional stadia during the FOCAC Cycle 2018/2021, and given the non-inclusion of two sports fa-cilities in the FOCAC Cycle 2021/2023, the changes in priority interventions by the Gov-ernment of China, the Government of Uganda should, as a matter of urgency, plan, budget and allocate adequate funds for the construc-tion and maintenance of Buhinga stadium and Akii-Bua Olympic Stadium. Other key related considerationsPrevious budget allocation for the construction of Akii-Bua Olympic stadiumPrior to the presidential pledges made with respect to the construction of Akii-Bua Olym-pic Stadium, the Government of Uganda, for four consecutive years from the Financial Year 2015/2016 to Financial Year 2018/2019, allo -cated a total of Shs 3.8 billion for the construc-tion of Akii-Bua Olympic Stadium. Out of Shs 3.8 billion allocated, Shs 2.53 billion was re-leased to the Ministry of Education and Sports for the same purpose.[Mr Abigaba]COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR8019THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 13 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.Further analysis of the budget performance of the project indicates that Shs 1.83 billion was spent from the Financial Year 2015/2016 to Fi-nancial Year 2018/2019 under Government of Uganda development funds allocated towards the construction of Akii-Bua Olympic Stadium under the development project Code 1369.Table 1 highlights the performance of the funds allocated towards this project. In the interest of time, Mr Speaker, the table is very clear; it has monies that were approved in each of those financial years. The second column is money that was released, the third column is money that was spent, the next column is the percent -age of what was released and the last column is the percentage of what was released and even-tually spent.In the Financial Year 2015/2016, Shs 1 billion was allocated towards the project out of which Shs 0.76 billion was released, which is 76.3 per cent of the approved amount and Shs 0.79 bil-lion was spent, which was 103 per cent of the released amount.In the Financial Year 2016/2017, the release was very low at 21.4 per cent and 97.2 per cent of this was spent. In the Financial Year 2017/2018, Shs 800 million was allocated and Shs 780 billion was released. Shs 770 million was spent of the money that was released.In the Financial Year 2018/2019, out of Shs 1 billion that was allocated, only Shs 600 mil -lion was released and out of that, only Shs 60 million, which is 9.5 per cent of the released amount, was spent.During the Committee on Education and Sports’ oversight visit to the field held between 17 and 19 September 2022 to appraise the sta-tus of the construction of Buhinga and Akii-Bua stadia, the committee was informed by the Chief Administrative Officer of Lira Dis-trict Local Government that Government had only allocated Shs 656 million for preliminary works on the sports facility and that the district council was not privy to the Shs 2.35 billion that was released for the aforementioned pur -pose. The committee observes that the budgetary allocations suggested goodwill and prior in-tentions by the Government of Uganda to construct sports infrastructure to facilitate the promotion of sports talent in the country. The committee further observed that the current state of the proposed site for the construction of Akii-Bua Olympic Stadium and civil work so far done at the site cannot justify value for the Shs 1.83 billion that was released to the Ministry of Education and Sports.We recommend that the Auditor-General should conduct a special audit on the perfor -mance of Shs 1.83 billion that was released to the Ministry of Education and Sports to aid the construction of Akii-Bua Olympic Stadium.We also recommend that the Ministry of Edu-cation and Sports and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should ensure that funds are secured within the next financial year to kick start the construction of the two stadia.Risks of encroachment on stadia land From the oversight visit conducted by the Committee on Education and Sports from 17 to 19 September 2022 to appraise the status of the construction of the two regional stadia, it was evident that the proposed construction sites for the two regional stadia had no visible land-marks and signposts showing proof of owner -ship and registered interests in the land which subjected it to risks of encroachment. We ob-served that the absence of key landmarks and signposts on these proposed construction sites may expose land to risks of encroachment. As a committee, we recommend that the Min-istry of Education and Sports, in collaboration with the district local governments of Kabarole and Lira, should, in the meantime, erect some signposts on the proposed construction sites for the two stadia showing the registered own-ership and interest in the land and the purpose for which it is intended.In conclusion, deducing from the meetings held by the Committee on Education and Sports to 8020 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTDisclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.consider the matter of the failure of the Gov-ernment of Uganda to secure a grant from the Government of the People’s Republic of China for the construction of the two regional stadia namely Buhinga and Akii-Bua in Kabarole and Lira districts respectively, it is evident that the Ministry of Finance, Planning, and Economic Development did not fast-track its acquisition in time. The Ministry of Education and Sports is equally responsible for delaying the submis-sion of key documents in time to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Develop-ment as a prerequisite for securing the grant from the Government of the People’s Republic of China. The Ministry of Education and Sports should come up with a proper master plan for all the regional stadia to enhance infrastructure devel -opment and identify and develop skills and tal -ent, which will boost sports discipline.Mr Speaker, while handling this matter, we all agreed in unison as a committee; so, we do not have a minority report. I beg to submit and im-plore Members to adopt the report.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. Do you have any statement to make on other stadia since you are the commit -tee overseeing the sector?MR ABIGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are currently handling the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Education and Sports and a few months ago, we handled the Budget Framework Paper. If you read the com-mittee report, we are emphatic on calling upon the Government to intentionally come out and consider establishment of regional stadia. We have even included all those monies in our re-ports and we are going to make the same rec-ommendation in our ministerial policy state -ment report. Therefore, we implore this House and also the Government to take this in good faith and ensure that we restore all our original stadia. That report is very comprehensive. In our Budget Framework Paper report and the ministerial policy statement, we are going to be emphatic on this matter.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, let us use 20 minutes and dispose of this then go to the main report of the National Council for Sports. I will start with Hon. Josephat, Hon. Ruhunda and Hon. Christine. Honourable member, they talked about your submission. I will then go to Hon. Nyakikongoro and Hon. Judith Alyek and Hon. Pius then I come here. Let us do it quickly, two minutes each.3.55MR JOSEPHAT TUMWESIGYE (NRM, Bugangaizi South County, Kakumiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the committee for a wonderful report. The committee chairperson continued referring to these two stadia as “regional stadia”. He has mentioned something about prompting the Government to think about enhancing the refurbishment of regional stadia. I would like to add that the Government should deliberately consider establishing new stadia where there are no functional stadia so that sports can be energised in this country. You will agree with me that sports bring people together both culturally and economically. In some countries, some sportsmen and women earn more than the Presidents of those countries, I would say. Mr Speaker, I implore the committee and this House that we should think of establishing stadia at least at the level of the cities that we have created in this country. I come from Bunyoro subregion and for everybody’s knowledge, it is the oldest kingdom in this country but we do not have a stadium. I would, therefore, request that the committee - since you are still working on the Budget Framework Paper of your committee - considers even those areas where they do not - (Member timed out.)[Mr Abigaba]8021THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 13 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Ruhunda?3.57MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Central Division, Fort Portal City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was privileged as the MP of Fort Portal Central Division, together with my colleagues, to host the President at Buhinga playground. It is at that point that I raised the matter with the President; that the country needs state-of-the-art stadia because we lack sports tourism in this country. We are a soccer nation without infrastructure for soccer and other sports. This was something that the President got interested in and he said that we should have regional stadia across the country. I had it in mind that they would be hosting international competitions - the CAF competitions - I am glad the FUFA President, my friend, is here. We thought that we needed a master plan, like we have seen in Rwanda; it is a smaller country with a smaller economy but what they have done is they have organised and planned for tourism across the board, right from the hotel industry to the sports industry. That is why we did not want to depend on the mercy of the Chinese for us to develop our sports facilities. We could budget purposively using the four sub budget lines to create money for financing stadia using our own budget. (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conclude, honourable member.MR RUHUNDA: Mr Speaker, if that is not possible, I have seen the Ministry of Finance bringing loans for other projects. I see no reason whatsoever why we cannot get loans to finance Buhinga stadium, Akii-Bua stadium and others. It is my prayer that this House pronounces itself by urging the government to secure loan facilities to finance these stadia in the country to avoid embarrassment like we saw in Cairo. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Christine?4.00MS CHRISTINE APOLOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Though overtaken by events, it is important that Parliament follows up on these monies allocated for the stadia. You can imagine from 2015, 2016, 2018, 2019 to date - I really implore us to revisit the observations of the Auditor-General for the years when money was allocated for the two stadia and then strictly follow up the utilisation of the funds. We should ensure clear accountability of funds allocated by the government for these development programmes. We would have also expected the chairperson of the committee - like you hinted - to give us an update on all stadia in the country. This is so that as we are now planning to approve the Budget of FY 2023/2024, we would be able, as Parliament, to identify the priorities for the forthcoming financial year. We need to identify particular areas like talent development so that we realise good outcomes. That will give Parliament a picture of what is needed after handling the two stadia other than just having this information. Thank you very much.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nyakikongoro?4.02MR ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (NRM, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker and the chairperson for the report. In Uganda, we do not prioritise certain things that we need. That is why we see many people rushing to go and watch football in other countries, including our own Minister of Sports. (Laughter)Mr Speaker, I was so embarrassed at a function which you attended in Kakyeka Stadium - and they call it a “stadium”. This is a regional stadium, which would be expected to serve 8022 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTDisclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.Ugandans. These stadia, if developed, can collect NTR and this money can be recovered. Look at the small football pitches that we have where they put curtains and whatnot. People pay on entry but here in Uganda, we just leave them like that; we do not develop them and then we scatter our resources. Mr Speaker, I am embarrassed that in 2015 - when I was in this Parliament before I went for recess and bounced back - Akii-Bua Stadium was a priority. We were excited that we were going to have a state-of-the-art stadium in the North but up to now, even the little money that was appropriated, I hear they are now recommending that the Auditor-General should audit it. Why can’t we use even the little money that we are given as we push for further funding? This discourages people from supporting such activities. Therefore, when we allocate money to do work, let us do it and ensure that it gives us the morale to look for more money to support other stadiums. I beg that as a country that sup-ports sports –(Member timed out.) 4.04MR DENES SEKABIRA  (NUP, Katikamu County North, Luwero): Thank you, Mr Speaker. For the last decade, President Musev-eni has been promising the people of Greater Luweero a stadium. When I wrote to the Chair -person of the Committee on Presidential Af-fairs, they advised that I write to the Commit -tee on Education and Sports. Now that the Minister for Sports is here, I would like him to pronounce himself on that because we do not have any monument for this NRM Government in Luweero as opposed to the graveyards we have. We have one in Na-kaseke, in Kikamulo and even in Kiboga. I think we deserve one. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Sekabira, you look good – you are a good monument for the NRM. (Laughter) I think human beings would be better monuments. When you look at Hon. Sekabira, he would be a good monument. (Laughter) That was on a light note.4.06MR PIUS WAKABI (NRM, Bugahya Coun-ty, Hoima): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I sug-gest that before we think of regional stadia, let us, first of all, rehabilitate the national stadi-um; Mandela National Stadium so that it can be functional. (Applause) I do not know who plans for this country. We were embarrassed to host a home game in another country. Once we come to regional stadia, I request that we start with Hoima City because we have moved a step ahead. As the Member of Parlia -ment, I convinced my family and gave out 10 acres of titled land in Hoima City to the Gov-ernment. The FUFA President can testify. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Silwany raised this matter and I stopped him, if you remember, honourable colleagues. This is the right time for him to raise it.4.07MR SOLOMON SILWANY  (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Mr Speaker, I thank you for your very clever guidance. (Laughter)  I seek that you protect me from hecklers – Hon. Namugga Gorreth is heckling me.Mr Speaker, when we talk about stadia – I raised the issue of the regional stadium of Bu-soga today because I think Busoga presents this country with the very able FUFA Presi-dent, Hon. Hassim Magogo, who is seated with us in this Parliament. When you look at page 10 of the report, the committee is recommending that the minister looks into the regional stadia and see that they bring here a proposal for the infrastructure de-velopment of the different regional stadia. I think this is the right time for other regions that have brought benefit to the sports of this country – like Busoga that brought a good leader that is managing football very well. We [Ms Nyakikongoro]8023THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 13 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.should come up with Bugembe Stadium that has been pending for a long time. These days when you go to Bugembe Stadium, you may think it is something else because it is very di-lapidated. This used to be one of the classiest stadiums in Uganda. I request the honourable minister to give us the plan as quickly as possible so that we know when they are going to give us Bugembe Sta-dium in Jinja so that we, the best footballers in Busoga –(Member timed out.)4.09MR GEOFREY KAYEMBA-SSOLO (NUP, Bukomansimbi South County, Bukoman-simbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I wish our king, Ronald Muwenda, a happy birthday. (Applause)I thank the committee for the report. Really, they have brought good things. It is Govern-ment’s obligation to build stadiums but the way Government does its things is why we lost the grant. If they had expedited it, we would have been with a stadium in Buhinga. Some-how, somewhere, the people of Fort Portal lost an opportunity due to the bureaucracy of this Government. I also want to go to the recommendation on the Shs 1.8 billion for Akii-Bua Olympic Stadium. When you go on the ground, you do not see value for the Shs 1.8 billion. I think the Audi-tor-General should take it up for an audit. Mr Speaker, Government should consider de-veloping the stadiums which exist. I am not sure that Namboole will be ready for the 12th as the minister intimated. However, we have other stadia like the one at St Mary’s Kitende. Why doesn’t the Government help the private investor to develop that stadium? There is also Lugogo Stadium for KCCA. Why doesn’t the government provide a good budget for it so that it can be used to develop talent in this country? We need the status for Nakivubo because it was an international stadium and a monument for the world war. Up to now, we do not know what is going on. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable col-leagues, I am not picking Members from the same region because we are talking about sta-diums; so, we want to know about the different subregions. For Lango, let me pick Hon. Linda Agnes. 4.11MS LINDA AUMA (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speak-er. I would like to commend the committee for their report. On the very day they went to Lira, as the area Member of Parliament, I was with them. Regarding all that has happened, especial -ly Government’s planning of the finances to support these stadia, something comes to my mind: do we really love this country? Are we really patriotic, especially some of us who are in leadership? First of all, construction of these stadia failed because of failure of the technical people that were supposed to expedite the designs and en-sure that they were given to the funders in time. This was a failure on our side.Secondly, the Government went ahead to plan with their little resources and start construc-tion, especially of Akii-Bua Stadium. The only money that reached Lira District was Shs 665 million and it was meant for bush clearing. The simple structure that we have in Akii-Bua Sta-dium is being worked on by the local people. Mr Speaker, this pains us very much. We are lucky that Hon. Magogo was in Lira during the FUFA Drums. Our –(Member timed out.)4.13MS AGNES AMEEDE (Independent, Woman Representative, Butebo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to draw the attention of the House to the policy on identifying local talent. When I was in school a long time ago, time was always set aside for sports in primary and secondary schools. The pupils and students engaged in all manner of sports and sports equipment was provided. Today, most of that is not in our schools, at least not in Butebo. 8024 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTDisclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.Children have a right to play but they are not playing. It is not part of the school calendars to play. Some schools have fields but these fields are not evenly levelled and are full of anthills.Kampala was awash with newspaper articles that school fields were being given away in Nakasero, Kololo, Buganda Road and others. Are we really serious about identifying and developing local talent? I would like the minister to pay attention to schools that have fields and do something about it. 4.15 DR NICHOLAS KAMARA (FDC, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report presented. I am now very convinced that the Ministry of Education and Sports and indeed the government are not serious about the two stadia. First of all, as you have heard, we had an international game but we do not have any stadium, which qualifies to host any FUFA mandated games. Secondly, when I was growing up in my – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The ones of FUFA are going on. It is the Confederation of African Football (CAF) games -DR KAMARA: When I was growing up, the old primary schools in Kabale Municipality had stadia but in the last 10 years, I do not know of any primary schools, which have been built with a stadium. In fact, even the seed schools that have come up do not have any stadia. Therefore, it is important that the Ministry of Education and Sports tells us the policy on building stadia in schools because that is where sports development starts from. I beg to submit. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, seed schools have playgrounds and play fields. I do not think we can build stadia for schools.  4.16MR FRANCIS LORIKA (NRM, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the committee for the positive recommendations. I also want to inform this House that Karamoja region is endowed with a lot of talent. I want to believe that we have the best footballers in this country, but it is unfortunate that when they talk about Karamoja, they talk about other things - Karimojong are talented in all fields. They are very good footballers.We have had a big challenge, especially with the footballers from our region because we border Sudan and Kenya and so, most of them end up harnessing their talents or training in other countries. If much emphasis is put, especially in those regions that border other countries, we can actually benefit from these talents.If you remember, most of the athletes in Kapchorwa used to go and participate in games in Kenya and Kenya was actually taking the trophies and wins. If we can put emphasis and construct more stadia, especially in our region of Karamoja, you will talk positively about Karamoja. I believe we shall be able to represent this country positively. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For Kigezi region, Hon. Kamara has already spoken. We are trying to sample each region to know how the stadia and sports are doing.4.18MR WILLIAM CHEMONGES (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this very wonderful report. However, for some of us who represent athletes in this country - Just like last week when I was in my constituency, I woke up in the morning around 5.00 a.m. and I found people training. There were those training in football and others were running. When I look at the way we handle sports in the country, I get surprised because it is a big shame that with all our resources and God-given talent in sports, we still cannot manage to have a stadium per region. We need [Ms Ameede]8025THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 13 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.to come together, as leaders, and make sure we have stadia per region. Finally, we also need to look at the way we invest our resources when we finally decide to put them in anything. For example, in Sebei we have the Teryet, which is the high altitude training centre. I can tell you that the money invested in that project does not reflect on the ground. Almost Shs 26 billion, like I hear, has been invested. However, when you go there and look at the work done on ground - even when you look at the hostel that has been built in that place, you will wonder who is planning for this project. I would like to request this House that we should have a very serious committee to go and really – (Member timed out.)4.20 MR GABRIEL OKUMU (NRM, Okoro County, Zombo): Thank you very much right, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for the report presented. In Zombo, particularly - I will not talk for West Nile - in every village, there is a football club. At national level, we have two clubs: Paidha Black Angels and Paidha United. However, Government has not invested in tapping into the energies of these youth. These clubs are funded locally. I would like to request the government to have a holistic approach to our problems. For example, in 2018, we had an insurgency where the youth combined and attacked a UPDF barracks.In Karamoja, we are crying that there is cattle rustling. We would like the Government to tap into the energies of the youths so that they become friends of the Government. If this is done, for sure, we shall not have cattle rustling and insecurity will end in this country. I would like to implore the Government to pay attention and prioritise sports for the youths who are the majority in our country. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 4.22MS SUSAN AMERO (Independent, Woman Representative, Amuria): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. In Soroti, we have a stadium for the whole of Teso subregion called Oligoi International Stadium. I know that most of these stadia do not need a lot of money. I can give an example of Pece War Memorial Stadium in Gulu. The former LC 5 Chairman of Gulu tells me they spent about Shs 380 to 400 million to put it to a level where they can collect resources when they hold football matches and other games. Mr Speaker, I do not know why the Government cannot afford to put at least a stadium in every region for us to keep our youths active. The youths are becoming drug addicts because they do not have what to do. They do not have jobs so they engage in what they can afford to do. If we keep them busy, they will be tired and not do wrong things. Mr Speaker, I beg that this Government forgets about just taking two regions and giving them billions of money when we can do some work with the limited resources, and have the whole country covered and represented in the national budget. I also beg that the Government considers putting stadia in every region so that the youth are engaged because we know that work without play, makes Jack a dull boy. Thank you.4.23MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We need to develop the talents of our youth. We now have the FUFA Drum programme moving on, introduced by the FUFA President, Hon. Moses Magogo, which has unearthed the talents of our youth. Mr Speaker, many times, many regions and tribes have not been represented in national football. Nowadays, the FUFA Drum has shown that this country has a lot of talent. Therefore, we call for stadiums in each region. 8026 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTDisclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.For the Akii-Bua Stadium, the amount of money allocated was Shs 1.83 billion but what was received was less than Shs 600 million. The Ministry of Education and Sports should be investigated. The minister should take this very seriously. Of the Shs 1.8 billion, Shs 600 million has already been received. Can the extra money reach Lira Akii-Bua Stadium immediately? Mr Speaker, there are very many thieves in this country who usually take advantage of such situations. The minister should take up this very seriously. Finally, looking at the way our children are, the Ministry of Education and Sports should encourage parents, teachers, and head teachers to allow children to participate in co-curricular activities, especially games and sports. There are so many schools without football pitches –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, in this House, we are lucky to have the FUFA President, who has been in charge of football in the country. Hon. Moses Magogo, give us some information. I am sure you must be having critical information on this issue.4.26MR MOSES MAGOGO (NRM, Budiope East County, Buyende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to provide information, and as you have rightly guided me, let me borrow what Hon. Solomon said. The clever guidance he provided is that this House has the resource in me in terms of information sharing. (Applause) This 11th Parliament is privileged that when we are discussing sports, we have the correct information to guide us.Mr Speaker, the world sports economy is over $600 billion. Let me break it down. In the UK alone, sports contribute to their economy what URA in this country collects the entire year. Largely, Uganda and the whole of Africa are not partaking of this economy. We all know that sports has a cocktail of values and many of you have mentioned it. These include: boosting tourism, employment, forex earnings, marketing Uganda, building patriotism, health, widening the tax base, and mobilisation, among others.Whereas Government programmes have concentrated on agriculture and manufacturing, Uganda has a huge competitive advantage of manufacturing sports products that can compete on the world market. Sports talents are the raw materials of the manufacturing process that produces sports products consumed at a fee. We all see how many people or how many Ugandans support foreign sports but these products have been created from talents. Therefore, this is also a manufacturing process. Mr Speaker, Uganda is abundantly endowed with different sporting talents. Now, the Government of Uganda may provide four items, that is, the law, which we have been working on, and some of the issues Members are raising have been provided for in the law. Then, there is the funding, policies, and most importantly, infrastructure, which we are discussing today.We are all aware that the Government has provided infrastructure for other economic activities but not the sporting business. Mr Speaker, Uganda had a population of 16 million people in 1986. There were a number of stadiums across the country, and some of these stadiums were actually hosting international competitions - in Bugembe, Mbale, and Nakivubo where we even had matches at night, as early as 1986. Today, as we speak, we have 45 million people but we do not have any stadium that can host a Confederation of African Football (CAF) match. To break it down, other than the Mandela National Stadium which was a Chinese grant in the 1960s, but completed in 1997, there has never been any major sporting infrastructure construction or rehabilitation.Mr Speaker, it is the duty of the Government of Uganda to provide sporting infrastructure for the Ugandan youth. There are Members here who have supported the FUFA Drum-PRIME MINISTER’S TIME[Mr Olanya]8027THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 13 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Magogo, it should not be a statement.MR MAGOGO:  I am providing information. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, but conclude. We do not have much time. We are in the Prime Minister’s Time. We want to keep our resource intact.MR MAGOGO:  There are very many Members here who have supported the FUFA Drum, and we have seen the congestion we have, which can end up even in a catastrophe.This Parliament has borrowed so much money to undertake a lot of infrastructure in energy, ICT, and roads so, there would not be anything wrong with borrowing money to undertake supporting infrastructure.The second piece of information I want to provide is about the bidding to host AFCON 2027. I am privileged to be a member of the CAF Executive Committee, a body that runs African football. On 5 April 2023, the CAF Executive Committee opened the bids for countries interested to host the 24 Nations Africa’s biggest football event, also known as the Africa Cup of Nations.Mr Speaker, in July 2022, His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda hosted the CAF President, Dr Patrice Motsepe. In the meeting, we had the Rt Hon. Speaker, the Deputy Speaker, the CECAFA President and the President of Tanzania. The President gave a duty to the Parliament of Uganda to undertake to bid to host AFCON 2027, as long as it was not in competition with any other East African country.The Football Federations of Uganda, Kenya, and Tanzania have agreed to make a joint bid to bring Africa to East Africa for the first time in 66 years (Applause).Mr Speaker, under rule 59, where I can bring a motion without notice, I call upon this august House to support Uganda’s bid to host the Africa Cup of Nations 2027. When we host, the issues we are discussing regarding infrastructure will automatically be absorbed because there will be a requirement for us to improve on the infrastructure we have. Allow me to lay on the Table a document, which includes the requirements that we have received for the purpose and benefit of this Parliament. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Please read the document; it must have a title for reference purposes. MR MAGOGO: The title of the document is, “Members Association of the Confederation of African Football calls for bids to host African Cup of Nations 2027.”THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Magogo and team want our moral support as Parliament. They want our support in each and every way so that they can host - they bring Africa to East Africa. I think this is a very good proposal. I can see honourable colleagues chanting. Let me formally capture this proposal because I remember I was in that meeting and the President was very supportive. He said: “Parliament, please play a very critical role. The Confederation of African Football President seems to be supporting.” So, we need to send a very strong message outside. Let me put the question to the proposal so that it is very well captured and we extract the resolution on it. I, therefore, put the question that this House supports the proposal that Uganda jointly bids for the hosting of the 2027 Africa Cup of Nations with other neighbouring East African countries.(Question put and agreed to.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Magogo, you can see the support the honourable colleagues have for the sports subsector. Leader of the Opposition, on the report of the committee? 8028 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTDisclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.4.35MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Now that the grant was not secured, we want to implore Government to take over the development of these stadia, as earlier planned. However, if the Government says they cannot manage, let us privatise them because if we had a good private stadium here, we would not have gone to Egypt. Maybe we would have used the “St. Mary’s” if it was highly developed instead of going to Egypt. Of course, Mr Speaker, you know that I am the patron for the Ankole District Football Association League and Buhweju is the champion. So, I speak from my heart.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You went through unopposed.MR MWIJUKYE: Mr Speaker, I was appointed because Buhweju are the champions.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We all supported you.MR MWIJUKYE: Finally, on the Shs 1.3 billion, I think we need a forensic audit because money cannot just disappear. Once that is done, then we can know who is bringing sports down. Otherwise, I thank the minister because he is a sportsman. Now, please speak, not as a minister, but as a sportsperson because I think you are not coming out the way we see you on the playground. I thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, yesterday, you brought a statement here but you can use two minutes on this issue and we go to other issues. We have Prime Minister’s Time and then we will go to the other issue of the National Council of Sports.4.36THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang): Mr Speaker, first of all, there are 20 Members who have contributed and there are very key issues, which really needed a response. Maybe you will guide me and some of them may lead me to formally bring a written response for Members to understand what we have and what we intend to do. However, for the record, I begin by addressing my good friend and sister, the Woman Member of Parliament for Sheema; I have never gone to watch an international competition in another country as far as football is concerned. Secondly, why am I saying this? I know one of my colleagues is in Luzira  Maximum Security Prison; I need a record to make it clear. (Laughter) Secondly, I went as team leader and the Minister of State for Education and Sports to support Team Uganda, specifically on athletics. So, for that matter, I also went on behalf of Team Uganda to support the CHAN football competition in Algeria. That is my role as the Minister of Education and Sports. Now, to the issues raised, honourable colleagues, first of all, I want again to put it on record: His Excellency the President has personally written to me to have a meeting with him to discuss matters of sports. I confirm, as the Minister of State for Education and Sports, that I am in touch with one of the strategic partners he has identified, which have done good work in some of the best countries within the continent as far as sports infrastructure development is concerned. A case in point is Senegal and Cameroon, to mention but a few. I am in touch with them on issues regarding what you have mentioned here. Is the Government committed to developing the sports infrastructure? I want to say, yes. The question is when are we going to implement it? I am happy that today, we are all in unison supporting the programme of developing sports 8029THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 13 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.infrastructure. I have the following to mention ever since I was appointed to this office:1. We must first differentiate between a stadium, a football pitch and a football ground. We seem to be mixing issues here. Yesterday, I made a case study presentation of two - Akii-Bua Stadium – how much is it costing? It is about US$ 48 million. That is a pitch depending on where you are putting it. 2. We must also agree; do we have land? As of now, I have instructed the National Council of Sports, under the guidance of my senior minister, to move across the country to identify and meet local leaders together with you, the honourable members, to ascertain the question of land. For instance, I have heard from my good friend, Hon. Solomon Silwany, talking about Bugembe Stadium. If you recall, in the sports law which I tabled before you here, the question of investment of property was in the third schedule.As Government, we thought we would take on that role but the Attorney-General guided that that land does not belong to us, as a ministry, but it belongs to local governments.For that purpose, we have a plan, which was developed; what entails a stadium, what entails a playground and what entails a regional stadium for us to have? We are talking about four regions of Uganda but we are talking about 18 zones of Uganda. Where do we put these stadiums? If I construct Akii-Bua Stadium, is it enough to take West Nile, Acholi and Karamoja? Is that enough? These are fundamental issues, which we are looking at holistically as the Ministry of Education and Sports. So, I wanted first, to make those clarifications. The other issue that I want to comment on as I conclude – the others, I will give a formal written statement. There are two things:1. Mr Speaker, I congratulate you, together with the Rt Hon. Anita Among and His Excellency the President. I am happy the FUFA president is here. I was not privy to that meeting - the meeting that you had with the President and the CAF President for purposes of us hosting the 2027 African Cup of Nations, as the East African Community. As a Minister of Education and sports, I welcome it because, like you said, it will help us have some of the acts according to our plan; the immediate, medium and long-term problems handled for purposes of us first reaching there. I welcome that and I promise to follow it up on behalf of the ministry -(Interjection) - Maybe it is going to be discussed in the next subject matter. Mr Speaker, on the question of renovating Namboole Stadium, Friends, I know some of you may not want to hear this but allow me to say it because I am in the Parliament of Uganda. Where are we from and where are we today? What have been our priorities as a country? The person speaking here was born in an IDP camp. Would you build a stadium in a place where there is cattle rustling? (Interjection) No, I am beginning by telling us the reality. That is why I am saying - Mr Speaker, protect me, please.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, submit without asking Members questions. They are responding to your questions.MR OGWANG: Mr Speaker, I bringing this because sometimes - honourable members, we are in the Parliament of Uganda. Let us listen. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, let us listen to the honourable minister.MR OGWANG: Unfortunately, people who are heckling, with due respect, found me here. Please, let us have respect. This is the National Assembly where issues must be debated. When we talk about the priorities of this country, it is not that this Government does 8030 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTDisclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.not want to invest in the sports subsector. However, fundamentally, I gave the example of Ogwang - I am now happy that in Karamoja – Hon. Adome is here. It is a first– by the way, Hon. Adome, for your information, the Uganda Secondary School Sports Association is, for the first time, hosting a sports competition for the entire Karamoja in your municipality. It is meant to be tomorrow.However, could you have hosted such a competition in Karamoja before? We must agree to look at these facts. Could you have planned to build Pece in Gulu when there was insurgency? Could you have planned to build Akii-Bua in Lira when there was insurgency? I want to say this: we acknowledge where we have come from and where we are now. I pledge, on behalf of the Government, that we will build sports infrastructure because it is the mandate of the Government. I thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable colleagues, in the VIP gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation from the Pan-African Parliament. They include: 1. Mr Kenneth Akibate, the Sergeant-at-Arms2. Mr Ndamuka Marimo, Director of the Bureau3. Mr Rodin Mayengo, Senior Procurement Officer4. Mr Jeffrey Onyango, Media and Communications Officer, and 5. Mr Jacob Odaba, the IT Administrator. They have come to observe the proceedings of this House. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) Next item –Honourable colleagues, you had become charged, so, I wanted to jump quickly. I think we have received critical information and, luckily enough, the chairperson of the committee said that more information will be in the ministerial policy statement. When processing it, we shall discuss more about this. You can take note, especially of allocation of funds to the sector to address issues of the stadiums. Honourable colleagues, I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Education and Sports on the failure by the Government of the Republic of Uganda to secure the grant provided by the Government of the People’s Republic of China to construct two regional stadia - Buhinga in Kabarole District and Akii-Bua in Lira District - be adopted. (Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.STATEMENT BY THE RT HON. PRIME MINISTER ON GOVERNMENT BUSINESS FOR THE SUCCEEDING WEEK, 18TH TO 20 APRIL 2023, PURSUANT TO RULE 28 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister? Thank you, Chairperson, Committee on Education and Sports. You can take leave.4.47THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, allow me to submit business for the following week, 18th to 20th of April, under Rule 28 of the Rules of Procedure;1. The Uganda National Kiswahili Council Bill.2. Statement by the Minister of East African Community Affairs on the 10th East African Petroleum Conference Exhibition in May 2023.Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister.[Mr Ogwang] PRIME MINISTER’S TIME8031THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 13 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.PRIME MINISTER’S TIME4.48THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Mr Speaker, Hon. Allan Mayanja, Member of Parliament for Nakaseke Central, raised a matter of national concern regarding the presence of an infestation by the African Armyworm in Nakaseke District. His prayers were that:1. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries provides chemicals and tools to Nakaseke District Local Government for the management and control of the African Armyworm. 2. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries appears and presents a status report to this Parliament.Mr Speaker, my response to this question is that the African armyworm is a migrant pest that damages cereal crops and grasses during the vegetative growth stage and can cause up to 100 per cent loss if not controlled. The pest is sporadic and its spread and impact is facilitated by environmental conditions such as high temperatures, erratic rainfall and wind currents (on which adult moths ride).Mr Speaker, last year, during the first season (March-May), there was repeated African armyworm upsurge and infestation in over 50 districts, damaging cereals (millet, sorghum, maize and rice) and grass. This invasion was put under control – like I told you last week but one – by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, working with local governments and farmers. The ministry provided over 20,000 litres of pesticide (Cypermethrin) and 120 motorised spray pumps together with protective gear to control the pests.Mr Speaker, at the onset of the current planting season (February-March this year), some pockets of the African armyworm infestation were reported in five districts (Nakaseke, Tororo, Nwoya, Busia and Pader). The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, working with local governments and farmers, suppressed the infestation to very low populations. Intensification of rainfall in the country further suppressed the pests naturally. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is continuing to monitor the pest situation and has procured 6,000 litres of the recommended pesticide and 60 motorised pumps and 100 sets of protective gear to support the control operations in case of a resurgence. Finally, we appeal to farmers and the general public to remain vigilant and report any incidents of this pest or any other to the lower local governments and district authorities to enable timely response by Government. In brief, these pests were suppressed both naturally and with the help of local government. Hon. Omara Paul, Member of Parliament, Otuke County asked that the 10th Parliament enacted the mining law which, according to him, provided for a 5 per cent tax on a kilogramme of refined Gold exports. This law could not be implemented because there were serious disagreements between the Gold refining companies and the Uganda Revenue Authority. However, the 11th Parliament, in 2022, repealed the Mining Act, 2003 and cured the lacuna in the law by passing a provision in the new Mining Act under Section 287(2)(s), which states thus: “A tax of Shs 200 per kilogramme of gold exported, will be applied.” The provision of the law allows for retrospective application of the tax, effective July 2021. His prayer is: why hasn’t Government facilitated the recovery of tax arrears yet we are running a deficit budget?”My response, Mr Speaker, is that revenue from the export of Gold has been included in the revenue projections since Financial Year 2021/2022. For the period 1 July 2021 to March 8032 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTDisclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.2023, the total quantity of the processed Gold exported was 59,943.43 kilogrammes, and the tax arrears amounted to Shs 43.4 billion, out of which Shs 428 million has been paid and the balance of Shs 42.9 billion is still pending. Mr Speaker, Gold exporters have been making undertakings to pay the arrears and some have started paying. However, some Gold exporters have gone to court to petition against the payments. Since the gazette of the Statutory Instrument of 1 March 2020, a total of 3,308.48 kilogrammes of processed Gold have been exported and declared, and a total of Shs 2.4 billion has been collected.In the next Financial Year 2023/2024, revenue from Gold is projected to be Shs 10.6 billion, based on the recent declaration from Gold exports. Thirdly, Hon. Kabugho Florence, District Woman Representative, Kasese, asked the question: “We are all aware that Kilembe Mines Hospital was washed away by floods after River Nyamwamba burst its banks –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: ICT, can you ensure you do not interrupt the Prime Minister by switching off the microphone until she finishes Prime Minister’s time? MS NABBANJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me repeat this: Hon. Kabugho Florence, District Woman Member of Parliament, Kasese asked that we are all aware that Kilembe Mines Hospital was washed away by floods after River Nyamwamba burst its banks and this brought about a very big gap in health services within the region. It has also been established that the Ministry of Health has since deactivated its credit line, and that for long now, Government has always promised to elevate Rukoki Health Centre IV to a hospital status to bridge this gap but this has always remained on the Government pledge list to date. People have nowhere to resort to, for adequate medical attention. Rukoki Health Centre IV has no theatre and women have resorted to giving birth under trees, which is not only dangerous, but also undermines human dignity. Her prayer to the Prime Minister is that she would like to know the Government plans on elevating this health centre to a hospital status and most preferably the timeframe within which Government expects to have it done. My response, Mr Speaker, is that as you are aware, the floods have affected the operation of Kilembe Mines Hospital on several occasions. Government planned to mitigate the effects of the closure of Kilembe Mines Hospital and to ensure that it continues to offer healthcare services to the population within the region. In that regard, Government, through the Ministry of Health, has embarked on Rukoki Health Centre IV upgrade to a general hospital status. In addition, the Ministry of Health has prioritised the construction of a health centre III in Bulembia Division to increase access to primary health care services to the catchment population of Kilembe. Mr Speaker, my office, under the emergency response, secured Shs 2 billion for restoration of the health infrastructure that had been destroyed by floods at Kilembe. However, after a technical assessment, the site at Kilembe was found unsuitable because it was still in the way of River Nyamwamba. A decision was taken to relocate the establishment of the general hospital at Rukoki Health Centre IV . At this stage, the technical designs and the bill of quantities of the general hospital are being prepared by the Ministry of Health. The Shs 2 billion is, therefore, being applied towards the renovation of the existing structures using the UPDF Construction Brigade. This includes the renovation of the maternity ward, which was burnt in 2019. [Ms Nabbanja] PRIME MINISTER’S TIME8033THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 13 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.Allow me to clarify that Rukoki Health Centre IV has a functional theatre now, which conducts more than 50 operations a month. Hon. Aisa Agaba, Member of Parliament, Bugangaizi East County says asked a question regarding processing and obtaining a death certificate, which she said has become a cumbersome and expensive venture at the National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA) offices, unlike earlier when they were obtained from subcounties.There are very many transactions that require death certificates. Today, people have to travel longer distances to access NIRA offices to process death certificates because these offices are in a few regions of the country. There is a requirement for one to go through the NIRA CID desk for interview and at times, officers want to reach where the deceased was buried. We have had cases where the NIRA CID officers ask applicants for facilitation in the form of money to reach the burial sites and interface with the deceased’s relatives and the local authorities. This has forced many people to either suspend or give up on processing death certificates, yet they are a necessity for proof of death.Her prayer is: why shouldn’t the Government just improve data management systems on registration of death at subcounties and save people from trekking longer journeys and spending lots of money just to obtain a death certificate? My response, Mr Speaker, is that the Registration of Persons Act, 2015 mandates the registration officer, who is prescribed as a staff of NIRA as a registrar of births and deaths. It also mandates the subcounties and health facilities to notify the events of deaths that happen within their areas of jurisdiction and the police, in the events of violent deaths and foundlings. Mr Speaker, the documents acquired at the subcounties were changed by the law to mean “notification of death” or “notification of birth” records whose purpose is to notify NIRA to register that an event of death or birth has taken place. NIRA has 117 registration centres spread across the country. The Authority aims to have offices in all the districts and cities in Uganda and currently serves the rest of the administrative units from their mother districts. The issuance of the death certificate is done with the utmost care by conducting a thorough verification to get the assurance that the alleged deceased person has actually passed on. Deaths are recorded in two ways:1.  Deaths that occur in health facilities are notified by the health facility administrator. This is done online using a system called the Mobile Vital Record System. It is also done manually by providing a medical certificate of cause of death and a death notification record for deaths that have not been captured on the system due to various reasons. For example, deaths that happened long ago or in health facilities that are not on the system, such applications do not require a CID report because the records and evidence is available from the health of facilities. 2.  Deaths that happen in communities are the ones that require thorough verification because most of them have no records and it is these deaths that are susceptible to forgeries for purposes of getting death certificates and facilitating these honest persons to obtain legal authority over the estate of a deceased person.Current deaths are notified by the sub-county chiefs who issue a notification of death record as proof of death. This is both online for subcounties that have internet connectivity, and manually for those that are not connected. It is also on that basis that NIRA issues a death certificate. Mr Speaker, it is important to note that the requirement for CID reports was decentralised 8034 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTDisclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.to the district level. Therefore, any CID designated by the IGP at any police station investigates and confirms the event of the death through a report to NIRA. It is, therefore, not true that all the applicants for a death certificate must obtain a CID report from the NIRA CID office in Kampala. A CID report from any police station within the country is sufficient.Hon. Naome Kabasharira, Member of Parliament for Rushenyi County said that there is need to clarify the high cost of third-line antiretroviral treatment in Uganda compared to the first-line and second-line ARVs. Her prayer is: Can the Government clarify the high cost of third-line antiretroviral treatment in Uganda? My response is that in Uganda, we have approximately 1.45 million people living with HIV/AIDS. Of these, 1.3 million are on lifelong ARVs supported by the Government of Uganda and our partners. The majority of them are on the first-line ARV regimen, that is, 96 per cent. While about 3 per cent are on the second-line regimens, less than 1 per cent, that is, about 1,700 people are currently on the third-line regimen. Clients are moved to a third-line regimen also known as Salvage Therapy after failing first-line, followed by second-line regimens. It is a deliberate policy of the treatment programme to keep people on the first-line regimen as long as possible. This requires good adherence to treatment. The cost of the first-line regimen is currently about $120, that is, $10 per month per person, and $120 for a year, while the second-line regimen is $360 per person per year, translating to approximately $30. It is true that the third-line regimen is more expensive, about - $840 per - (Interruption)- MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In our rules, specifically rule 83, on behaviour of Members in the House –83(1)(g) states that during a sitting, a Member shall not bring into the House without the consent of the Speaker anything other than papers, books, or documents which are directly connected to the business of the House.I have seen the honourable minister of sports walking in with a plastic cup of something that we do not know. I do not know whether it is alcohol or water - (Laughter) - Therefore, Mr Speaker, is Hon. Peter Ogwang in order to walk in with his plastic cup when we do not know what he is carrying? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Peter Ogwang, I cannot vouch for you because I do not know what you are carrying. – (Laughter)– The safety of my Members is of great concern. Kindly find a way and safely dispose of the product you are carrying. MR OGWANG: Mr Speaker, I really take cognisance of the Rules of Procedure but since morning, I have been within the Parliamentary buildings for committee work and up to the plenary. I went to pick up some water. I am not aware whether there is alcohol provided for in the precincts of Parliament. For that matter, Mr Speaker, I take your ruling but allow me take back the glass of water to where I found it. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, water is allowed but what a Member referred to is that you need the permission of the Speaker so that we are sure what you have. Thank you. MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, like I had told you earlier, the cost of the first-line regimen is currently about $120 per person per year. That translates into $10 per month, while that of the second-line regimen is $360 per person per year, translating into about $30 per month. It is true that the third-line regimen is more expensive; it is about $840 per person per year. That translates into $70 per month.[Ms Nabbanja] PRIME MINISTER’S TIME8035THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 13 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.For all clients, whether they are on the first-line, second or third regimens, the cost of treatment is borne by the Government of Uganda and development partners through the Ministry of Health that meets all the costs unless a client opts to go for private treatment.The third-line ARV regimens are more expensive for the following reasons:i)  The cost of laboratory tests that is required to determine whether one has failed to respond to the first-line and the second-line regimen. There is gene sequencing conducted in three laboratories in Uganda; so, samples have to be transported to those laboratories. The reagents and machines required for these tests are quite expensive to buy and run. ii) The ARVs used for the third-line treatment such as Darunavir are often still new on the patient. There are no generic versions of these drugs that would be cheaper as is the case with the first and second-line. iii) ARVs used for the third-line drugs are determined for each individual client and are often not in a fixed dose combination. For example, one tablet containing two or three drugs, which is often the case with the first and second-line regimens. iv) Over all, there are few clients worldwide that are on third-line ARVs for the pharmaceutical companies to reduce their costs and benefit from the economies of scale. I would like to stress three things here about the third-line ARVs. i) Despite the high cost in Uganda for the patients that require and are on third-line ARVs, the cost of this treatment is borne by the Government of Uganda and its partners – like I said earlier, unless a patient opts to go private;ii) Patients who need third-line treatment should be supported to get it in order for them to achieve sustainable viral suppression and improved clinical outcomes. This will prevent transmission of multi-drug-resistant strains of HIV that would, in the long run, increase the cost of treatment for newly infected individuals that would risk increasing the cost of the overall programme; andiii) Clients on first and second-line regimens should be supported to adhere to their treatment so that they stay on the affordable first and second-line regimens for a long time and reduce the need to move to the third-line of ARVs. Hon. Achayo Juliet,Ngora County, raises a matter concerning the inability of Government to collect enough blood for the safety of Ugandans and the lack of capacity by the Nakasero Blood Bank to carry out its activities. Her prayer is that I update the House on the readiness of the Uganda Blood Transfusion Services to carry out its mandate.In my response, the Government has progressively increased the capacity of the Uganda Blood Transfusion Services. We started constructing regional blood collection centres. For example, the construction of Soroti Blood Bank is at 90 per cent completion. In terms of human resource capacity, the Uganda Blood Transfusion Services has a total establishment of 424 positions, of which 296 are filled. The current staffing level can support constitution of 25 teams for blood collection. The collection centres require about 415,000 units of blood. Uganda Blood Transfusion Services would need 38 teams, as each blood collection team is able to collect 1,000 units of blood per month. UBTS relies heavily on volunteers to fill the human resource gap of blood collection. However, volunteers are unreliable – as you all know – uneconomical and have a lot of associated risks. Uganda Blood Transfusion Services proposed to recruit additional 13 teams, each comprising of 10 clinical staff for blood collection this 8036 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTDisclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.financial year. Funds for recruitment amounting to Shs 2.6 billion have been included in this financial year’s budget. I request you, honourable members, to support this budget. Hon. Nakut Faith from Napak says that she raises a matter concerning the lack of resources by the Ministry of Water and Environment to resolve issues of silted valley dams in the Karamoja area. Her prayer is, can Government update the House on the issue of silted valley dams? Mr Speaker, on 16 March 2023, a technical team from the Ministry of Water and Environment, after our meeting with the Karamoja subregion Members of Parliament in Moroto and in my office, visited the region and launched an exercise to conduct an assessment of the cost implication of the desilting and rehabilitation of the priority dams selected by those leaders in our meeting. The technical team, together with the regional unit from the ministry, are currently conducting this exercise and the report will be presented to this House when this study is completed. Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Leader of the Opposition?5.23MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to make some brief comments, as per the rules on the responses by the Prime Minister. On question number one by Hon. Allan Mayanja, I would like to commend the Prime Minister and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for the timely response and to the satisfaction of the honourable member in providing the pesticides and spray pumps that were requested. I also commend the ministry for being on standby to address the same concern. Hon. Paul Omara raised the question that the Government is pressed in terms of the resource envelope and Shs 42.9 billion lies outside as tax arrears, but the Government has not facilitated the process of recovering that amount. I urge the Prime Minister to take this matter seriously because we are going into the budgeting process. The Government is already, as we have been told, pressed to raise more resources. We are aware that new tax proposals are being made. This amount, if recovered, would help. Mr Speaker, the Government has collected only Shs 428.7 million out of the Shs 42.9 billion – that is just under one per cent of what is outside there, yet it is now two or three years. Therefore, the Prime Minister should work closely with the enforcement agencies to recover this amount. On the amount projected for Financial Year 2023/2024, which is Shs 10.6 billion, I feel – basing on the figures that the Prime Minister has presented here, in the two preceding financial years, the tax amounted to Shs 43.4 billion. I do not know the justification the Prime Minister has now used to reduce it from the average of Shs 20 billion per year to 10.6 billion. I think this is a low target in terms of what the Government has been able to establish. The question raised by Hon. Florence Kabugho was more about the timeframe. The Prime Minister has given a roadmap on the elevation of the health centre, but the honourable member required the timeframe. I think the people of Kasese are very much pressed and would like to know when the UPDF Engineering Brigade would begin the elevation of the facility. There was a question raised by Hon. Aisa Agaba on the issue of the cost of getting the Criminal Investigations Directorate (CID) reports for processing death certificates. I would like to propose, in the alternative, that since the subcounties are now offering the notification of death and they are filling them [Ms Nabbanja] PRIME MINISTER’S TIME8037THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 13 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.online, the same subcounty officials should now file them and the National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA) sends back the report to avoid the expenses by people travelling up to NIRA offices to get those death certificates. The officers, who are issuing the notification, can file it and, after the certificate is generated by NIRA, it is sent back to the subcounty and people can pick it. On the issue of facilitating the CID officers, these certificates generate non-tax revenue. Therefore, the CID officers should be adequately provided with resources rather than demanding that the people who need the certificate facilitate them. This is the gist of the question the honourable member asked: when you approach the CID, it is you to pay them to go and visit the grave and talk to people to confirm that death has occurred. The Government could provide resources to those CID officers to be able to undertake that assignment. The fifth question by Hon. Naome Kabasharira – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, do you want to comment on each and every question? MR ODUR: Yes, briefly. I am about to finish. Some are good, Mr Speaker. I would like to commend the Government for providing free antiretroviral treatment for both the first, second and third-line treatments to all the people who need them. I think the Government should keep that up so that all citizens are healthy. On the issue of regional blood banks, Mr Speaker, I have a question directed to the Government. When you begin the process of regionalising institutions in this country – such as the regional police and the regional referral hospitals – these facilities must come with some standards. You cannot have a regional referral hospital and that does not have a blood bank. So, it should be in the plans of the Government that now that we are regionalising our institutions, those institutions must have the necessary requirements. Lastly, Hon. Faith Nakut raised the issue of lack of resources. I can only comment that the team that has been sent on the ground should immediately find the resources. This is because one of the drivers of conflict in Karamoja, which we raised, is the issue of access to water and the lack of valley dams. Some of these valley dams have taken more than 10 years without being desilted. Therefore, when you address the issue of water in Karamoja – the valley dams – you would have partially solved the problems that Members have been raising. I thank you, Mr Speaker.MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE INQUIRY INTO THE OPERATIONS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF SPORTSTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, if you remember, we said the minister should prepare a response to the issues.5.29 THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCA -TION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have a 38-page response, which I would like to lay on the Table. This statement has been up-loaded on our iPads – maybe you could allow Members to go through it and then we have one debate, including my response. That is my request. Allow me to lay on the Table my response as far as the probe on the National Council of sports is concerned. I thank you, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable colleagues, go through that statement. Next week – because I saw that it is very detailed. To have a balanced debate, you need to read that statement. The House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2 o’clock. (The House rose at 5.30 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 18 April 2023 at 2.00 p.m.)