Thursday, 21 April 2011

Parliament met at 2.39 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you. Once again, I commend your patriotism displayed by your coming to do parliamentary work. Please, continue do that and let others follow your lead.

2.41
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Sometime last week, hon. Okupa raised the issue of police cadets. He tabled a list here and the Minister of Internal Affairs promised to bring that list yesterday but nothing happened. Can the Leader of Government Business inform the House what is going on? I thank you.

2.42
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): I would like to thank hon. Livingstone Okello-Okello for raising that remainder. Yes, it is true that an undertaking was made to provide information on the equitable regional recruitment of officer cadets who were recently recruited. It is true the Rt Hon. Third Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Internal Affairs, would have been with us here this afternoon but as you all know, they have been operating under intense pressure to ensure that they provide security arising out of the Walk-to-Work exercise. I want to give an undertaking that I will take up this again with the hon. Minister of Internal Affairs.

THE SPEAKER: And again I wish to inform you that notice of business to follow shows a statement by the minister on police returnees from Darfur. I think this was combined with that statement. So, we shall keep it on our Order Paper.

2.43
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you. Mr Speaker, I beg for your indulgence. I am sorry I should have informed you about this matter earlier but I had some commitments which derailed me. We had to go to court, where my party leader was taken, in Nabweru and finally sent to prison. I could, therefore, not make it to inform you.

The issue is about our sisters who have been going to look for jobs outside this country. Last week, there was a story in the Red Pepper followed by another story in the New Vision about two ladies who escaped from near captivity in Iraq. The two ladies were helped by fellow Ugandans who are working at the military bases in Iraq. Yesterday morning at 5:30 a.m., I was listening to the BBC and I heard the same story. It was perturbing to listen to the testimony of one of the two ladies who managed to find their way back home to Uganda. What our sisters are going through in Iraq is terrible; it is very dehumanising. 

The Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development has not come to explain to the country what happened. The BBC reporter spoke with hon. Opio and I was shocked by his response. He said he cannot deal with the proprietors of the company who recruited the ladies because they are high profile people whom they always meet at high level political meetings and didn’t want to antagonise them. I think that was not a serious response from the minister. The company that recruited these ladies is called Uganda Veteran Development Limited and the Director is Col. Mudoola. 

In that interview he also said that once they have handed them to the companies, in the other side in Iraq, their business stops there. How can we allow such, Mr Speaker? 

This woman says she was raped several times by the person who employed her. It took her friend, who had a hidden mobile phone to call one of the Ugandans, Tumwesigye, who works at the American base and he told her to find her way to the American base. 

He told her he would risk his job to come to their rescue. It is not allowed to have foreigners inside the American military base but Tumwesigye Samuel risked his job and drove out with his gun and picked these two ladies and took them inside the base. He informed the commander of the American forces, Gen. Petraeus, and they were able to help these two ladies to get back home.

From that testimony, the whereabouts of 148 Ugandans are not known but they suspect their situation is not different from what they went through. Government and this Parliament should summon the Minister of Gender to make a statement. 

We also need to get to know about these companies that are recruiting people here in Uganda, otherwise we cannot subject our people to this kind of suffering. They take money from them and hand over our sisters and brothers to countries like Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Iraq and subject them to such dehumanising treatment. Even if we are poor here in Uganda; even if we don’t have jobs, if that is what we go through, we rather die here in this country. 

So, Mr Speaker, I ask this Parliament or the committee to summon the minister or you direct the minister to make a statement to that effect. I am trying to make contact in order to meet these ladies personally because I think there is a lot that we don’t know that our people are going through. Thank you.

2.48
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Okupa for raising this very important matter. I know this matter came up some time back and hon. Rukutana, when he was still Minister in charge of Labour, gave a response. But it is also true that we have all read and got to learn through the media what has been done.

I would, therefore, request the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Affairs to come up with a very clear statement on what is happening in this industry involving Ugandans who are employed in countries such as Iraq. Thank you.

2.49
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a slightly different issue not the young girls who are in Iraq. It is an issue of national importance in the sense that there is a serious shortage of Septrin as a drug in the country. Septrin is used by HIV patients as a prophylaxis drug. In other words, patients who are HIV positive are usually put on Septrin to prevent the emergence of opportunistic infections like TB and others. Since July last year, there has been a shortage of this drug in the whole country and actually it is a crisis among the patients who are living with HIV. 

I wanted to get clarification from the Minister of Health why they have been unable to procure Septrin for all these months; almost a year now and yet I am informed that the US Government, through the PEPFAR programme, provided resources enough to procure Septrin for about five years. I want a clarification from the Minister of Health why there is this constant shortage of Septrin as a drug, and other medications.

2.51
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Stephen Mallinga): Mr Speaker, I have just been on a tour of the National Medical Stores and I was assured that all medicines are available except the rare medicines. Septrin, I know is commonly used in the prophylaxis and prevention of opportunistic infections in people with HIV/AIDS, not TB as the honourable member said. Sulphonamides don’t prevent infection of TB. Anyhow, I think I need to check on this again and I will come back with an answer.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE INSOLVENCY BILL, 2009

2.53
THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, before I start this business, you remember that yesterday I drew your attention to the fact that the Bill we are handling is like a Bible; it is a very big one. But the amendments that were indicated yesterday were only affecting five or seven clauses in the Bill. According to our rules, we have to read every clause. The purpose of that is that in case there is somebody who wants to amend a clause, he can move an amendment. I indicated yesterday that if you have any amendment you want to add on to those of the committee, you should indicate it to me this morning. 

I did not get any amendment other than the amendment of the committee. Because of that, I indicated to you that in other clauses that are not being amended, we are going to lump them together say from clause 3 to 20 as the case may be, so that we process the Bill and go ahead with other business. We have a lot of business, which we have to handle and some of it is urgent business. I hope hon. Members that you appreciate the move I am going to take when dealing with this Bill. Thank you very much.

Clause 1

THE CHAIRMAN: No amendment? I propose that clause 1 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The committee proposes an amendment to clause 2 by substituting for the definition of “court” a new definition as follows; “Court means the High Court or a court presided over by a Chief Magistrate”.

The justification is that given the complex nature of insolvency matters, only chief magistrates and higher courts should handle them because they have the competence. Thank you very much.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to find out from the chairperson of the committee whether the definition they are giving here is the same as the definition of courts in the Interpretations.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. As the member may have read through clause 2, this is a definition clause, which defines court and in that clause, court is defined as to mean the High Court. We are expanding that definition to include courts presided over by chief magistrates for purposes of this Act.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, the reference to the Interpretation may tend to be misleading. Normally what is in the Interpretation is the general definition. For instance what you are likely to find in the Interpretation is not here. You will find that “court” would mean a court of competent jurisdiction. Now a court of competent jurisdiction would only come in, in different Acts for purposes of those Acts. For instance for the purposes of this Act, the proposal by the chairperson is that for purposes of jurisdiction in bankruptcy matters, the court of competent jurisdiction will be the High Court or one presided over by the Chief Magistrate. Without prejudice to that, we all know under the Constitution that the High Court has got unlimited powers over all persons and matters in the country.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clauses 3-19

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I draw your attention to clauses 3 up to 19 of the Bill. I propose that clauses from 3 to 19 stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19, agreed to. 

Clause 20

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The committee proposes an amendment to clause 20 by inserting a new one as follows: “(1) A debtor may petition court for bankruptcy alleging that the debtor is unable to pay his or her debts and the court may subject sections 21 and 22 to make a bankruptcy order in respect of the debtor.”  

The justification is to allow a debtor present a bankruptcy petition without always waiting for statutory demand made by a creditor. 

Clause 20(2) is amended by inserting “and” immediately after the words “sub-section (1)” appearing on the first line. This would be a consequential amendment. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20, as amended, agreed to.

Clauses 21-30

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I propose that clauses 21 to 30 stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24, agreed to.

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26, agreed to.

Clause 27, agreed to.

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30, agreed to.

Clause 31

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The committee proposes amendment to clause 31 as follows:  “(a) By inserting in (2)(a) the words: “of a value to be prescribed” at the end of the provision”. 

The justification is to enable creditors recover their moneys from valuable items used by the bankrupt personally for his or her business, employment or vacation.

“(b) By inserting in clause 31(2)(d) the words: “of a value to be prescribed.”  The justification is that this is valuable property and we should be agreeable to the creditors to recover their money. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I put the question to the proposed amendments. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 31, as amended, agreed to.

Clauses 32-41

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, I propose that clauses 32 to 41 stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 32, agreed to.

Clause 33, agreed to.

Clause 34, agreed to.

Clause 35, agreed to.

Clause 36, agreed to.

Clause 37, agreed to.

Clause 38, agreed to.

Clause 39, agreed to.

Clause 40, agreed to.

Clause 41, agreed to.

Clause 42

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. In clause 42 the committee proposes an amendment to insert a new sub-clause (5) as follows: “(5) the court may subject a discharge order to such terms and conditions as the court may consider proper.” 

The justification is to grant court discretion to make a discharge order subject to terms and conditions as may be necessary for every individual case.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I put the question to the proposed amendments. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 42, as amended, agreed to.

Clauses 43-203

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I propose that clauses 43 to 203 stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 43, agreed to.

Clause 44, agreed to.

Clause 45, agreed to.

Clause 46, agreed to.

Clause 47, agreed to.

Clause 48, agreed to.

Clause 49, agreed to.

Clause 50, agreed to.

Clause 51, agreed to.

Clause 52, agreed to.

Clause 53, agreed to.

Clause 54, agreed to.

Clause 55, agreed to.

Clause 55, agreed to.

Clause 57, agreed to.

Clause 58, agreed to.

Clause 59, agreed to.

Clause 60, agreed to.

Clause 61, agreed to.

Clause 62, agreed to.

Clause 63, agreed to.

Clause 64, agreed to.

Clause 65, agreed to.

Clause 66, agreed to.

Clause 67, agreed to.

Clause 68, agreed to.

Clause 69, agreed to.

Clause 70, agreed to.

Clause 71, agreed to.

Clause 72, agreed to.

Clause 73, agreed to.

Clause 74, agreed to.

Clause 75, agreed to.

Clause 76, agreed to.

Clause 77, agreed to.

Clause 78, agreed to.

Clause 79, agreed to.

Clause 80, agreed to.

Clause 81, agreed to.

Clause 82, agreed to.

Clause 83, agreed to.

Clause 84, agreed to.

Clause 85, agreed to.

Clause 86, agreed to.

Clause 87, agreed to.

Clause 88, agreed to.

Clause 89, agreed to.

Clause 90, agreed to.

Clause 91, agreed to.

Clause 92, agreed to.

Clause 93, agreed to.

Clause 94, agreed to.

Clause 95, agreed to.

Clause 96, agreed to.

Clause 97, agreed to.

Clause 98, agreed to.

Clause 99, agreed to.

Clause 100, agreed to.

Clause 101, agreed to.

Clause 102, agreed to.

Clause 103, agreed to.

Clause 104, agreed to.

Clause 105, agreed to.

Clause 106, agreed to
.
Clause 107, agreed to.

Clause 108, agreed to.

Clause 109, agreed to.

Clause 110, agreed to.

Clause 111, agreed to.

Clause 112, agreed to.

Clause 113, agreed to.

Clause 114, agreed to.

Clause 115, agreed to.

Clause 116, agreed to.

Clause 117, agreed to.

Clause 118, agreed to.

Clause 119, agreed to.

Clause 120, agreed to.

Clause 121, agreed to.

Clause 122, agreed to.

Clause 123, agreed to.

Clause 124, agreed to.

Clause 125, agreed to.

Clause 126, agreed to.

Clause 127, agreed to.

Clause 128, agreed to.

Clause 129, agreed to.

Clause 130, agreed to.

Clause 131, agreed to.

Clause 132, agreed to.

Clause 133, agreed to.

Clause 134, agreed to.

Clause 135, agreed to.

Clause 136, agreed to.

Clause 137, agreed to.

Clause 138, agreed to.

Clause 139, agreed to.

Clause 140, agreed to.

Clause 141, agreed to.

Clause 142, agreed to.

Clause 143, agreed to.

Clause 144, agreed to.

Clause 145, agreed to.

Clause 146, agreed to.

Clause 147, agreed to.

Clause 148, agreed to.

Clause 149, agreed to.

Clause 150, agreed to.

Clause 151, agreed to.

Clause 152, agreed to.

Clause 153, agreed to.

Clause 154, agreed to.

Clause 155, agreed to.

Clause 156, agreed to.

Clause 157, agreed to.

Clause 158, agreed to.

Clause 159, agreed to.

Clause 160, agreed to.

Clause 161, agreed to.

Clause 162, agreed to.

Clause 163, agreed to.

Clause 164, agreed to.

Clause 165, agreed to.

Clause 166, agreed to.

Clause 167, agreed to.

Clause 168, agreed to.

Clause 169, agreed to.

Clause 170, agreed to.

Clause 171, agreed to.

Clause 172, agreed to.

Clause 173, agreed to.

Clause 174, agreed to.

Clause 175, agreed to.

Clause 176, agreed to.

Clause 177, agreed to.

Clause 178, agreed to.

Clause 179, agreed to.

Clause 180, agreed to.

Clause 181, agreed to.

Clause 182, agreed to.

Clause 183, agreed to.

Clause 184, agreed to.

Clause 185, agreed to.

Clause 186, agreed to.

Clause 187, agreed to.

Clause 189, agreed to.

Clause 190, agreed to.

Clause 191, agreed to.

Clause 192, agreed to.

Clause 193, agreed to.

Clause 194, agreed to.

Clause 195, agreed to.

Clause 196, agreed to.

Clause 197, agreed to.

Clause 198, agreed to.

Clause 199, agreed to.

Clause 200, agreed to.

Clause 201, agreed to.

Clause 201, agreed to.

Clause 202, agreed to.

Clause 203, agreed to.

Clause 204

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The committee proposes an amendment to clause 204 by substituting for the words “a member of a prescribed professional body” with the words “a lawyer,” “an accountant” or “a chartered secretary” who is a registered member of the relevant professional body or is a member of any other professional body as the minister may prescribe. 

The justification is to ensure that qualified people with relevant knowledge and skills act as insolvency practitioners in an environment commanding a high level of professionalism. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I put the question to the proposed amendments. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 204, as amended, agreed to.

Clauses 205-253

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I propose that clauses 205 to 253 stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 205, agreed to.

Clause 206, agreed to.

Clause 207, agreed to.

Clause 208, agreed to.

Clause 209, agreed to.

Clause 210, agreed to.

Clause 211, agreed to.

Clause 212, agreed to.

Clause 213, agreed to.

Clause 214, agreed to.

Clause 215, agreed to.

Clause 216, agreed to.

Clause 217, agreed to.

Clause 218, agreed to.

Clause 219, agreed to.

Clause 220, agreed to.

Clause 221, agreed to.

Clause 222, agreed to.

Clause 223, agreed to.

Clause 224, agreed to.

Clause 225, agreed to.

Clause 226, agreed to.

Clause 227, agreed to.

Clause 228, agreed to.

Clause 229, agreed to.

Clause 230, agreed to.

Clause 231, agreed to.

Clause 232, agreed to.

Clause 233, agreed to.

Clause 234, agreed to.

Clause 235, agreed to.

Clause 236, agreed to.

Clause 237, agreed to.

Clause 238, agreed to.

Clause 239, agreed to.

Clause 240, agreed to.

Clause 241, agreed to.

Clause 242, agreed to.

Clause 243, agreed to.

Clause 244, agreed to.

Clause 245, agreed to.

Clause 246, agreed to.

Clause 247, agreed to.

Clause 248, agreed to.

Clause 249, agreed to.

Clause 250, agreed to.

Clause 251, agreed to.

Clause 252, agreed to.

Clause 253, agreed to.

Clause 254

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Clause 254, the committee proposes an amendment by substituting for the provision in (3) the following: “Court presided over by a Chief Magistrate shall have jurisdiction over all insolvency matters against individuals a subject matter of which  does not exceed Shs 50 million.”

The justification is that chief magistrate’s courts are competent enough to handle insolvency matters which do not exceed Shs 50 million.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I put the question to the proposed amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 254, as amended, agreed to.

Clauses 255-259

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I propose that clauses 255 to 259 stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 255, agreed to.

Clause 256, agreed to.

Clause 257, agreed to.

Clause 258, agreed to.

Clause 259, agreed to.

Clause 260

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The committee proposes an amendment to clause 260 by inserting a new sub-clause (2)(d) as follows: “Prescribe any matter under this Act.”

The justification is to accommodate prescription of a wide range of matters as may become necessary under the provisions of this Act. 
 
THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I put the question to the proposed amendments. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 260, as amended, agreed to.

Clauses 261-264

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I propose that clauses 261 to 264 stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 261, agreed to.

Clause 262, agreed to.

Clause 263, agreed to.

Clause 264, agreed to.

The First Schedule

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I propose that the First Schedule stands the schedule to the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The First Schedule, agreed to.

The Second Schedule

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I propose that the Second Schedule stands the schedule to the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

              The Second Schedule, agreed to.

The Third Schedule

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I propose that the Third Schedule stands the schedule to the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Third Schedule, agreed to.

The Fourth Schedule 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I propose that the Fourth Schedule stands the schedule to the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Fourth Schedule, agreed to.

The Title

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I propose that the Title stands the Title to the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS AND DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I put the question to the motion that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS AND DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Insolvency Bill, 2009” and passed it with some amendments. 

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS AND DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is that the report of the Committee of the whole House on the Bill entitled, “The Insolvency Bill, 2009” be adopted. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE INSOLVENCY BILL, 2009

3.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS AND DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Insolvency Bill, 2009” be read the third time and do pass. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is that the Bill entitled “The Insolvency Bill, 2009” be read the third time and do pass. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED “THE INSOLVENCY ACT, 2011”

THE SPEAKER: Congratulations, the Bill has passed. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON BUDGET ON THE SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE SCHEDULE NO.2 FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2010/2011 BUDGET

3.10 
THE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Ms Rose Akol): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is the report of the Budget Committee on supplementary Schedule No.2 for financial year 2010/2011. 

On 30 March 2011, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development presented to this House a supplementary budget Schedule No. 2 amounting to Shs 151.599 billion. Shs 59.599 billion is for recurrent expenditure and Shs 92 billion for development expenditure. 

On 07 April 2011, the Minister again presented an addendum to supplementary schedule No.2 amounting to Shs 1,394.18 of which Shs 414.51 billion was incurred in 2009/2010 and Shs 979.67 billion incurred in financial year 2010/2011. Both the addendum and the original supplementary requests Schedule No. 2 were referred to the Budget Committee for consideration. The total supplementary request now stands at Shs 1,545,779,000 representing 19.57 percent of the total approved budget of the Financial Year 2010/2011. 

Mr Speaker, it is my pleasure to present this report. The methodology is the usual. The committee scrutinised and also chairpersons of sessional committees were invited to participate. 

The framework for the scrutiny of the supplementary expenditure is as follows: 

The committee focussed on the following while scrutinising the schedule:

i)	Whether the supplementary expenditure is in conformity with the law.
ii)	The sources of funding for the supplementary expenditures
iii)	Whether the supplementary expenditure was occasioned by the unforeseeable emergencies that the relevant sectors could not capture in the normal budgeting process and whether all their deserving emergencies were covered under the supplementary expenditure. 

The Overview of this Supplementary Schedule

The supplementary request under Schedule No. 2 is for Shs 1,545.779 billion representing 19.57 percent of the total approved budget for the Financial Year 2010/2011. That table is a summary of the supplementary expenditure category where we have under recurrent, Shs 59.599 billion, which has Shs 3,56.559 billion and then the development at Shs 1,486.170 billion giving a total of Shs 1,545 .769 billion. 

The Legal Framework

Mr Speaker, the legal regime governing appropriation is comprised in the Constitution, the Budget Act, 2011 and the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003. The Constitution and the Acts require prior parliamentary appropriation of all expenditures except those charged on the Consolidated Fund by the Constitution or an Act of Parliament. 

Provisions are, however, laid down in exceptional cases where expenditure in excess of what is appropriated is made or for expenditures made in respect to items for which no funds were appropriated during the financial year. 

In such situations, parliamentary appropriation can be done after expenditure. The provisions in the Act do not address treatment of classified expenditures yet they require different treatment due to their sensitivity and for security reasons. This poses operational challenges and uncertainty of whether questions arising in respect to classified expenditure in excess of what was appropriated or where funds where not appropriated but have been spent. 

However, the Public Finance and Accountability Classified Expenditure Regulations, 2003 provides special treatment with regard to classified expenditure, specifically regulations 7 and 8 give guidance on treatment of classified expenditure. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a copy of the Public Finance and Accountability Classified Expenditure Regulations, 2003. For the benefit of members who may not have these regulations, I beg your indulgence that I read the relevant regulations that I have sighted in my reports. Regulation 7 reads: “Classified expenditure shall be budgeted for and appropriated by parliament in accordance with the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003.” 

Regulation 8 further states that, “Classified expenditure shall be subject to the Act – the Public Finance and Accountability Act – and to any instructions or directives issued under the Act and these regulations.” 

Regulation 8(2): “Where national security or other interests require that there should be a deviation from the strict application of sub regulation 1, that deviation shall be permitted after consultation with the secretary to the treasury and shall be consistent with best practise.” 

Regulation 8(3) says, “Any deviation under sub regulation 2 shall be approved in writing by the secretary to the treasury.” 

Mr Speaker, these regulations I have referred to are specifically about classified expenditure. I want to read the relevant Section of the Public Finance and Accountability Act which the committee referred to when dealing with this classified expenditure and that was section 16.  It deals with supplementary estimates.

Section 16(1) “Where in respect of any financial year it is found that the amount appropriated by an Appropriation Act is insufficient or that a need has arisen for expenditure for a purpose for which no amount has been appropriated by that Act. A supplementary estimate showing the amount required shall be laid before Parliament. The expenditure votes shall be included in the supplementary appropriation Bill to be introduced in Parliament to provide for their appropriation.” 

Therefore, there is need to have special provisions in relation to classified expenditures incorporated and harmonised in both the Budget Act and the Public Finance and Accountability Act (PFAA) because state security and public interest normally require that classified expenditures should be treated differently. 

Although the provisions under the PFAA (classified expenditure) regulations 2003 are instrumental in guiding treatment of classified expenditures, these should conspicuously and logically flow from the Act into the regulations. 

The committee was informed by the hon. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that the entire supplementary including the addendum will be funded by a draw down from Bank of Uganda. 

The impact on the original financing arrangement as presented in the current year budget was therefore by implication not affected.

The committee went further to scrutinise each vote.
Vote 001 - Office of the President: Under the recurrent supplementary budget there is a request for Shs 3 billion by the office of the President to cater for the presidential swearing in ceremony.

In the Supplementary Schedule No.2 presented to Parliament, it was indicated that Shs 295 million had already been provided for in the financial year 2010/11 for this item. The minister in charge of presidency in her presentation to the committee clarified that although the budget line is the same for all public functions. The Shs 295 million was actually meant for three national functions that is: Heroes’ Day, Liberation Day and National Independence celebrations.

The minister in charge of the presidency further informed the committee that the budget for swearing-in ceremony was clearly indicated in the policy statement on Vote 001 for the Financial Year 2010/11 as an unfunded item, as attempts to provide for it during consideration of the budget were not met due shortage of funds.

The committee was also informed that the Shs3 billion was to cater for accommodation, transport, construction, ushering, reception, security, communication and publicity. 

The committee in its wisdom decided to reduce the swearing-in ceremony budget by Shs 200 million to 2.8 billion only taking into account the current economic situation prevailing in the country.

The committee also recommends that Parliament approves for appropriation Shs 2.8 billion only.

Vote 017 - Ministry of Public Service: The Minister of Public Service is requesting for Shs 56.99 billion to cater for a shortfall in payment of pension of which Shs 28.033 billion is to cater for a shortfall in pensions for general civil service; Shs 15.956 billion is for shortfalls in pensions to teachers and Shs 12.61 billion is for shortfalls in pensions for military service.

This House will recall that a total of Shs 132 billion was provided and approved by Parliament to cater for pension arrears accruing from previous periods.

This House was also assured by the relevant sector that no more pension arrears would accrue since all arrears had been cleared. It is therefore surprising to note that one year later the same ministry is requesting for a supplementary to clear pension arrears.

The committee notes that pensions are a direct charge on the consolidated fund and therefore sees no reason why the sector ministry should also request for supplementary funding.

The committee recommends that the funds requested for (56.599 billion) be provided for and no further request should be provide for by a way of a supplementary in future. The minister of public service should be able to provide for all these pension payments through the normal budgeting process.

Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development: under the development budget, the ministry of energy and mineral development is requesting for Shs 92 billion to cater for a shortfall on account of exhaustion of an IDA funding for the Mutundwe Aggreko Thermal Power Plant. IDA funding expired by end of October 2010. The Shs 92 billion is therefore to cater for payments of outstanding invoices since November 2010 up to date and estimated operational costs up to the end of June 2011.

The costs involved are energy charges and capacity charges for the said period payable to Aggreko. Copies of these invoices were availed to the committee and hon. Speaker I beg to lay these invoices on Table. 

The committee was also informed that the total required subsidy for all other plants as well stands at Shs299.79 billion but the Ministry of Finance could only provide for Shs 92 billion in the supplementary.

The committee notes with concern the heavy costs involved in generation of thermo energy. The supervision of this thermo plant also seems to be lacking and needs follow up by the relevant sessional committee. 

The committee recommends that Shs 92 billon requested for be provided to avoid a major power shortage.

The Bujagali dam should however be completed as soon as possible to provide cheaper hydropower. The minister promised the committee that Bujagali power project could be commissioned by October this year.

The Ministry of Defence

The Ministry of Finance informed the committee that additional funding for classified military equipment worth Shs 1,394.17 billion was being requested for, of which Shs 414.51 billion was expended in financial year 2009/10 and Shs 979.67 billion was expended in financial year 2010/11. This expenditure is now before Parliament for retrospective approval.

The Ministry of Defence further informed the committee that due to the classified nature of the transaction, expenditure for 2009/10 and 2010/11 could not have been included in the normal budgeting process for security reasons. 

The Minister of Defence also informed the committee that all intensions were to carry out these transactions with in the law. He also informed the committee of Regulation 8(1) of PFAA (classified expenditure) 2003 which states that classified expenditure shall be subject to the Act and to any instructions or directives issued under the Act and these regulations.

I read regulation 8(2) and it is a repetition here. The Minister provided a written correspondence as evidence of this consultation with the Secretary to the Treasury. I beg to lay this correspondence on the Table.

In conclusion, therefore, the committee recommends that this House approves the Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No. 2 for the Financial Year 2010/11 as follows: recurrent supplementary expenditure Shs 2.8 billion, development supplementary budget Shs 1,486,170,000,000 and statutory revision for information of Parliament and not appropriation, Shs 56,599,510,000; totalling to Shs 1,545,569,510,000. 

I want to take this opportunity to also lay on the Table minutes of the committee. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I thank you very much chairperson and the committee members.

3.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICRO-FINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I take this opportunity to thank the Chairperson of the Budget Committee for her presentation. 

I also want to thank the committee members who turned up for the four meetings we had and considered the Supplementary Schedule No. 2 and the Addendum, which I presented.

The committee report appropriately captures the amount of money that I requested for in the supplementary schedule and the addendum. 

However, on page 6 of the report, I would like to make corrections where they referred to Shs 295 billion instead of Shs 295 million. 

In the supplementary schedule which I presented, this item had a figure of Shs 295 million which was appropriated for the national celebrations - the three national celebration days and this is just a correction.

I also want to say that Government concurs with the proposal made by the committee regarding the request for Shs 3 billion that we requested – the recommendation to adjust downwards to Shs 2.8 billion has been discussed and Government is in agreement and the national organisation committee is hereby instructed to make adjustments accordingly.

I would like to make a slight amendment to the schedule I presented. This is in reference to the reference column regarding activity 312203 which is machinery and equipment. This activity in the Ministry of Defence has many items and so I propose an amendment to mention activity 224003; classified expenditure for clarity. We do not want this activity to be lumped with machinery and equipment. Not every machinery and equipment in the Ministry of Defence is classified – this is just for proper accounting to make us follow up on accountability. This is in Schedule 2 that I tabled – the addendum had activity 312203; machinery and equipment and so the request should read: activity 224003; classified expenditure. 

We would like classified expenditure to stand on its own because under this activity of machinery and equipment, not every machinery and equipment in the Ministry of Defence is classified. This is just for clarity; otherwise, the figure remains the same, save for this slight amendment.

I have acknowledged that the committee report captured very well the figures I tabled and I did not get into mentioning the figures as they are. But if Parliament wants, I can take you through what the chairperson of the committee has already taken us through. 

The recurrent expenditure was Shs 3 billion. The committee is recommending Shs 2.8 billion and Government has conceded to that. Development expenditure now reads Shs 1,488,170,000,000 and statutory –(Interjections)- before I finish?

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I would like some clarification from the hon. Minister, on the machinery and equipment. She stated that not all that is classified and now she is trying to isolate the classified under 224004 to be the classified expenditure. So, how much of this money is for classified expenditure such that we are able to know the amount that is going to classified expenditure and then the other part which is not for classified expenditure because you are trying to separate the two? You would have given us an opportunity to scrutinise the other part which is not classified.

MS NANKABIRWA: I thank you very much, hon. Okupa. The addendum to Schedule 2 was specifically for one item under classified equipment and I did not mention how much is in the equipment and how much was in other equipment in activity 31220, which I read. 

I was specific on what I presented under the addendum and it was only that item. The whole amount as it is indicated in the addendum I laid on the Table goes for classified activity.

Before I yielded the Floor to hon. Okupa, I was concluding by thanking the committee for their report and requesting Parliament to support the recommendation of the committee with the adjustment for the budget for the swearing in – the downward adjustment to Shs 2.8 billion. I thank you.  

3.37
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): I thank you very much. First, I would like to report that some of us walked successfully today without being disturbed by the security organisations and nothing has gone wrong in Uganda. 

I walked from Kyambogo up to the fourth floor of Parliament where my office is and I was with Eng. Patrick Amuriat –(Interjections)– I am fit –(Laughter)- Mr Speaker, I am fit and a sportsman.

To begin with, under our law, there is no prohibition that we should not budget for classified expenditure. It is allowed and since the law allows us, I see no reason why Government never brought these items for budgeting. We have always done this against the provisions of the Constitution, the Budget Act, the Public Finance and Accountability Act and the Bank of Uganda Act among other Acts.

I delayed to speak because I was trying to look for the accounts of Bank of Uganda for the year 2009/2010 and I do not see the Shs 414.5 billion in the Bank of Uganda books. That shows that even the accounts of Bank of Uganda are not right. Likewise, the accounts of Government are not right. If they can miss such big amounts, then I think there are many things, which were missing in our books.

The law is clear. If you spend, you must lay it before Parliament within four months. In 2009/2010, we spent Shs 414.51 billion. It was never laid on the Table and now we are laying it after almost two years. What happens to the law? Did we make the law for the purposes of showing that the law exists but we do not follow it?

Bank of Uganda has a limit on lending and it gives what we call short lending, which must be cleared within a financial year. The moment you go beyond it, you have broken the Bank of Uganda Act. That shows that the Governor of Bank of Uganda has broken a law. We could pass this as you want it but it will be passed contrary to the laws of Uganda. One day, I am sure we shall be held liable.

The budget of almost Shs 980 billion - we have just passed the Budget; there was no reason because we knew in 2009/2010 that we needed the figure. We should have put it in our budget. Now it is coming as a supplementary. Are we using budgets for purposes of coming here and we pass and go? Is it not a tool? Is the Act useless? I think from today, we do not need to follow the laws. We better put the laws aside and do what we want because already from this, we have broken the laws.

A few minutes ago, a Member said we have no Septrin in hospitals. As I talk, there are people who are dying of Cancer. To treat a cancer patient minimally in Mulago, for drugs, you need about Shs 1 million for the beginning. How many Cancer people are dying because of lack of money? It is terrible. I think we are being unfair to Ugandans who pay taxes. 

Somebody was telling us we cannot reduce fuel costs because we shall be distorting the collection of taxes. No! Every Government has tools to deal with crises and one of them is that you can even subsidise the cost. Tax is one of them. Remove the other and subsidise the cost as we have done to Aggreko. That is why we have power. We have removed the taxes and even gone further to subsidise the cost of diesel we use for generating power. Otherwise, if we do not do it, the electricity bills would be very high and Ugandans would not manage to pay them.

I do not think this Parliament should pass this, which will allow Government to continue to do its things. We should not be party to this. Let them go and they will answer in future because what we are going to do here is an illegality to ourselves. In Uganda, it is now clearly showing that the laws are finished. The chairperson read section 8(1) concerning the public financing of the classified expenditure. Yes, that one comes later. It is even telling you that you should account and it says Government should account. I want to report to the House that we have not seen accountability of classifieds since the year 2005 to date. They have never been audited and you may be sitting here thinking we are okay. Many of our resources have gone under “classified” and we have known it since 2005. If the Minister of Finance denies it, let her say so. 

I would like to call on Members to leave this for the Executive to do without using us Parliament as a rubber stamp. They have already done it. There is nothing we can change. They should not legalise an Act which they would have told us and we would have done. 

We even have letters whereby money is being drawn from Bank of Uganda in cash. You draw US $20 million in cash? Is that fair and is that how we should run the country? I wish the Chairperson of the Budget Committee would have asked how this money was being drawn. You will see those transactions and you would not have come here saying that it is time to pass it. If you draw cash, maybe somebody draws and carries it in his or her own pockets. Classified equipment - you go to the internet now and plug in what we have bought. They will show you how many AK47s we bought from somewhere. They will show you how many types of tanks we have bought. This is business as usual. 

Whoever is telling us about classified expenditure is lying. You punch in these things and they will bring up what Government has bought and at what cost. I would like to tell you that even this thing you are talking about of the jets, the price which is being shown on the internet is different from what we are quoting because we want to use the word “classified” and we take public money. 

We believe that all of you, even those in the NRM, this is your money and I think you should be serious with it. If you want it to go like that, you are the one then committing murder. When people are going to hospitals and not getting drugs, you have committed murder because you have passed money for a few individuals to mismanage. When the roads are not being done, people get accidents on the road and die. You have committed murder. Do not think that murder is when you get a knife or a panga and cut somebody. Even your acts which aid people to die mean you commit murder.

Mr Speaker, in conclusion, if these figures are not in the Bank of Uganda accounts, I do not know where they are. Maybe the Minister should help me understand where the first Shs 414.5 billion is. Which account can I trace it in the Uganda books of accounts?

Two, since you informed us that you never laid it on the Table, what punishment should we afford you now, because you have committed a crime?

Three, what do we do to the Governor of Bank of Uganda who passed the limit - because he is supposed to do something within the limit? The law has been broken.

Four, I am putting on notice those concerned that this act is not right and at an appropriate time, if we are the only ones here, I will move the issue of quorum because to pass such, we need all to have quorum. I thank you.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just need some clarification from the Minister. The report says the funding of this supplementary expenditure will come from a draw down. This is from our reserves in Bank of Uganda. Given what is already happening, because our inflation is now at double digits, what would be the impact of this additional injection of this money to the economy because we are going to increase the money supply in the economy yet we are already hit by inflation? What impact will this now have on our economy? 

Two, the Minister corrected a figure which the committee had put on page 6 for what was budgeted for the three public holidays that is Hero’s day, Liberation day and National Independence from Shs 1 billion to Shs 295 million. Now if three functions take Shs 295 million, how come that one item is going to take Shs 2.8 billion? I just want clarification on that because we know that even on days like Independence Day we receive guests. 

The other issue is on the pension. I concur with what the chairperson of the committee said. A year ago the Minister told us that the Shs 132 billion was enough. How did this then come about? In fact, I was even worried because I have some relatives and voters whose pension was due but were only paid half yet we passed all the money; and the Minister said it was enough to clear all of them.

The other issue is about the military. I remember in October last year, we got communication from the Ministry of Defence and Public Service that we should inform the people concerned. We had a meeting in one of the hotels in Soroti regarding this and the forms to be filled were issued. Ugandans who were supposed to benefit have not got their money up to now. What happened to the money that was supposed to be paid to the military ex-servicemen? In October last year, you assured us that they were going to be paid. 

In Teso, this was one of the issues and many promises were made. A number of Members from the Front Bench came there, day and night to assure them; but to date; they have not received this money. The fact is that the money was passed; where did it go? Can the Ministers of Public Service and Defence clarify this to the country?

3.51
MS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of this committee for this report. I am not surprised that this is the third time the Office of the President is going to be facilitated even when, come May, this small Parliament will be sitting close to 400 Members. You will be squeezed like sardines but you can afford to send funds to the Office of the President for the third time in less than one year. Congratulations and that is good work done; you deserve a pat on the back! 

I base my argument on page 6; I am looking at the amount of Shs 3 billion. The same page contradictorily talks about other functions that could be funded with Shs 295 million and they succeed. But on this very special one, because you are going to ferry heads of state, you will need Shs 3 billion at the expense of the taxpayers in Uganda just for those luxuries –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The information I would like to give you my sister is that currently, Government came up with a policy to withdraw the old currency and bring in a new currency. When they brought in the new one, eventually they never withdrew the old. So, even the old currency notes are in circulation and now we have double the amount of money supposed to be in circulation. Maybe that is the reason they are multiplying the cost of such functions up to ten times. 

MS EKWAU: Thank you for that information. I am just wondering; what we normally see happening during these functions, Ugandans are ferried from all parts of the country. Even people from Kaberamaido are brought from there to come here and feast for just one day. I do not know whether they go back and dine after eating so much in one day. I do not know whether the eating stops with only that one day. 

For that matter, I urge this Government to set their priorities right. You should not spend a whopping Shs 3 billion for one function and use Parliament to pass it. I am very happy that the peasants in Kaberamaido are the same as those that most of us represent. So, as we think about the Shs 3 billion, I am not amused at all. You will pass the Shs 2.95 billion, but Ibi does not bless it. I do not see it as a good thing for Uganda. 

Our education system is not well facilitated, many sectors of this country are in need yet one function – the votes of most of the ministries of those Members on the frontbench; some are just trying to move to Shs 6 billion or Shs 7 billion in one financial year but look at just one activity in one ministry; you give Shs 6 billion to some of the parastatals but here one single function is taking Shs 3 billion! 

Mr Speaker, my problem is passing this money to host the swearing in ceremony of H.E the President. I find it very hard to participate and be part of the Members who have sat this afternoon to pass this money. In fact, I will not be counted as one of those who participated in passing this budget. 

The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development - I was a Member of the Natural Resources Committee for some good time and one of our arguments – the honourable minister does not even have power in Karamoja, but what I am trying to argue out will help even Karamoja. When hon. Migereko was Minister for Energy, I kept voicing out concerns for electricity in Kaberamaido. Each time I approached him, he told me to wait until Bujagali power project was completed. He would always assure me that by 2010, Bujagali would be completed. Each time I went to Kaberamaido and the issue of electricity came up, I kept on telling them to wait until 2010. I am so surprised that in –(Interruption)

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Ibi for giving way, but could you also inform Members that this electricity was delivered on time? Thank you. (Laughter)

MS EKWAU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The clarification I will give you is that as I speak even after the power line to Kaberamaido went blank, dark, whatever you will call it; in this regime, up to now, it is not there unless you put a lot of pressure. We have not yet received power, not even the poles. Some are standing; others are still lying by the roadside. So, there is no power in Kaberamaido -(Interjections)- many people in this House, including the ministers have been going to Kaberamaido; even committee members across there. We do not have any power in Kaberamaido. I do not need to labour much on this, but my problem is; why has the Bujagali power project taken all this long amidst the facilitation and the supervision? At the same time, we are getting a lot of hard-earned taxpayers’ money to go and cater for Aggreko thermal power plants. In fact, sometimes I used to make a lot of fun when I said this name Aggreko seemed to look like Migereko –(Laughter)- and we would laugh it off. Sorry, I do not mean you, but remember we have been joking about this.

I take the issue of the thermal power plant with a pinch of salt. There is no way when resources are scarce that we can continue voting money to cater for such. We have the National Development Plan. What plans does this Government have for this country? Priorities should be priorities, done once and completed, especially on sensitive issues like power. So, when you continue, instead of getting money to feed those dying, you are voting more money to go and cater for thermal power plants. I see this as planning in reverse.

To the Ministry of Defence, we are getting tired of this classified expenditure; classified as if the word “classified” somersaulted from Mars; classified as if it is a new-born vocabulary in our dictionaries; as if it popped up yesterday. If you go out there, you will hear the population saying this Government was eating with the Kony war. Now that the war ended, they will still look for ways of getting funds. Otherwise, what do you want this immediate war equipment for? Are you planning to invade another country like we normally do? Why are we acquiring these jet fighters at this time?

Last year, I came to this House and pleaded for the people of Kaberamaido after the floods had swept all the food away and now we are going to give money for the jet fighters. The time the people of Kaberamaido – the little food that is not there – by the way they have not even started weeding. The gardens are bare. Let us pass this but when we come with the plight of our people who need food; we hope this Government will be willing and ready to feed them and not say that they should continue eating the red termites as we hear you telling them; or you will not tell them to go and dry mangoes or remind them of how much they drink. We hope you will be there to feed them. 

Otherwise, we just implore and urge Government to set priorities. Use the National Development Plan; otherwise, you have made the budget process very hopeless. We do it just for paper and issues of accountability, good governance and – it is a flower. It has become a flowery thing to do, but you do not follow it. We are not happy with this. We do not want to deceive you. 

4.03
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Mr Speaker, I have been quietly listening to the Chairperson of the Budget Committee and I was wondering whether the angels are going to fall down and save this country. 

We are witnessing, the first ever most expensive presidential oath. This is an exercise going to take one day and it is going to cost this country Shs 2.8 billion; but Makerere University is in arrears of Shs 90 billion. Government has not saved that institution.

We need about Shs 13 billion to cater for animal diseases. That has not been catered for; but we are expending Shs 2.8 billion for a one-day exercise. The question is: is this county facing west, east, north or south or it has no direction at all? 

When you look at what is happening in the health sector, for example, this country is facing reversals in achievements it made in HIV/AIDS. My good doctor was talking about lack of Septrin in this county. The minister has been touring National Medical Stores. He has no concrete evidence of whether there is enough Septrin in this country to help these helpless people but here we are, collected together while you are seated in that chair, Mr Speaker, being manipulated as the Legislature, to endorse expenditures that are not people-centric. I keep wondering: what is wrong with us?

I am just reading a document here about the EU concept about this country; that we are a good governance country. We have had good governance indicators. It is surprising this is coming to our Parliament this time round. What is wrong with us? (Interjections) Indeed, there will be nothing with us depending on how high or how tall you are. But the issue is, if we are asking for money for classified expenditure, I hear to buy equipment; can the Minister of Defence together with that of security, inform this country about the current external security threats facing Uganda? What are the current internal threats facing Uganda that require such amounts of money for classified expenditure?

It is unfortunate. What we are talking about now, which is a serious threat, is the fact that this country cannot feed itself. We are witnessing situations where schools are reducing meal portions and we are misplacing our investment. We already know the impact of underfed children; but still, here we are – my good sister will, of course, as usual, be used to bringing such a report to Parliament. We were here with you yesterday. How many Members of the Front Bench were here when this was not coming on? Look at how the Front Bench looks like today. That tells you that we need to delink the Executive from this Parliament so that we do our oversight responsibilities very well.  We cannot be used as rubber stamps because somebody has two legs: one in Cabinet, one as a representative of the people. This is unfortunate.

Energy – Mutundwe - it is good – where has he gone? Hon. Migereko was here –(Interjections)- since creation, West Nile has never seen electricity. We have never seen hydro electricity. We requested Government - since 1986 to give us Nyangak - thank God he is coming in. (Interjections) While hon. Migereko was the Minister of Energy, he came to Arua and delivered five empty promises that Nyangak would be on board by the year 2007, but up to now, we have never seen electricity. The thermal power plant has expired. In fact, it expired three years ago and we have never seen Nyangak, and today, sitting in for the Leader of Government Business, he is here requesting -(Mr Migereko rose_)- no, you will respond later. (Interjections) No, thank you, because you know how much damage you have done to the people of West Nile. 

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, hon. Bako has been debating very eloquently, but is she in order to misinform this House that ever since time immemorial Arua has never seen electricity, when it is actually true that Arua has been generating electricity? It is also true that electricity does not of necessity have to be of hydro form. Is she in order to continue telling lies to this House from a point of lack of knowledge of what happens in the industry. Is she in order?  

THE SPEAKER: Well, hon. Bako, the Minister has given those facts. Are you aware of those facts? Are you disputing or these are facts you are sure of?

MS BAKO: Mr Speaker, I was very explicit; I said since creation West Nile has never seen hydro electricity at all. (Laughter) It is also true that in the manifesto of the President in 1996, he promised that Nyangak would have power before 2001 and in 2001, the same President promised us Nyangak, which was not delivered; in the year 2006, the same promise was made. Nyangak has never surfaced and we are still waiting. Isn’t that good enough to suggest that we are an abandoned region?

MR LOKERIS: Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I wish to inform you that there were a few technicalities that we were rectifying. You will get hydro power electricity in Arua region, very soon -(Interjections)- because we are working on it and you will get it but the other one is there. The thermal is there and if you want hydro, it will soon come.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The clarification I would like to seek from the Minister of Energy is in regard to taking hydro electricity to my uncles in Karamoja. Could he give me the same assurance?

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I am at a loss. I do not know whether it is my English teacher who did not teach me well or it is the Minister’s teacher. He has told us here that there were technicalities. Is it technical problems that delayed or they were technicalities? He has just said that there were technicalities and that is why there was no connection for the power. So, what is he talking about? Is it technicalities or technical problems? (Laughter)

MR AKENA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform those who represent the minister of energy that the hydro power to west Nile was cost, arranged and the equipment even arrived in Uganda in the mid 1980s. In the rehabilitation and development plan of the NRM, they note that the equipment had come on the Apac, Kiryandongo, Bweyale line, to extend to West Nile, and the other line was going through Gulu to Moyo into West Nile. They note that the equipment had come but due to what they term as insecurity in the area, the equipment was transferred to some other corners in Uganda. So, west Nile was catered for, the equipment was imported, and the NRM Government only had to install at a given time. Thank you. 

MR LOKERIS: Mr Speaker, the ministry and Government has embarked on a number of schemes. Hon. Alaso was asking what we are doing with Karamoja. The first scheme we have here, one is Sironko-Nakapiripirit, we have started, the poles are there, in six months power will be in Karamoja, at the cost of Shs 10 billion.

That is that line, Katakwi-Moroto, we are also working on it and Karamoja again will see power, with Katakwi. For Kaberamaido, the Member was saying there is no light but we are there – the scheme is called Kaberamaido-Amolatar scheme in Kaberamaido, Soroti and Dokolo districts. So, we are embarking on putting up poles because the money is there, all those places around there, if you have never seen power, you will see this time. Thank you very much. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is true in West Nile there is some thermal power. In the day it is unpredictable, maybe it comes for one hour and it goes -(Interjections)- I will give you the reason why I am saying this. They have taken a lot of money as grants, as well as loans which are guaranteed from Bank of Uganda. We are talking about nearly US $60 million but what we have for – there is hydro for them, there have been boxes of generators which have stayed there and they have even lost colour - I do not think they will work. So, the true story is that West Nile has some thermal power which comes in unpredictable moments and it is very expensive. You can see that even yesterday the RDC of Arua was saying we should strike. So, all this you can see what hon. Bako is saying is that they have a problem and we should not try to push these things under the carpet, we should accept and say we have a problem and ask, “Who are those who have been taking money?” and see how to address it.

Hon. Ibi talked about there not being power in Kaberamaido. Hon. Migereko got up and said there is power. The Minister of Energy, my brother from Karamoja is saying we are working on it. So, who is telling the truth? We have a problem with this Front Bench. This Front Bench, when you put people who cannot reason, you will get a big problem. And who is talking? This one says, “We are working on …” while the other one is saying, “It is the power …” and he is no longer there; he is just here. He is just a lay man like all of us and no longer a Minister of Energy. Mr Speaker, we need to be realistic with ourselves. Thank you.

MS BAKO: Mr Speaker, you can now appreciate the crisis we are in. Therefore, we need to supply this country with power. You may be interested in knowing this; every time there is an election, NRM will always put poles along the highways to show that soon electricity will be supplied. Some of these have been eaten by termites – which some people have turned to feed on as food. This should actually be a call to the Government that instead of requesting for such colossal amounts of money for non-people purposes, they should invest in the people and the economy. 

I can assure this House that the people of West Nile are still mourning Kayiira, the first Minister of Energy in this country. We wish he could resurrect today; our hearts are bleeding because we had a person who had West Nile at heart. But today, every minister who comes in and goes out knows that NRM knows how to supply darkness in the name of power to the people of West Nile. This is unfortunate. And so, we hope that now Gen. Saleh is in Arua – and has felled down our forests and is interested in grabbing that land for a five-star hotel – that probably this Government that is asking for such colossal amounts of money, will start thinking about connecting power to West Nile since one of their own has gone there and grabbed land for hotel purposes.

Lastly, I want to ask the Leader of Government Business what the core values of the NRM Government are. I do not see this as a Government with values. What are our priorities? What are your interests? What are you investing in? You have run down the education sector and the health sector; there are no roads in this country and we can no longer feed ourselves and you are talking about investing in jets. Come on! When are you getting serious with your conscience? This is now a matter of conscience; elections have gone – fraudulent or not fraudulent but somebody is on the chair – are these the priorities? Is this kind of request going to realise your “Prosperity-for-All”? Is this how you envision Uganda being run 20 years down the road? I am quite unfortunate but when I look at the age group of the Front Bench, my heart starts beating in a reverse way because I am totally disintegrated. The people who I respect as elders cannot put Government to task and say, “We need to fix our country.” It is a total reflection that you are not in charge and you are fearful ministers; you only go there to worship the President and you cannot question such expenditure. How can your country be investing like this? I am your daughter by my age; where is the future you are giving my children, your grand children? It cannot come from such budgets and supplementary requests. I see hon. Ruhindi looking at me and hon. Kabwegyere seriously taking notes. These are the only things that will give me solace. But sooner or later, the Front Bench will begin talking to the President as the Executive. Otherwise, I do not know what these ladies and gentlemen go there to discuss with the President. 

But whether such financial requests will turn this country around is an issue that you need to think about over the Easter holiday. I am praying that one of these days when you are going to celebrate the resurrection of Jesus Christ, you will put this supplementary budget request in your conscience and say; “Lord Jesus Christ, now that you have resurrected, let this resurrection translate into an effective and meaningful use of this budget and request.” Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.23
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think that the Constitution and the Budget Act provided a direction of prudence and fiscal discipline for anybody who would care to adhere to it. My reading of Government’s conduct and the way supplementary budgets are managed and presented to this House year in, year out - the requests for retrospective appropriation and such related matters, there is a lot of indiscipline. There is also general lack of fiscal prudence in the way the NRM manages the country’s money. I think this is a serious indictment on the Government of President Museveni. 

I listened some time last week to the President and the comment he made on matters of this supplementary budget and I was taken aback. First, he said that the Shs 2.8 billion which is provided for his swearing-in ceremony is peanuts –(Interjection)– that is what he said. What do you want to do? You do not have to say, “No, no”, but instead say what you want to do so I can understand.

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you, hon. Alaso for giving way. The figure of Shs 2.8 billion was mentioned by the President but it was in regard to the benefits that will accrue from this expenditure. It is in regard to the economic multiplier effects arising out of our committing the Shs 2.8 billion to this swearing-in ceremony, the contacts this country will make and the business that will arise. It is only fair that as leaders, when we speak, we try to deliver the total message so that we benefit from it and others can equally benefit from it. I kindly request!

MS ALASO: Thank you, my colleague. What hon. Migereko has not disputed is the fact that the President said this Shs 2.8 billion is peanuts. And if he wants me to add “peanuts” and distort the President’s message to say that what he is going to yield is peanuts, I can agree with that version also. But I heard and if hon. Migereko heard something else, at least what I heard is that the President said that the Shs 2.8 billion is peanuts. 

He also said – this is what I heard again – that these people who are running up and down and walking to work are “idiots”. I am trying to merge the two and understand the Shs 2.8 billion, according to the President of Uganda, who in 1986 on the steps of this Parliament took Oath to be President and went to buy a wooden bed from Kawempe - I don’t know whether he has sent it to the museum since then. He also told this country that the problem of Africa was the leaders who overstayed in power. But I was asking myself, if the Shs 2.8 billion was injected in this economy or to some of the staggering aspects of our economy, perhaps the idiot the President was worried about would find some meaning in the Shs 2.8 billion? That is why when a President who swore in 1986 on the steps of Parliament now in 2011 says this is peanuts – I want to understand if this isn’t fundamental change; that is what I want to do.

I also want to understand how that this lack of fiscal discipline will not create more idiots for the President to deal with in this country. I am saying this because you are not putting money where the idiots’ problems are. You are putting money where your interests are. It is very unfortunate. 

But I was also wondering – and I hope the minister in charge of the Presidency will help me understand this - just one little thing about this budget – that she is going to spend Shs 218 million on invitation cards. I would like to see a copy of that card. Is the card inscribed in gold? Is it embossed in what? I just want to see a copy of it. How can invitation cards take Shs 218 million? Because you have money for all the other things: protocol, chairs, flowers – so invitation cards are just used to send the messages across, but they are taking of Shs 218 million?

My mind and heart go to a man called Masereka who, last month, died from Bundibugyo Hospital because his family could not raise Shs 150,000 required to do an operation –(Interjections)– yes, in Bundibugyo. Dr Bataringaya, you need to go and find out more about that. That man could not find Shs 150,000 in this very affluent economy – his family borrowed the first Shs 50,000, the next Shs 50,000 and when they failed to raise the last Shs 50,000 – by the time the wife came back to hospital, the man had died. If we cannot afford to help our people undergo an operation of Shs 150,000 – anyway, maybe I am expecting too much from this Government and it would be wrong to do that.

Secondly, there is a budget of Shs 1.7 trillion, which is almost a quarter of our budget for buying jets – (Interruption) 

MS WABUDEYA: Thank you very much my young sister for giving way. Mr Speaker, hon. Alice Alaso was wondering whether I would help her understand how we are planning to spend Shs 218 million on invitations cards and that is the information I want to give her so that we can move together. The item “Invitation” has many other things than the cards. Some of these things include: programme booklets, car stickers, transportation and the feeding of the district delegations. So that information should be able to help you understand that this money is not only meant for invitation cards –(Interjections)– it is my programme and I am the one giving you the details. Please, accept them.

MS ALASO: Thank you, hon. Wabudeya. I would like to accept that information, but the hon. Minister also knows that she has another item on the same page of the budget reading “transportation for district delegations and such related matters.” So, it is not fair to try to make me believe that this is strictly about feeding the delegations. If it were about feeding, you would have called it food.

I am into the money for buying jets. I don’t know, maybe it is good to buy jets, but I don’t think so. Anyway, I think that spending a quarter of our national budget on buying jets, when 70 percent of our people who depend on agriculture are having a budgetary allocation of less than three percent, is unrealistic and unfair. There is no good will to putting the money where it can benefit most of these people. How can the entire agriculture sector get less than three percent of our national budget? How can the entire health sector get less than 12 percent of our budget – actually it got only nine percent - but you allocate a quarter, which is close to 25 percent of our national budget, to one item –(Interjections)– are you the one buying the jets?

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank my sister for giving way. When comparing a percentage in the budget, you have to also put into consideration the period – the expenditure on defence is a one-time expenditure of that amount that will be in 20 years while the expenditure on agriculture is done on a yearly basis. So, if you are going to do a cumulative percentage, of course you will find that really agriculture expenditure is far more than the defence expenditure.

THE SPEAKER: But haven’t we debated this matter substantially? What I see is a matter of details, which can come at the Committee Stage while sitting as the Committee of Supply to deal with these items. The complaints about details should definitely come then.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I wind up my submission, I don’t want hon. John Byabagambi to mislead me. During my stay in this House, I have ever been a member of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. I don’t recall any year in which we never allocated those sectors monies. So, it is wrong to come and make a very blanket statement that this is a one off expenditure – that is wrong!

I also would like to call upon hon. Byabagambi to declare his interests in this matter because I am also told that he is the middleman for the jets since he studied in Russia. So, he should declare his interests in this matter. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Are you suggesting he has a personal interest?

MS ALASO: Yes, Mr Speaker, unless he declares it - you see, he has failed to declare his interests. So, I think he has personal interests. But –(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, whatever we say in this Parliament goes on record and this is the record for posterity. Unless the honourable member has got facts that I actually deal in jets or I am a middleman trying to get a commission from jets - by studying in Russia, it does not mean dealing in equipment which I do not even know where it is being bought from because this is classified information. Is the hon. Member, therefore, in order to insinuate and even belittle me that I have interest in this deal? Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Alaso, can you substantiate about his interest in this transaction?

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I said that hon. Eng. John Byabagambi studied in Russia and he has accepted that. And that he did mechanical engineering, and it is very close to jets and he doesn’t dispute that. (Laughter) He has just said that he has no interest in this matter of jets and I thought he had when he was defending it but if he doesn’t get a commission on his interest, I withdraw that part.

I would like to conclude by wondering aloud: the Minister of Defence has soldiers in Chad for a long time and last time I raised this matter in this House and now I put it to the Minister that when you were deploying in the Central African Republic, you didn’t seek the approval of Parliament. And some of those soldiers go without salary. They have been suffering and we have that information. Wouldn’t it have been a better thing to do to pay the soldiers salary than buy two jets? At the end of the day, we would have saved money, our soldiers would be happy, maybe we would have transformed the “mama ingias” and we would have saved part of that money for areas that are in dire need, like the health sector.

Can you imagine that after 25 years of the NRM, you still go to hospitals and you do not get drugs; you still have 435 or close to that out of every 100,000 women dying from child birth? Really this cannot be allowed to go on and for that I want to put it on record that I am not in support of this motion to pass this money. 

I know my colleagues will pass this money but I hope that in your heart of hearts, somewhat the spirit of the living God will convict you to know that you are not minding the welfare of everybody else in this country.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, I have found out from the contributions made that people are complaining about the details of the various votes, and if I put the question, I will go to the Committee of Supply where details may be handled. I think I will give you time to go and scrutinise the figures and then I will put the question so that we go to the Committee of Supply on Tuesday. On Tuesday, I will put the question to adopt the report and once we adopt the report we will go to the Committee of Supply.

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, assertions have been made on the Floor of this House which require a prompt response from the Government side. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, if they want to reply they can. 

MR MIGEREKO: The Minister for Defence for instance has issues to clarify. The Minister for the Presidency has issues to clarify. The Chairperson of the Committee on Budget – 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, if they are ready let them make brief responses.

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: I have closed debate from the House. I am allowing the minister to make a response because we have debated enough. At the Committee of Supply, you will deal with the other issues. Nobody stood up on that side and that is why I have been concentrating on this side because they were standing. 

4.44
THE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Ms Rose Akol): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to make a few clarifications arising from what has been said. I want to concur with the hon. Minister of Finance on the Shs 295 million. It was million and not billion.  

Secondly, I also want to clarify to honourable members that in my report, I have stated that the legal framework under which the committee looked at this supplementary was the Constitution, the Budget Act, the Public Finance and Accountability Act, and also the Public Finance Classified Expenditure Regulations, 2003.

I also want to add that [MR NANDALA-MAFABI: “Clarification”.] I am only clarifying. In the Public Finance and Accountability Classified Expenditure Regulations, 2003, 12(3): “The Auditor-General shall, in accordance with Section 32 of the Act, examine and audit the accounts submitted …” and that is the classified expenditure. So, even classified expenditure is subject to audit and definitely my honourable colleague and neighbour, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, has access to all these.

Thirdly, I want to clarify to my honourable colleague, Abia Bako that I am not being used by anybody and I am only performing my duties as the chairperson of this committee and I am presenting this report as chairperson of a committee of Parliament. And maybe if she is being used, I just want to make it clear that I am not being used, perhaps like she is being used. I thank you, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

4.46
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker and colleagues. I thank all those who have spoken for being candid and putting across their points of view on matters under discussion.

I take the Floor to clarify in so far as the supplementary going to Defence is concerned. Many times, I hear colleagues talking about issues that are bi-partisan and of national interest. In my judgment, I think security and stability is item one in that list of the common good. (Applause) Therefore, when it comes before us, who represent our people all over the country, we should speak and listen knowing that this is an issue of common interest. 

Perhaps before I go further, let me for avoidance of doubt inform colleagues in the House that hon. Nandala-Mafabi is in a very privileged position. He is our Chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee, and there are very few people in this country that actually see decades of classified expenditure. Among those few people, hon. Nandala, the present Chair of the Public Accounts Committee is one and I do hope that hon. Nandala is the Chair - I don’t think it is in dispute so if he can give me time, I will first articulate the point that I want to put across.

Well, he has just said that he has seen classified accounts up to 2005. He said this on this Floor so he cannot turn round and say he has not seen the accounts. But let us go to the substance of the matter. As hon. Alaso has said, it is true that year in, year out, the Ministry of Defence like any other department of Government comes to Parliament to seek appropriation for expenditure for the following year and every year, the Ministry of Defence has been clear that they need more money than currently being given in order to fully protect this country.

In the Financial Year 2009/2010, we came to Parliament through the committee and requested funding for that financial year and we were given what the country could afford at that time. But I would like to inform the House that somewhere in the middle of that financial year, the leading of the managers in the Defence sector, including the Commander-in-Chief, was that our country faced hastened threats against the security of our people and land and that we needed to hasten the state of preparedness so that should those threats be realised, we would not be found wanting but be in a position to effectively protect our country. It was for that reason that Government, after due consideration, took the hard decision to incur this expenditure so that our people may be fully protected.

Our judgement was that at that time, when we took this decision, if we were to make this information public, this would have prejudiced the security of our country. As honourable members are aware, we have come to the Floor of the House through the committee of our own volition because we judge that it is now okay for us to come to the House and inform and ask the House to approve the expenditure that we incurred.

But as the Chair of the Budget Committee said and I want to repeat this, we nevertheless made sure that we acted within the law of this country, security issues notwithstanding. Fortunately, Members of Parliament had foreseen such eventualities and provided for them not only in the Constitution, in the Public Finance and Accountability Act and also in the subsidiary legislation in form of regulation that we authorise on this Floor for the Minister of Finance to make.

In sub-section (2) of regulation 8, it states that where for security reasons it becomes necessary not to strictly follow the Public Finance and Accountability Act, the Secretary to the Treasury will be informed and negotiated with to allow departure from strictly following the Public Accounts and Accountability Act. In this particular incident, we followed that regulation strictly and we have obtained, in writing, permission from the Secretary to the Treasury to not strictly follow that law until some stage, which is now that we have come to the House. So for my brother hon. Nandala-Mafabi to say that we are flouting the law left and right is, to say the least, unfair because we are sure that we acted within the law.

Recently, some of us attended a workshop on the budget and I saw some colleagues from the Opposition in that workshop. Among the people who spoke was the regional manager for the World Bank and I would like to paraphrase what he said at that workshop. He said that after peace and stability returned to the Northern part of this country, Northern Uganda had become a growth centre, that economic growth was now ongoing in Northern Uganda following peace, security and stability in that area. And he went on to say that in fact he projects that Northern Uganda, given stability, will become the driver of the Ugandan economy. This was great news to me.

I would like to add that in the reports of the World Bank, it has been indicated that the East African region, within Africa in the recent past, has been the fastest growing economy compared to other parts of the continent and the one explanation is that this region has had relatively better stability and security.

Lastly, on those quotes, I am sure colleagues have been reading reports and listening to BBC, the information I have is that the World Bank is indeed going to change its criteria for funding countries; that they will go to fundamentals in addressing the problems of countries that need funding and fundamentals include issues of security and stability. That is only logical because once you have peace and stability then everything else is easy to manage.

Without stability you cannot have health or education. In managing an economy whether in the family or country, yes, we have to grapple with issues of priorities. In our judgement, and I think history will be there to bear us out, prioritising stability is in the right direction. Putting protection of our country as number one would not be a wrong priority so while I do appreciate that there are problems in the country and in education and roads, to anchor our means to solve these problems, we shouldn’t forget that security is very critical.

Hon. Bako did challenge me to indicate what threats face the country. Within the limits of confidentiality and not to cause problems for our country, I will just quote the obvious ones, which she knows. Only last year, we lost close to 80 people at the hands of terrorism in the city of Kampala. Hon. Bako knows that ADF is still in Congo and that Kony is still at large. So for hon. Bako to ask the question is correct but I just want to remind her that there are threats including these ones that I have outlined. (Ms Bako rose_) Could you hold on, hon. Bako, so that I first finish with these other issues? 

Hon. Alaso brought the issue of soldiers in the Central African Republic and she made two points: one, that we did not give approval for that deployment; and two, that they are not getting salaries.
 
I would like to inform hon. Alaso and other colleagues that when Operation Lightening Thunder started, within a week or so we returned and informed this House as required by the Constitution. If hon. Alaso thinks that that was not according to procedure, then we will wait to hear. However, as far as we know, having made that deployment we came here to inform the House. Indeed we came here and sought a supplementary in order to sustain that operation, which was given. 

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you, the hon. Minister. This is not the first time that I am raising this matter. When you came for the supplementary, I was in the House. The Constitution requires you to have a resolution of Parliament not to ask for a supplementary budget and then inadvertently think you got a resolution of Parliament. Yes, in order to deploy troops outside this country there is a constitutional provision and there is no record of that resolution anywhere in this Parliament. 

Last year, I raised the same matter and the honourable minister made an undertaking to come to the House. You said that if that is the position or the concern, “I am going to formally come to the House to get that resolution out of the way.” You never did that and you are now back at it. Let me follow you on what you are going to say.

DR KIYONGA: Okay, I need to warn my sister, hon. Alaso, that my steps are always very carefully measured. If you carefully read the Constitution under which we are operating and the law that governs the UPDF, it only says when the President, who is the Commander-in-Chief, has to deploy for peacekeeping purposes is when he will come to Parliament to obtain authority. I challenge anybody to show me anything different from that reading from the Constitution and the law that governs the UPDF. The operation in the DRC, which extended to the Central African Republic, was not for peacekeeping as we all know.  

Coming to salary, I would like to inform you, colleagues who represent the children who are assisting to fight terrorists in the Central African Republic, that not only are their salaries being regularly deposited on their accounts like any other soldier whether he is in Uganda, Central African Republic or Somalia but out of our meagre resources that are voted by Parliament, we have introduced a small allowance. This is in the case of the soldiers who are in the Central African Republic.

Having made those clarifications let me conclude and address the issue of payment to veterans or ex-soldiers, which was also raised. Parliament did vote Shs 34 billion so that we can pay soldiers that worked during the time of former and late President Idi Amin and other auxiliary forces. We are grateful that Parliament passed this money. I would like to inform the House that most of this money has been expended in the direction that we asked for. However, it is true that there are some problems that arose so that some people up to now have not received their money. 

Some of the problems included mix-up of accounts by the banks that we were working with. In one instance, for example, Stanbic Bank opened accounts in the field as we verified the people who were to be paid. When they returned to their headquarters, they found the same numbers they had given us in the field already issued to other customers who are not soldiers. So, every time we sent money, it was bouncing until we had to have a meeting with this particular bank. I am now glad to inform honourable members that this matter has been sorted and payments will start flowing so that those who had not been paid will receive their payments. I thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Minister. Hon. Members, in the strangers’ gallery are students of history from Kampala University. They have come to observe the proceedings in the House. You are welcome. (Applause)

5.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca B. Mbaguta Sezi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to clarify the concern of hon. Okupa where he talked about pension and alleged that pensions are paid in halves, if I heard him well. 

On a monthly basis, the individual entitled to pension gets full pension. Once you get your monthly pension, the gratuity is also paid in full. That is the clarification I wanted to make.

MR OKUPA: That being the case, you may not drag it so much here. I have a living case of my sister-in-law who lost her husband who was working in the Air Force. Maybe when we get out of here, I will get time with you and present that case. Thank you. 

MRS SEZI: Thank you very much. Since you have promised to bring the individual case, we shall appreciate to see that case and investigate. However, pension is paid in full on a monthly basis and the gratuity is also paid as a lump sum. 

I would like to add something on the ex-service men. As my senior has said, the process is ongoing. As a ministry, we are paying ex-service men and the number that has been paid so far since we started the exercise is 22,073. That also involves paying widows; the widows on our payroll are 46,000 and the veterans who retired are 30,000. I thought that I would make those two clarifications. [MR BYABAGAMBI: “No widowers?”] When I say “widows” I also mean widowers. Thank you. (Laughter)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, hon. Minister, for giving way for this clarification. Year in year out, we have been passing money for pension but some of us represent constituencies where the pensioners and ex-servicemen are crying. I am sure as my neighbour, you very well know because I have always consulted you on the matter. 

We want to get assurance from both the Minister of Public Service and the Minister of Defence when the backlog will be cleared, but particularly in Kanungu. I am sure that my friend, hon. Mbabazi knows -(Laughter)- that even when we were campaigning, at every rally you would get these pensioners and ex-servicemen asking about their money. In my constituency there are very many people who have not been paid. Can we be given assurance, now that we are going to give you money, that “by this time” all the ex-service men and all the pensioners will be paid and will be up to date? It is a very big challenge; hon. Sezi Mbaguta knows this and I used to tell her and update her about the problem in Kanungu. So, we want the assurance of when you will clear that backlog so that the suffering people can be happy. 

MRS SEZI: Do you want to know when we will complete that exercise of paying backlog? As far as we are concerned, there is a lot of progress on backlog. However, I would also like to say that because of local governments having found difficulties in settling the pensions of local government staff - because we realised that the complaints were not from the central government departments but from local governments - we have taken over that payroll for pensioners. We have also requested the chief administrative officers to indicate who was paid and how much and who is still making a claim on accrued pension. I think as you heard from the report of the chairperson, they need to make those submissions so that we can plan for it in the budget process. Thank you. 

5.10
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Mr Speaker, the hon. Minister of Defence has made a statement, which has really made me worried. It is to the effect that Ugandan troops can be deployed outside of the country without parliamentary approval and the only time you need approval is for peacekeeping. I am trying to reflect back at the time we passed the UPDF Act and I thought that was not the position that there was a requirement. So, I am worried that our government can actually deploy troops to go to war and Parliament will not have the opportunity to make mention or to pass a resolution. I really think that that is not the position but I would like the honourable minister to help me again so that I get out of this place knowing that any time –(Interjection)

Actually, the other concern I have is the possibility of an arms race in this region. Now that we are acquiring jets and we can deploy without Parliament even sanctioning except for peacekeeping, Mr Speaker, then my fears are compounded. I want to understand the minister more on this matter. 

MR ONYANGO KAKOBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wanted to give information to my colleague, hon. Alaso. I was not here in the Seventh Parliament when the UPDF Act was passed. Fortunately, I did some studies on issues of security and when I was doing my research on my dissertation for the MA, I did it within Parliament here and I came across that piece of legislation. It is in the UPDF Act. I do not remember the particular Act though but it talks of peacekeeping. The situation in the Central African Republic is not peacekeeping; it is peacemaking and the two are different. (Laughter)

5.12
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT IN CHARGE OF SECURITY (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The answer to the question raised by hon. Alice Alaso, the Secretary-General of FDC, is very well covered by the Constitution -(Interjection)– well, the day you are in position to help me on legal matters is the day I will welcome you. Article 124 of our Constitution provides for declaration of a state of war. So, if the President is to declare war, those provisions or clauses in that Article provide for the –(Interjection)– I know you really do not understand it and that is why I am here to help. All the four clauses of Article 124 clearly stipulate the declaration of war, the seeking of approval of Parliament before the declaration or where it has already been declared, and the time given for the President to seek approval of Parliament. 

Article 210(d) reads as follows: “Parliament shall make laws regulating the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces, and in particular, providing for - 
(d) The deployment of troops outside Uganda.” 

This is an enabling provision. This Parliament passed the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces Act in compliance with this command of the Constitution and it is in that Act that the conditions of deployment of troops outside Uganda are stipulated. The Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces Act stipulates that the President will seek the approval of Parliament if the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces are to be deployed in a peacekeeping mission outside Uganda. So, there are two situations therefore: declaration of war, which is covered under Article 124, and the deployment of troops outside Uganda, which is covered under the UPDF Act and which specifically talks about peacekeeping. Therefore, the deployment of our troops to pursue Kony, including hot pursuit, is not a matter that falls under the provisions of any of these and it is done within the law. Thank you. 

5.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICRO-FINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I want to thank colleagues for their contributions. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi raised a number of issues, many of which have been responded to and clarified by the sector ministers and some were clarified by the chairperson of the committee. 

As to why we did not budget for the items for which we are requesting the money, and regarding overspending and the requirement that we lay on the Table in four months, that is clarified in Article 156(2) of our Constitution. 

I am now left with informing hon. Nandala-Mafabi, and I know that in the heart of his hearts he knows. I know he reads a lot and he has many hats; the Governor Bank of Uganda has been making annual reports and I know that hon. Nandala-Mafabi is privy to these reports. I have here with me an annual report from the Governor, Bank of Uganda for 2009/2010. On page 99 of this report, up there on loans and advances to Government, “classified accounts” is clearly indicated. (Interjections) What he raised was that it is not indicated anywhere and I am informing you that as of 30 June 2010, under classified expenditure, it is Shs 449,899 billion. He had alleged that the Governor, Bank of Uganda had not declared and that he had broken the law. This report is here for all of us and I wish to lay it on the Table. 

Hon. Nandala-Mafabi also commented about the new and the old notes being used concurrently. I know that hon. Nandala-Mafabi knows that there is no way the old currency would have died abruptly. As I speak now, the new notes stand at 70 percent and the old ones are at 30 percent. This shows that they will eventually die out. I did not expect him to think that there would be an abrupt death of the old notes.

A lot was said about the need for more money to be put in health and roads. It is because of the size of the resource envelope that we do not give 100 percent of the requirements. He said that we have so many murderers and I think he can substantiate at a different time, not now.

Hon. Elijah Okupa raised a very pertinent question. He said that funding will be from draw down and he wanted to know the impact of this on our economy. While Government expenditure will increase the supply of money in the community, it will not add to the existing inflationary pressures on the economy. This is because Bank of Uganda has adequate instruments to neutralise the associated liquidity. However, the main impact will be felt on the interest rates. This is inevitable. This is a small cost to pay compared to the benefits of shielding the economy against power shortages and safeguarding the welfare of pensioners. I know that members know that our Government has made major macro-economic policy reforms, which are seeing us grow. The Governor, Bank of Uganda will contain the inflationary pressures.

Members have raised concerns about the comparisons of budgets for the three national celebration days to the budget on this one event of swearing-in. The three national celebration days we are talking about are Independence Day, Liberation Day and Heroes’ Day. If you go by the attendance of foreign guests such as heads of states, this swearing-in will be above all these because we are told that 32 heads of state are expected. For CHOGM, we had 54 heads of state and we are now expecting 32. I think Shs 2.8 billion is really reasonable if we are expecting such guests. 

On these other national celebration days, we do not normally book hotels. People come, celebrate at Kololo and go back. I agree that we are squeezed financially, but we have this constitutional duty to perform once every five years. In 2006, we used Shs 2 billion.

I want to assure my colleagues that in our national development plan, the five key strategic areas of intervention, which were identified, are infrastructure, human resource, production and productivity. Swearing is not among our key strategic areas of intervention. We shall see real development and Ugandans bought into this plan which is also incorporated in the manifesto of the NRM.

I also know that there are those Ugandans, like hon. Abia, who see no value in the NRM Government. They are entitled to their opinion. I think they are 18 percent of them in our population. The majority of Ugandans bought into the NRM manifesto so let us implement it.

I want to thank you for your contributions. I have taken note of pertinent issues. Let the struggle continue. Let us secure Uganda for we all need a stable country.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think this concludes the responses from the relevant ministers. I will not put the question now. We will do it on Tuesday. I appeal to you to go and study the details of the figures so that when we reach the Committee Stage, you come with details.

I had also planned to deal with the loan requests. I hope the reports have been distributed. I appeal to you that although you are going for the Easter weekend, spare some time to read through these reports on the loan requests so that when we come on Tuesday, we clear these loan requests without wasting much time. 

I want to thank you very much for the contributions you have made and wish you a happy Easter weekend. This brings us to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. May God bless you. 

(The House rose at 5.28 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 26 April at 2.00 p.m.)
