Wednesday, 8 April 2015

Parliament met at 3.12 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome the Prime Minister, the Leader of the Opposition and all the Members of Parliament to this sitting. I will amend the Order Paper to permit a motion on Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD) to be presented. I will also amend the Order Paper to allow the presentation of one petition.

In the meantime, distinguished colleagues, the House should have risen for the Easter recess a week ago but because the Government was not ready with their policy statements, we had to wait until today. I expect that this will be the last sitting of the Third Meeting of the Fourth Session. Therefore, I want to announce the proposed timetable for the consideration of the annual budget. 

Between now and 20 April, we expect that the sessional committees will be looking at the National Budget Framework Paper and the policy statements. It is expected that as they write their reports, they will include a section on the National Budget Framework Paper. Between the 20 and 24 April 2015, we expect the committees to submit their reports on the National Budget Framework Paper to the Budget Committee. On the 30 April 2015, we expect a report from the Budget Committee to this House on the National Budget Framework Paper for FY 2015/2016 to 2019/2020. From 4 to 15 May 2015, we expect the committees to present their reports to this House on the policy statements. We also remind the Committee on Finance to present the report on the revenue Bills.

From 18 to 20 May 2015, we expect the Budget Committee to sit to harmonise revenue expenditure figures. On 26 May 2015, we expect the Budget Committee to consider the Appropriation Bill presented to Parliament.  On 28th May, we expect a report from the Budget Committee on the Appropriation of Bill, 2015 and the annual budget. We expect that the budget should be approved, together with the Appropriation Bill, on 28 May 2015 so as to comply with the new requirements of the Public Finance and Management Act, 2015.

However, I would like to remind the Government that although some policy statements have been presented, part of the information is incomplete. This will make it difficult for the committees to work. I would like to remind you that the Ministry of Finance did not comply with all the requirements under Section 13 of the Public Finance and Management Act, 2015. Therefore, the Minister of Finance should submit the following: 

1. The recent fiscal development and forecasts in respect to revenue, recurrent and capital expenditure.

2. Plan for the following:

i) Domestic financing of the annual budget including borrowing by Government and drawing down of government deposits;

ii) External financing of the budget in the form of borrowing and grants;

iii) Government debt and any other financial liabilities for the financial year to which the annual budget relates;

iv) Divestments of government assets, which guarantees are to issued, money to be recovered as a result of the recommendation of the report of the Auditor-General;

v) Multiyear commitments to be made by Government in the financial year;

vi) Grants to local governments and any other subventions for the financial year;

vii) The Appropriation Bill;

viii) Treasury memoranda specifying the measures taken by the Ministry of Finance to implement recommendations of Parliament in respect to the Auditor-General’s report on management of the Treasury;

ix) Statement of budget, signed by the Minister and the Secretary to the Treasury, attesting to the reliability and completeness of the information provided under Section 13 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act;

x) A list of accounting officers - I think this has been done - appointed under Section 11(2) of the Public Finance and Accountability Act; and

xi) Budgets of public corporations and state enterprises.

All these are requirements we agreed on when we amended the law. So, we expect that they should be complied with before we can complete the budget process.

Secondly, honourable members, I have received a letter from the 	Chairman of the Electoral Commission. I am just a messenger - I am passing on the information to you. He says that there will be a general update of the national voters’ registrar between 7 and 30 April 2015. I think let me read the letter in full; it is written to the Speaker: 

“In fulfilment of Article 61(1)(e) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda as amended, the Electoral Commission will conduct a general update of the national voters’ register in preparation for the 2015/2016 general elections. The Electoral Commission is in the process of compiling a national voters’ register for purposes of the said elections and has extracted data containing particulars of registered and verified Ugandan citizens from the national identity card register.

The extracted list will be displayed at the update centres in each parish during the designated period for updates, commencing on 7th April until 30th April, starting from 8.00 a.m. to 6.00 p.m. on each of the appointed dates, weekends inclusive.

The purpose of the general update exercise is to register eligible Ugandan citizens of 18 years and above who are not yet registered as voters, as well as those who were not registered during the mass enrolment exercise for purposes of issuance of the national identity card. Please note that persons, who registered during the mass enrolment for issuance of national identity cards and were successfully verified as Ugandan citizens, will not be required to register again during this update exercise. This is because the Electoral Commission already has their data and the list will be displayed for public scrutiny alongside the update exercise. All persons who registered during the above exercise are advised to check the above list and confirm that their particulars appear at the respective update centres, in the parishes where they indicated their preferred polling stations where they are allocated.

The national voters’ register will be displayed in accordance with Section 25(1) of the Electoral Commission Act, Cap 140, from 2 to 22 June 2015, for purposes of the 2015/16 general elections. Please note that during the general update exercise, the following activities will be conducted:
a) Registration of eligible Ugandan citizens of 18 years and above who are not yet registered as voters;

b) Transfer of particulars by voters who wish to move to new voting locations;

c) Enabling voters to confirm that their particulars are on the voters’ register at voting locations of their choice; and

d) Enabling voters to confirm accuracy of their particulars on the register and correct any errors that may be identified in their particulars on the register.

Please note that the commission will conduct the exercise for purposes of compiling and updating the following registers:

a) National voters’ register for presidential, general parliamentary and local government council elections;

b) National youth voters’ register for election of youth councils and committees;

c) Professional bodies’ register for the election of representatives of KCCA;

d) The UPDF register for election of representatives to Parliament; and

e) The workers’ register for election of representatives to Parliament.

The commission will also conduct the update exercise for purposes of compiling the following registers: 

a) The national PWDs voters’ register for the election of PWD councils and committees; and
b) The national older persons voters’ register for the election of older persons’ councils and committees.

This is, therefore, to inform and request you to share this information with honourable Members of Parliament.” 

The letter is signed by the Chairman, Electoral Commission. I will ask the Clerk to Parliament to circulate this letter. If there are issues to raise, the sector minister should be able to answer them.

Honourable members, lastly, we have just come back from the Inter-Parliamentary Union meeting in Vietnam. We discussed a number of issues including the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), cyber warfare, shaping a new system of voter governance, women and young parliamentarians and the general proposals for the SDGs.

Honourable members, as you are aware, the SDGs will replace the MDGs in September 2015. The SDGs constitute a global agenda that will apply to both developing and developed countries. 

The Ugandan delegation noted that a lot needed to be done to ensure that there is effective implementation of the SDGs in Uganda; for instance, we have never received report on the progress of the MDGs in this House. It is also not clear which Government department is coordinating the development of the national consensus on the SDGs in Uganda, which are to be adopted by the heads of state in September. There is also no evidence that Ugandan citizens have been involved, consulted or informed about the SDGs. It is not clear whether there is coherence between our National Development Plan and what is being finalised.

Consequently, honourable members, we agreed that after we have finished with the budget, we shall have a debate on the 17 proposed goals so that the Members of Parliament can have ownership and information. We shall also see whether we can influence the outcome or the final goals in September. 

We shall be required not only to legislate but also to budget for and understand the mandate and competences of our committees, and to determine which committee will be in charge of the SDGs because we are going to have them for the next 15 years. We shall also expect an annual report on the SDGs from the Government, and we shall seek support of the Leader of Government Business in ensuring Members participate together with the government delegation in those deliberations. That is what I wanted to report on. Thank you very much.

Honourable members, a few people had some matters to raise. Hon. Dede Mayende has a personal statement and I will give him time to speak; hon. Xavier Kyooma has a complaint; hon. Alice Alaso has something to say, as well as hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi. Two minutes each.

However, before they come up, in the public gallery we have students of Gombe Secondary School in Butambala District, represented by hon. Muwanga Kivumbi and hon. Mariam Nalubega. You are welcome. (Applause)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I seek your guidance on the communication you read to this House from the Electoral Commission. I have been listening attentively and it has come to my notice that these are piecemeal electoral exercises being forwarded to this House yet all along it has been our cry that we get comprehensive electoral and constitutional reforms.

Madam Speaker, are we proceeding by way of piecemeal? Is it business as usual? Is Government not willing to come to this House to present a clear position? Time is running out. You have stated that we are soon going to be considering ministerial policy statements; I have not heard when this House shall be given the road map, the constitutional and electoral reforms.

Therefore, is it procedurally okay for this House to be given piecemeal information yet the country has been waiting for comprehensive statements and proposals, clear and unequivocal? Is this how we are going to proceed? Are we just having a by election or we are preparing ourselves for a general election? 

Madam Speaker, I would like seek guidance and say that we do not take this statement but we demand a comprehensive statement from Government. We do not need this piecemeal information; we need a comprehensive way forward from Government. There is a roadmap and we would like this Parliament to be in charge of that roadmap. To that extent, we shall not take anything short of a comprehensive programme that encompasses legislative, constitutional and all the necessary and appropriate laws. 

Madam Speaker, I beg that this House rejects that statement; because it is taking us for granted - (Applause)– and we demand a comprehensive undertaking by Government on the position and the way forward.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, I told you that I am just a messenger. I am just informing you about the letters I have received and giving you their content. If you do not want to receive it - I have done my duty and informed you about what the Electoral Commission Chairman has told me, which he asked me to pass on to you. However, the Prime Minister will say something later.  

3.28
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and welcome back. The matter of electoral reforms and the coming elections is very important and everybody is talking about it. We are now left with months to the elections. However, the Government seems not to be moving forward in this matter. 

When hon. Ssekikubo asks for a comprehensive report from Government, it should also include the roadmap for the electoral reforms. It is important that we have that so that we can also go to the villages and answer questions in a sensible way. 

I think there is a problem. I know you are a messenger. I also received that letter from the Electoral Commission. However, once it has been brought here, we should be able to add on; we are demanding, on the basis of that letter, that Government comes up with a comprehensive report on the electoral reforms, so that we know where elections are going.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, you read the timetable for what we are going to do during the budget process. However, I did not hear you talk about the time when the shadow Cabinet ministers will present their reports to the House. I also did not hear you talk about when we shall have the State-of-the-Nation Address.

We have not accessed the ministerial statements, which were presented to last week. We have only accessed one, which is for agriculture, but it is incomplete. It was hurriedly put together, it has no pagination and it is not a useful report to anybody to use for doing any work. I would imagine that most of the reports were hurriedly brought here and they not done properly. If we looked at them, we would return them to the ministers. Therefore, we need to have all those things sorted out, so that we get know how to move forward, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I forgot to say that although some policy statements came in, the soft copies have not yet arrived. This means that the Clerk cannot now upload them onto the Members’ iPads. However, please tell us about the other issues.

3.31
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, last week I did tell this august House that Cabinet had completed its consideration of the Bill on constitutional and electoral reforms. I am now requesting you, Madam Speaker, that as soon as Parliament resumes, you prioritise the debate on constitutional reforms. Now that Cabinet has completed its work, the Bill is being printed and I expect that it will be in the House shortly, so that we can deal with it and complete it. So, as far as Government is concerned, we are clearly on course.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, the so called reforms and constitutional amendments have budgetary implications. We need those amendments and reforms alright, but they have a bearing on the ministerial policy statements because you would imagine they have budgetary implications. You cannot put the cart before the horse. 

To that extent, unless the Prime Minister can give assurances to this House that they are well catered for financially, they will be coming here with proposals on reforms that are not backed up by budgetary provisions. Therefore, we would demand that they be brought yesterday; we want them earlier. The Speaker and the Clerk to Parliament are here; who has not done their job? It is Government that has not done their job. Members of Parliament are here. 

For you to speak like that and give the impression that the problem is elsewhere - the problem is squarely in your docket, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. So, can you clarify to this House what steps and measures you are taking to have the Bills and proposals brought forward without any excuses or further delay?

THE SPEAKER: On the issue of the shadow Cabinet, I believe while I was away, instructions was given that a week after you receive them, you present your reports to the committees. I think that is already in the Hansard. Hon. Kyooma.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, he had a response to make. These are constitutional matters and we demand answers.

3.34
MR XAVIER KYOOMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise under rule 46 (1) of our Rules of Procedure to give a personal explanation about what appeared in the Saturday Red Pepper newspaper of 4 April 2015 and its sister paper, the Entatsi, which serves the south western region. It was reported that the Speaker had exposed lazy Members of Parliament. This story originated from what happened in this House on Thursday, 2nd April when the Committee on National Economy presented a report on the loan request for the Mirama-Kabale Road. 

Madam Speaker, my concern is about the fact that I, the person who was presenting the report, also appeared among the Members who were absent that day. I think from the newspaper’s explanation, those who were absent that day were lazy MPs including ministers and members who were away on official duty with your permission and those who were out of the country with your permission.

Madam Speaker, I am concerned about the accuracy and reliability of the information given by these newspapers. We respectfully recognise the contribution and role of the fourth arm of Government, but in the circumstances that they give misleading information, it leaves a lot to be desired. If the roll call was done after a report that was presented by the chairperson of the committee and you actually report that the chairperson of that committee was absent, then what next?  

Madam Speaker, for the record, I was here at the beginning of the sitting, I was here during the roll call and I even answered from that microphone used by the ministers. I even stayed up to the end of the sitting. So, what could the intention of such reporters be? Considering the time in which we are, it is very delicate because one may even think our friends, the media fraternity, are fighting wars which are not theirs.

Madam Speaker, for the -(Interjection) 

MS NAJJEMBA: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to give my colleague information. I was not here that day. I was on official duty; we were in a retreat discussing the KCCA Act, but I was surprised that it was mentioned that I was in a salon. (Laughter) I would like to also find out why. 

Madam Speaker, I was attending an official activity. We were four ministers in that meeting with KCCA officials and officials from Ministry of Lands. The meeting was chaired by the Minister for the Presidency and I was part of it. We were discussing a very important law, which is supposed to come to this Parliament for amendment, and someone says that I was in the salon putting on lipstick – (Laughter)- Sincerely speaking, that was so bad. In any case, it is not a crime for a woman to look good. (Laughter) 

The information I am giving is that whereas we do appreciate our partners, the media, we know they are doing a commendable job, we request for some respect. If a Member is not around do not make allegations. Our lines are open; a journalist can always call and find out where we might be at that time, but do not make allegations.

As women, we have a right to put on whatever we want to as long as it is decent and we are not going to offend the honourable Rev. Fr Simon Lokodo. (Laughter) I was very disappointed. What he is talking about is true. Some people were mentioned as absent and allegations made and yet they were away on official duty. So, Madam Speaker, I would like you to intervene as a woman; please, protect us.

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, honourable minister, for the information. Madam Speaker, this is what we are saying - when you read Red Pepper newspaper, it is said that it is the presiding officer then who gave the list, but of course I do not believe that.

Madam Speaker, the provisions of rule 56 notwithstanding, the newspaper says, “Oulanyah exposes 200 top lazy MPs”. This is a general story and it has 200 names, but for the Entatsi newspaper, the information is different; it says that the Speaker was surprised to establish that all the lazy MPs come from western Uganda. (Laughter) They even published some names and pictures of our ministers and members. They went ahead to say that the clergy and voters have agreed that all those MPs should not go back to them to ask for votes because they are not being represented. 

Madam Speaker, aren’t these reporters and media houses also answerable to the House and to the public? Can’t they give an apology to Parliament, the public and the affected people? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We shall deal with that. I shall tell you what we are going to do. 

3.52
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise two very important issues. The first has to do with the disaster that struck specifically Teso College Aloet. For those of you who know Teso College Aloet, it is the centre of excellence in Teso.

On Thursday, 2nd April at 6.00 p.m., a very heavy storm destroyed five dormitories, classrooms, ablutions and latrines at the school. The most difficult thing is that the 668 students housed in the western wing of the school do not have where to stay comfortably. The roofs are made from asbestos and now they are trying to patch them and the rain is really hitting these people. 

I would like to put in on record that the Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness, who happens to be an old boy of Teso College Aloet, visited the school and is very aware of this situation. I would like to request Government to expeditiously intervene because the option that the school was left with was to send the 668 boys away from school until we find proper shelter for them. They now sleep in classrooms and literally everywhere. I would like to request Government to intervene and rescue the students of Teso College Aloet.  

Secondly, I am deeply bothered by the reports that I read about issues to do with the Uganda Athletics Federation. For a long time, probably four months now, we have been reading that there is a lot of sexual harassment going on in places where athletes are trained. We hear that the female athletes, our daughters, have had to run away from the camps largely because, it is said, one of the trainers, who is the Police coach, has been molesting these young girls undergoing training. 

Somehow, Moses Kipsiro, our gold medallist, decided to be the spokesperson for these girls and attempts to protect his young sisters. Now, he is receiving death threats. He cannot sleep in his house. He was even stopped from representing Uganda. This is a country which does not have many good things to boast about and you stop a gold medallist, who makes you proud, from going out.

Madam Speaker, I think it is too bad that our children can cry out from their hut that somebody is molesting them and nothing happens and their little brother runs from the neighbouring hut and says, “stop molesting our sisters” and that person now wants to kill their brother, and the country is quiet – (Interjections)- Let me start with hon. Nelson Sabila and if you allow, Madam Speaker, I will also take information from the hon. Okupa.

MR SABILA: I thank you for giving way. The information I would like to give is that the challenges that these sportsmen, who make Uganda proud, go through are enormous. The coach being talked about has turned the gold that should do this country proud into a bedroom. He has decided to shift all the gold into his bedroom. He has married three of the female athletes. It is said that this man is a Kenyan; is it true that he is helping Uganda or he is sabotaging the talent that we have in this country?

Honourable members, I think that it is important today, as we have a full House, for the ministry responsible to tell us something on this. As we talk today, there is a very big meeting going on. Last week, the house of this person was burnt in Kapchorwa and straightaway they implicated these athletes simply because they have had cold relations with this man and yet this man has a very bad record. He has been womanising and seducing people’s wives, causing a lot of confusion among people. He has now accumulated many enemies. Now they are holding these poor athletes for nothing.

MR OKUPA: I thank you. Madam Speaker, I think this harassment of female colleagues is not only limited to athletes. For the last two or so months, there has been a picture appearing in the press of a female police officer who has been harassed by her senior colleagues and even abducted. 

I thought that the minister should have come here and made a statement regarding that lady. This female officer has been appearing in the newspapers and it has been reported that she was raped, demoted and she even had a miscarriage. She was abducted and taken to a forest where she was raped by three officers but nothing has come out this.

I wish the Ministry of Internal Affairs could take interest in this matter and report to this House about what is really happening to that lady. Is it just a hoax or it is a true story? The newspaper stories allege that it is one of the police commanders who is harassing and following her.  We need an explanation. (Ms Tete rose_)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, can I take information from my sister?

MS TETE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you my sister, hon. Alaso. It is true that the information that my sister is giving is very correct. It is unfortunate that as we talk, this young gold medallist has abandoned his home and is having sleepless nights. He has not been at home for one week. He is also receiving strange calls that have scared him. We need the Government to help this boy because he is now so traumatised that he cannot work or concentrate on anything.  

MS ALASO: I thank you very much. I thank all honourable colleagues for the information they have given. 

I think that it is totally unacceptable that individuals in the Uganda Police Force, whether the ones that hon. Elijah Okupa mentioned or the police coach that we are talking about, are going around harassing those athletes instead of defending them and ensuring that law and order is respected. Now we hear that they are framing members of the Kipsiro family, they are tormenting them and they are now running away from their home.

My prayer is that Government should come up very fast to assure the athletes of their personal safety, including that police woman that we have been talked about. Can they be protected? If Kipsiro, a man who has done this country proud, is now sleeping like a cockroach that looks for where to sleep,  really our image, even internationally, -(Interjections)- Yes! I understand it was reported by the BBC. This is our country, our image, our children, Madam Speaker.

Secondly, can Government bring to this Parliament a report of an investigation? We would like to see action taken against that coach. He was given stewardship over our young people - our athletes, our children - and that is what he pays them with. Madam Speaker, we cannot keep quiet on this matter. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I must express my personal disappointment because I think some four months ago, from this very chair, I asked the Government to explain to us whether it was true that these young girls were being molested in the camp; we have not heard from them. Then the other day I read a big headline, “Kipsiro seeking asylum in UK”. Kipsiro to seek asylum and nobody is interested!

3.53
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I presented a petition to this House in respect of plots 60 to 62 on Alidina Road in Jinja and you directed the Minister of Internal Affairs to carry out an investigation and report to this House.
Madam Speaker, there were developments; the IGP had stopped developments but they resumed. This has now caused a security a situation in Jinja town. I think this is a matter which the Minister of Internal Affairs should report back to Parliament, otherwise your order, Madam Speaker, would be issued in vain.  

3.54
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga South Division, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to raise a matter of public concern pursuant to our Rules of Procedure. 

Madam Speaker, I rise to report, with sorrow, that 27 Ugandans living in the United Arab Emirates were arrested three weeks ago in Abu Dhabi. No reason was given for their arrest. They have been kept in jail for the last three weeks. They are tortured and fed on bad food, seemingly poisonous, and that has caused one of them to die in jail. This is a serious matter. Out of the 27 people there is a resident of Rubaga South called Mariam Nabulya.

It is an established fact that under international law and the doctrine of state responsibility, Uganda has a duty to protect its citizens wherever they are. That is why our forces are in South Sudan arguably to try and protect Ugandans. The purpose of this concern is to urge Government to protect those Ugandans because under international law, Uganda could even go as far as the United Arab Emirates to ensure those people are safe; it is a serious matter. 

I urge the Government of Uganda, in the presence of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, to come back to this House in the shortest time possible and report on the security of the Ugandan people in Abu Dhabi. You have nothing to lose but your chains.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you want help from Government, you should provide details of the names of the people and in which Emirate are they in. Otherwise, are you telling the Prime Minister to go to all the five Emirates to ask whether there are any Ugandans detained there? Help the Government to help you by, for example, mentioning which prison they are in.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I said they were arrested in Abu Dhabi, one of the Emirates in the UAE. 

THE SPEAKER: If say they are in Uganda, they could be in Soroti, Bundibugyo, Kisoro - I want the Government to help you but give some details such that Government can help you.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: We have an embassy in UAE.

THE SPEAKER: Anyway, I am trying to help you to get your people out but you are insisting that it is Abu Dhabi. 

THE PRIME MINSITER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, on the issue of molesting our daughters and young people, which our sister, Alice Alaso, has raised, I want to say that this is a very serious matter. As she rightly said, it has been captured by the international media. 

We have discussed this issue with hon. Jessica Alupo, the minister responsible for education and sports, and hon. Charles Bakabulindi and also with the Minister of Internal Affairs, the honourable Gen. Aronda Nyakairima. The Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports has handled this matter but found it having significant security implications and has therefore handed it over to the Minister of Internal Affairs to carry out further investigations. When the investigations are complete, this House will be briefed on this serious and shameful allegation that is obviously injuring the standing and reputation of our country.

On the issue raised by Ndugu Ken-Lukyamuzi on the arrest of Ugandans in Abu Dhabi, it is true that wherever Ugandans go, like anyone else in the world they should be treated properly. For this purpose, embassies are in place in many areas to provide consular protection. However, because of the inadequate number of embassies and members of staff – you find that one embassy covers several countries - sometimes the requisite consular protection is not provided on time and as efficiently as we would want. Nevertheless, the matter is taken seriously and the ministry responsible for foreign affairs is going to take it up. We would, however, appreciate more information and details in order to quicken the process and work by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. One week ago, I asked the Prime Minister about the poor performance of our missions. I am glad the Prime Minister now accepts that the performance of our missions abroad is below average.

Secondly, we have a mission in Abu Dhabi and one of the cardinal roles of a mission is to offer consular services. If there were more than 15 Ugandans arrested in a country, the mission must know. Even to the extent of somebody dying and Prime Minister tells us he is going to find out! You can find out from the ministry in a minute. The work of a head of a mission, which the Prime Minister was in New York, definitely is to inform your home government that somebody has died in a foreign prison; it does not take time.

The performance, I want to repeat - I have got a list which I am preparing to lay on Table in Parliament. The performance of our missions is below average. This is simply because so many people who are in those missions have been recruited wrongly and they do not know what to do. I have talked about this on this Floor. This is now what is happening to Uganda and what you see in Abu Dhabi. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. He was giving you information. Please, conclude. 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, it is not correct that the performance in our missions abroad is below average. The contrary is actually the case. The performance of our embassies is excellent - (Interjections)- There is no doubt about that. One of the indicators is the fact that Uganda continues to score big victories in the international arena, to extent that now Uganda occupies the presidency of the United Nations General Assembly. So, where credit is due, it must be given. 

Madam Speaker, it is not correct to say that people who been politically given responsibilities in embassies have performed poorly. The contrary is the case. Many of these people have used their wide political experience to improve the performance of Ugandan embassies abroad.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let us not go into that debate. Please, find out what is happening to the 27 Ugandans. Concerning what hon. Xavier Kyooma raised, I will issue a list of those who were away with my permission. Those who were away without my leave will remain in the air.

MRS ALICE ALASO: Madam Speaker, I talked about Teso College.

4.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr Musa Ecweru): Madam Speaker, I share the concern of my sister, hon. Alice Alaso. I also have information that has been collected by my office regarding not only Teso College Aloet but many institutions in the country that have suffered similar disasters lately.

For Teso College Aloet particularly, I happened to be in the region when my attention was drawn to the fact that it had been devastated by a storm. I visited the school and I am here to confirm that most buildings in the western wing of the college were indeed de-roofed by a very strong storm including my own dormitory, Obwangor, where I was a house captain. 

We have directed action. I want to report to this House that I had communicated to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, who allowed me to direct the Permanent Secretary to work with the headmaster of Teso College Aloet to insure that everything will be done, particularly to quickly send iron sheets to enable the school fix those roofs so that the 600 children do not leave school. The west wing alone has 600 children and as we talk, they are in a very bad shape. 

However, this is not to say that we are not looking at the entire country; we are doing so. As for Teso College Aloet, I must also declare my interest because apart from being a minister, I am also an old boy of the school and therefore I will do everything possible to make sure that - 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. There was the issue about the police woman who is being tortured by a commander. There was a big article in the newspapers about this and she has been complaining.

4.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker and honourable members, rightly so, the Police took interest in that matter, which appeared recently in the newspapers. The Police are investigating and we are yet to receive the report.

Secondly, on the issue raised by hon. Paul Mwiru about the erased building in Alidina Road Jinja, you will recall, Madam Speaker, that I made a statement and you directed that we go and do further work on that report. When I went back, I reported to my boss, the honourable Gen. Aronda, who decided to constitute a security team to thoroughly investigate that matter. 

A report has been made and the senior minister wanted to first consult with the Rt Hon. Prime Minister before coming to Parliament. That consultation is still going on. I think we should be allowed to do this consultation. However, we definitely make a commitment to come back and give this report. It is more comprehensive, detailed and action-oriented than the one we first presented. I pray for your patience for that consultation to run its course. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Dede Mayende was supposed to make a statement. Welcome back. (Applause)

4.10
MR STEPHEN DEDE MAYENDE (NRM, Bukooli County South, Namayingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a personal statement moved under rule 46 of the Rules of Procedure of this House. I stand before you to explain the circumstances leading to my arrest and dentation. 

On Saturday, 5 March 2015 at about 12.00 p.m., while I was at my home in Namayingo, I received a phone call from the mayor of Namayingo Town Council, a one Dan Wanyama, who informed me that the IGP wanted to meet us in Jinja. I immediately drove to Bugiri where I met a team of police officers and the mayor of Namayingo Town Council. We boarded a police van and we were driven to Nalufenya Police Station.

Madam Speaker, at Nalufenya Police Station, I was taken to a boardroom and told to wait for the IGP. After four hours of waiting, I decided to call the IGP to find out what the problem was. He told me that he was on his way coming. That day, he did not come. 

At around 6.00 p.m., a police officer came to the room where we were with my colleague and told us that we were under arrest. We were taken to a police cell and they did not explain to us the reason for our arrest. 

Later at midnight, we were called to make statements. One police officer told us that they had credible information linking us to the murder of the Buyinja Sub County LC III chairman in Namayingo District. Madam Speaker and colleagues, I lost my consciousness.  However, I obediently made a statement without knowing the role I had played in that killing.

To the best of my knowledge, the genesis of these issues begun on 2nd March when a one Ibra, the prime suspect, called me and said that I should help and hand him over to the IGP, who was hunting for him. He feared he would be killed by these other police officers if they arrested him. I also called the mayor because he had been the one giving police tips in arresting those people. 

I had the IGP’s number and immediately, I called the IGP and he also called me twice in support of the move. Indeed, we went with the mayor and handed over that suspect to him. The IGP was very happy. He even called the President to thank me, although later he informed me that the President was still busy. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, while we were travelling, before handing over the suspect, the suspect handed over a phone and some documents to the mayor. He told him, “Take that thing to my place; do not hand it over to the IGP.” The mayor instead handed over everything to the IGP. I think this annoyed the suspect and he now alleged that the mayor had sent him to go and kill the LC III chairman and that he promised to give him Shs 7 million of which he gave only Shs 2 million; so the boy was still demanding Shs 5 million. The suspect did not mention my name at all. Nobody mentioned my name. I was just arrested on grounds that I am a friend to the mayor and that I communicate to the mayor always.

Madam Speaker, they detained me under intense restrictions. Even some of my colleagues tried to come and check on me, but they were denied access to me. They also refused my family members, my personal doctor and lawyer to access me for four days. I kept on protesting. My people also supported me until they let me start accessing my people. 

Madam Speaker, I instructed my lawyer to petition court for a release order since I had stayed in police custody far beyond the mandatory 48 hours granted by the Constitution. Before the court could set a date for my application, I was released on police bond on 19 March 2015 at around 11.00 a.m. The IGP informed me that on the advice of the DPP, there was insufficient evidence on my file to prosecute me.

I am now required to report every Monday either to Namayingo Police Post or Kireka. I have so far reported twice and yesterday my passport was taken.

What shocked me, though, is that the police bond paper, which they gave me, indicates that I am suspected of murder, crimes against humanity and terrorism. Given the gravity of these allegations, I request the Police to speed up the investigations so that justice is achieved. I am also concerned because my integrity is at stake and the burden of living with these allegations is too big for me to bear. I even fear to come to this House because this House is for honourable members and not for horrible people. 

Despite what happened, I appreciate the effort of the Police towards curbing crime in Namayingo and Uganda at large. I have no personal vendetta against the Police. However, I urge them to always uphold the rule of law while executing their duties. The issue of “arrest first and investigate later” should be avoided as it undermines the rights of suspects. Similarly, the Police should stop acting on people’s whims and suspicions as this will erode public confidence in their work.

Finally, I thank you, Madam Speaker, and Parliament at large for standing your ground and for the concerns you raised.  I think this greatly facilitated my release. (Applause) You indeed lived by your oath to preserve, protect and defend the Constitution. I also thank my colleagues who visited me and expressed solidarity during my great moment of need.  Thank you very much. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Mayende Dede. I would like to assure you that we are happy to see you back. We wish you well.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF UGANDAN LADIES WHO 
WERE REPORTED TO BE STRANDED IN THE KINGDOM OF SAUDI ARABIA

4.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker and honourable members, this issue was raised in the House last Thursday by hon. Betty Nambooze, whereupon the Speaker tasked the Minister of State for Labour to look into the matter. I took personal interest in the matter. I discussed it with hon. Betty Nambooze before we left this Chamber and I got a copy of that statement. 

I have now tasked the taskforce responsible for trafficking in persons to investigate whether these girls were trafficked to Saudi Arabia or not. This was only on Tuesday, after the Easter holidays. In that regard, Madam Speaker, I would like to report that we are still investigating this matter. We do not have any details yet. Apparently, when hon. Betty Nambooze made that statement, she said the girls were taken there by a licensed agency legally authorised to export labour. That is why the Ministry of Labour took particular interest in it. 

My plea to the House is that the time now is too short for us to give a meaningful response since the matter was raised only last Thursday. We request that we be given more time to find out more about this.

MR MWIRU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Speaker ruled on an immediate action in regard to the ladies who were said to be under apprehension. Therefore, as the minister asks for time to investigate, I thought we would be briefed on what actually has happened on the ladies who wanted to come back. Thank you.

4.21
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Sembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I vividly recall I raised an issue here and you guided me and my colleague that we should come up with a motion because the issue of trafficking and molesting our girls outside there is a concern of every Ugandan. Unfortunately, on Thursday I had gone to Kigali for burial when my colleague, hon. Nambooze, raised the issue. 

On that Wednesday, there was also a girl on TV who was molested and she passed away in Egypt. As I was moving around to get the correct information, which I had requested, I watched the news and the Minister of Internal Affairs, with an Inter-ministerial committee were holding a press conference. They were pre-empting the work of this Parliament addressing issues of what they had put in place and so on. I tried to call Mr Ssenoga to get that report and he did not pick my call.

To cut the long story short, the Prime Minister asked for information; I have stood on the floor of this House giving information, and other colleagues: hon. Okupa and the Committee on Labour, Gender and Social Development. I wonder what more information they need. For example, in Abu Dhabi, it is on record that we visited the mission. They are detached from their communities. Many Ugandans have died in transit from China and are buried. The government has the information, but they are not following it up. Many Ugandans died in Kuwait and the government have the information and they are doing nothing. What type of information does the minister say they are investigating? 

The former Minister for Gender, Labour and Social Development stood on this floor of the House - (Interruption)

MR JAMES BABA: Is hon. Kawooya in order to mislead this House? Hon. Nambooze came here and gave details of the girls, their telephone contacts and all the details for us to use in our investigation. That is the lead we are taking. Is she in order to keep asking what further information we need when we already have this information and we are taking action on it? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the question we are dealing with is the issue of Saudi Arabia. You are now going to other issues of China. I do not think we can handle that one now.

MS KAWOOYA: Madam Speaker, it was said in this House that they need information. The issue they raised cannot be isolated; whether it is in Saudi Arabia or the Emirates or in Asia. We were here, the Minister for Gender, Labour and Social Development told us that he trotted six countries; he should be sharing with his colleagues the information he found there.

Hon. Lukyamuzi has raised the issue again. Here, I am rising on this clarification; what information does the minister need? Should we come here separately on India, Asia, and Saudi Arabia? They have an inter-ministerial committee. We have asked and begged; you asked for time; why do you need time? You had requested us because -(Interruption)

MR ALEX BYARUGABA: Thank you colleague for giving way. Madam Speaker, you recall that this Parliament has in the past, not distant past, but recent past, two committees of Foreign Affairs and that one of equal opportunities carried out a very comprehensive report and they presented it in this House. The information I want to give to hon. Kawooya is that the minister could, if need be, make use of that very comprehensive report that has hitherto been presented to this House. I thank you.

MS EKWAU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When we comment about the inefficiency in the government, at times, they say we are politicking. 

A full-fledged delegation of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development went to Iraq. They have all the necessary details. The Committee on Equal Opportunities visited over three Asian countries beginning with United Arab Emirates. The Committee of Foreign Affairs did the same thing. What is peculiar? By then hon. Rukutana was the Minister of Labour. What more information is needed? We need the company that is in charge of transporting these people out of this country. What is it that they do not have? We can begin from there before even isolating this issue.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are dealing with people who are transported to China, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia and Abu Dhabi; it is really big.

Honourable members -(Interjections)- yes, they are Ugandans. You do not know whether they went lawfully, through a company or on their own. This matter is very intricate. However, the issue hon. Lukyamuzi raised was on the 27 Ugandans - I do not know in which prison in Abu Dhabi they are. However, it is said there are some 27 Ugandans in prison. I think that is what you wanted to know. This one is now about Saudi Arabia. The minister said he is not ready because he is still doing investigations. What do you want us to do?

MR KAWUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am inquiring on what my colleague has reminded this House that several committees visited many countries and made reports here and we made recommendations. 

This question of Ugandans arrested or dying will keep on appearing again and again for as long as this Parliament is not updated on how far resolutions made are pursued. For example, of the persons identified as arrested there, how many were recovered and how many are still detained? This Parliament is still ignorant of the outcome of the resolutions earlier on made. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, referring to hon. Baba; hon. Nambooze gave this Parliament information, telephone numbers and so on. The minister is saying they want more time. He is not specifying - even when they were asked about the police woman who was molested; he is not committing himself to a specific period when they would provide a report to this Parliament. Instead he is asking for more time, people are running into elections.

Madam Speaker, is it procedurally right to move without following up recommendations earlier made and for the minister not to commit himself even with the information he has?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether, for instance, the 27 Ugandans hon. Lukyamuzi talked about were arrested last week or one year ago or there is another set of 27. When were they arrested? What were their names? Ugandans are being arrested almost every month. The situation is fluid.

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, I think what you should note here is one thing that as long as we are exporting people into slavery - because the problem is –(Interjections)- I was in Saudi Arabia; the issue is that companies are exporting these girls to Saudi Arabia, and from there, they sell them as if it is normal trade. These girls pass on their passports to the buyers. When they are mistreated, the buyers normally ask for a refund which these girls normally do not have. 

That is why the companies must account for the people they exported into slavery because for us as Parliament, we cannot just look on. If any of us in this House or anywhere in Government has participated in exporting people into slavery, he or she should come up and say, “I exported 10,000 and as far as I am concern, this is the information concerning them.” Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: How about those who just go without going through companies? 

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think in this matter, we have to take a little bit of caution. This involves two governments. There is the Government of Uganda that is investigating, but there are also other governments. They include the Government of Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates (UAE), and so many others. It does not mean that you wake up in a single day and come up with answers.

I met three ladies and a gentleman in Nairobi at the airport. They were going on their own. I asked them where they were going. They said they got visas and they know there are cleaning jobs in UAE. 

Therefore, you may assume that you are going to block people from leaving this country through our borders. They only -(Interjections)– please, listen to me because you may not want to agree with me, but what I am giving you is the fact. If you fear the truth, then do not let yourselves face it. 

We agree that there are some Ugandans that are undergoing inhumane treatment in some countries. We were here with hon. Nambooze on Thursday, true to the fact, but you cannot get an answer between Wednesday and Thursday about each single case. Like the minister said, everyone lives at their own peril in this country. It is better you face the truth than try to shun it.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I recall that we made two strong resolutions in this House. One was to ask Government to enter into formal agreements with the receiving countries. 

We also directed that no more export of domestic workers takes place. Those are the two areas we have agreed upon. Maybe we should ask the government to tell us how far they have gone with formalising the export of labour with the receiving countries. Otherwise, we are going to continue complaining and going around in circles. 

4.35
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL AFFAIRS (Mr Muruli Mukasa): Indeed, that aspect of the resolution of entering formal agreements with the recipient countries has been tackled. Discussions have been held with the Government of Saudi Arabia regarding an MOU so that there is this bilateral agreement between Uganda and Saudi Arabia in connection with labour export. 

We have also made the necessary consultations and we have got the opinion of the Solicitor-General as is required. Once time allows, this particular aspect is going to be concluded by Uganda pending the signature on that agreement. 

As is required, for instance, by Saudi Arabia, they have agreed to choose one focal company which will be responsible for making sure that labour exported from here is treated according to the law obtaining in Saudi Arabia and here. Indeed consultations have been made and the necessary advice has been sought from the Solicitor-General and there is general agreement with regard to that focal company to make sure that exported labour will be in touch with the Government of Uganda as well as the registered licensed companies that are going to export labour. 

The agreement will also make sure that when the people get there, they are followed up, looked after very well, and reports are made about their welfare. This is so that this particular abuse which has happened now becomes a matter of the past. 

Let us not dismiss the fact that there are some Ugandans who go abroad looking for jobs without necessarily going through registered companies. Unfortunately, that happens and sometimes they get in trouble when they are there.

However, this focal company that has been singled out will also go out of its way to make sure that these Ugandans; whether they have gone through a registered company or not are found. They will make sure that their situation is properly documented and eventually regularise their stay there if they wish to stay.

Madam Speaker, at least this is to affirm that that aspect of the resolution has been followed up. It is going to be put to its logical conclusion. A report regarding that is going to be brought here. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS OF THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2015/2016

THE SPEAKER: Minister for Kampala.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Madam Speaker, I noticed that we are going to lay the statement from KCCA. I have an extract from the Hansard of Friday, 19 December 2014. On that day, the Speaker advised Government that he would not entertain any matter from KCCA until its political problems were solved. 

Allow me to read one paragraph by the Speaker which says: “So, whether the loan is approved or not, if by the time we resume in February next year the matter of administration and governance in KCCA is not resolved, no matter should be brought to this House that has anything to do with KCCA.” And the House expects that to be followed. 

I would like to draw your attention to this and to ask this House that we should respect our own decisions. This is so that we are not a laughing stock outside there. When we say something, let us get serious and enforce it. Thank you very much.

4.41
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true as the Leader of Opposition has said. The Deputy Speaker of Parliament presiding asked us to ensure that we resolve issues of governance concerning Kampala City Council Authority.

The Leader of Opposition knows very well that Government and the Opposition have made reasonable efforts in this direction. We have held both political and technical consultations. 

The Leader of Opposition and his team - my team and I, have held in my view a constructive meeting. We have asked the two legal teams; the government team headed by the Attorney-General and the Opposition team headed by hon. Sseggona, to meet and give us technical advice on the matter of Kampala City Council Authority.

I better also quickly clarify this position. As soon as Parliament closed, I saw the media awash with Government to re-instate Mayor Lukwago by February this year. However, I would like to reiterate what we said then. The issue was resolving issues of governance on KCCA – and by the way, I must say that in that respect, a new law has already been drafted and a new Bill considered by Cabinet. Cabinet has decided that further work should be done on this Bill and be brought back. 

In a nutshell, it is correct that some good work has been done by the Opposition and Government to resolve this matter. I am confident that with this cooperation, we will be able to resolve this matter. The new Bill is going to be presented to streamline the administration and governance of KCCA. I therefore propose without any doubt, Madam Speaker, that –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Prime Minster for accepting this clarification, which I would like to seek from him. I do appreciate the noble work that your committee and that of the LOP is advancing towards improving issues of governance in KCCA.

We remember last week, there was a fundraising by Buganda Kingdom called “ettofaali”, which took place at KCCA grounds. This has been going all around in this division and the Lord Mayor has been moving in these divisions where this ettofaali, gathering and fundraising has been taking place. However, last Thursday, when the Lord Mayor walked in on foot alone in company of the Member of Parliament representing Rubaga North, he was humiliated and denied access to the venue where this ettofaali was taking place.

The clarification I would like to seek from you, Mr Prime Minister is: Are you going to stop the individual Lukwago from moving even in these cultural functions? He wanted to identify himself with the institution of Buganda. He wanted to give ettofaali for construction of the kingdom premises. Are you going to retain him at home so that he is not seen anywhere in Kampala moving, even when he has no following?

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Prime Minister, you are aware that I am on that team. I am not used to and I do not know how to tell lies. You would do well to tell this House the truth. Even in our last meeting, we did not seem to make any headway. That is over three weeks ago.

Madam Speaker, I would think that while the Prime Minster is referring to the new law that is yet to come, the situation that is pertaining is under a current law that has not yet been annulled. Our issue is that there is an empty office that is causing inefficiency in governance.

The coming of the new law notwithstanding, the issue of an office not filled and the duties not being performed is our major concern. I think if the Prime Minister was honest as I thought he is, he should have been able to tell us. By now, we should have moved a long way if there was good will. 

Madam Speaker, honestly speaking, we are just going around in circles. We are wasting time and there is no intent of having this issue resolved. For as long as this House pronounced itself, Madam Speaker, if we have never done it before, let this be the beginning that we stand by our word. Whether it is the law or anything else, we do not want anything to do with KCCA now until that situation is solved.

We are not helping matters –(Interjections)- we all want services in Kampala; but we have to be honest about the kind of services that we get. A ruling was made and I think as a House, we need to stand by it, unless the situation has changed.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give to my colleague is that I have addressed my mind to rule 78 of our Rules of Procedure (2012), which is to the effect that once a ruling has been made – a decision of the Speaker, we cannot review it except on a motion on notice supported by this House.

If I am to read verbatim, 78 says, “Decision of the Speaker or Chairperson; the Speaker or Chairperson of a committee shall be responsible for the observance of the rules or order in this House or committee. 

The decision of the Speaker or Chairperson upon any point shall not be open to appeal and shall not be reviewed by the House except upon a substantive Motion made after notice.” 

Madam Speaker, in as far as we are concerned, there is no motion in this. This means that there has to be a motion

MR NIWAGABA: On the principle of rules, the decision of the Speaker then was based on an oral motion and what happens is not only the decision of the Speaker, but also the decision of the House. Rule 209 read together with rule 78(2) of the Rules of Procedure (2012), govern this situation very well.

If we as legislators are to observe our own rules of procedure, a matter to do with KCCA cannot be dealt with until such a time, when a substantive motion has been brought for us to reconsider that decision.

MR BAHINDUKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is entirely a procedural point, especially after listening to hon. Mwiru and other colleagues. In the wisdom of the Deputy Speaker of Parliament, the Leader of the Opposition and the Leader of Government Business, sat somewhere with a good interest at heart to negotiate and bring a resolution to this issue. Not aware as of now, what the results of the negotiation would be, would we be procedurally right to bring here that negotiation that they had somewhere, whether it was supposed to produce results positive or negative? How do we proceed and have that bearing in mind our constitutional mandate to appropriate and pass this budget. What we are now doing, Madam Speaker, we are basing on a negotiation that happened somewhere in good faith. That we are supposed to resolve this issue but now it is going to interfere with the work of Parliament to appropriate and pass its budget. Are we moving procedurally right yet we are not even sure of the results of the negotiations even to the next 10-15 years?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wanted to understand what constituted resolving the issue of governance. What did you envisage to happen that would guide us in taking a decision?  

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, we were here that very day -

THE SPEAKER: Order -

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: We were here that very day and we agreed, generally, if you read the Hansard of that day, that the matters of Kampala were of a political nature, therefore, they could be resolved politically. The general agreement was - in this House and outside this House - before we came back, for the Speaker to make a resolution - we had a meeting with the Speaker that day, the Prime Minister and hon. Banyenzaki; they even consulted the Executive Director of city council as we resolved to take that final decision.

The outcome was that they would reinstate the Lord Mayor, but there were small issues to handle. Even a decision was taken on the issue of his salary; that, that issue can be dealt with immediately. A firm stand was made to the effect that before going for Christmas, the Lord Mayor would have his full pay as matters were getting resolved.

Therefore, this Parliament moved on that day with the full knowledge and assurance of the Prime Minister - and at that time, he said he spoke like a good Mukiga -(Interjections)- truthful and honest. 

In a private meeting, he said, “This time you are speaking to a good Mukiga and I will not change my word. Even hon. Banyenzaki is here, another Mukiga,” he assured us. (Interruption)

MR ALEX BYARUGABA: Madam Speaker -(Interjections)- is the honourable member holding the Floor in order to suggest or insinuate that there are some Bakiga who are bad and also those who are good -(Interjections)- better than the Prime Minister. Is he in order to categorize the Bakiga as a community? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am not in a position to rule on this; I was not there when they were evaluating the goodness and badness of the Bakiga. (Laughter)

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: So, Madam Speaker, we have read rule 78(2) together with rule 209 and they bind this Parliament. For as long as we have people in that Chair whose decisions are not taken seriously by the government side - it is high time people get to know that Parliament is the House and that when we make decisions in this House - this time we are lucky; they do not bring treasury memoranda on many of the decisions we take and that chair is not undermined effectively by resolutions of Parliament. That is why this time we insisted that the decision be made by the Prime Minister but confirmed by the Speaker then. 

Let us uphold our stand and let the Prime Minister be honest enough, go out of his way and resolve these matters. I beg to move that rules be handled.

MR ISABIRYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My understanding of the ruling by the Speaker was that – we were handling a loan request by KCCA. So, my understanding of the ruling was that this Parliament shall never handle any loan request by KCCA if issues of governance - (Interjections) - have not been resolved. It was not about the ministerial policy statement. 

MR AYOO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think this is an area where we have to be very serious. Kampala Capital City Authority is an authority that runs the city - the only city in the country. To say, we are not dealing with the ministerial policy statement, when we have only three weeks to go would mean that the city authority should shut down. Yet at the same time, the whole question came when we were dealing a loan request from the capital city authority, but not the ministerial policy statement. Therefore, if you are dealing was political questions, we should allow the institution to operate. If you are talking of political issues and instead shut down the authority, we will be making the greatest mistake that even the people of Kampala City will not accept.

I think we should move forward with the ministerial policy statement while Government goes on negotiating on the political matters. Thank you.

MS NTABAZI: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Members, I recall very well I was in the House on that day. The issue which was on the table was the loan request; it was KIDIP III. KIDIP II. KIDIP, meaning Kampala Infrastructural Development something -(Interjections)– yes, I know what I am talking about and the people of Kampala should sit down. 

The issue was a loan request and I would like to tell you, Madam Speaker, that that loan request went through that day. It went through after a struggle. There was a discussion by Members saying, “How we can give a loan to KCCA without the Lord Mayor in Kampala”. That was the major issue then - Kasibante was not here on that day, by the way. 

So, the issue was -(Interjections)- hon. Kasibante, you were not here, I was here -(Laughter)- you cannot call me to order when you were not here.

Madam Speaker, on that day, we were discussing a loan, meant to work on the roads of Kampala. The issue which arose was -(Interjections)- how can we release money to Kampala when the Lord Mayor is not there –(Interruption)

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very, Madam Speaker. It has been very evident from the time hon. Ntabazi began to speak that she is not aware of what took place that day. She has tried to mention something which she confessed she cannot remember. (Laughter)


We all accept, the loan request was a kick starter, but hon. Ntabazi has confessed that she knows something took place but she is not very clear what took place. Is it in order for her to confuse the House on something she is not very clear with and she claims she is giving useful information to this House on something she confessed she is not sure about? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am not in her head, I do not know what she thinks. Please conclude.

MS NTABAZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think you are right to put this man in the right position. In conclusion, we took oath, when we came to Parliament, to guard the Constitution and the rule of law –(Interruption)

MS EKWAU: Madam Speaker, it is only fair and honourable for us to accord each other all the humility and respect regardless of whether we agree with what they say or not. Is it in order for hon. Ntabazi to refer to hon. Kasibante Moses as this man?

THE SPEAKER: No, that is unparliamentarily language. Please conclude.

MS NTABAZI: As I conclude, I know hon. Kasibante is a man. We took oath in this Parliament to guard the Constitution and the rule of law. It is mandatory in the budget process that every financial year, we lay on Table ministerial policy statements and it was in this same House where the honourable Speaker gave an order and ultimatum of the time when the ministerial policy statements were supposed to be laid on Table. This would give time to the committees to discuss them, take decisions and pass the budget. I request the august House to allow the constitutional mandate to take place so that we sort this issue of governance -I know the Prime Minister who is very confident in solving these matters will do it on time. I trust and respect that with his knew energy, he will solve this matter once and for all. I thank you.

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Leader of the Opposition for having raised this important issue. I agree that it is prudent for us to solve the problem of KCCA; there is no doubt about that. Kampala is for all of us.

Madam Speaker, last week, we were tasked to make sure that we beat the timeline concerning the new law on Public Finance Management Act. All ministries were supposed to lay before this House their policy statements by yesterday. We were just pardoned by the Speaker who was presiding and we were given yesterday, Tuesday, as deadline to lay the policy statements. 

Most of the ministries endeavoured to lay their policy statements; save for the remaining few which appeared on the Order Paper for Thursday and Tuesday. KCCA was one of the items on the Order Paper remaining and today we were told that it is going to be the deadline for laying of papers so that committees can begin on the work.

Therefore, procedurally, I request the Leader of the Opposition, and all of us who are very concerned to let us fulfil this duty of laying the policy statement of KCCA, so that we beat the deadline. As the committees begin to do their work, both Government and the team from the Opposition will continue to deal with the issues as they were raised then. Even as the chairperson, you need to consult the Hansard; you were asking: What were the issues that culminated into -(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When we had just started today’s sitting, the chair for the Committee on National Economy, pointed out a critical issue; that we are in injury time. As Members of Parliament, very soon, we will be going for primaries and all of us acknowledge what it takes to go through an election.

Madam Speaker, the issue we are dealing with right now has nothing to do with a non-formal aspect. We are dealing with the law. The contention is; what did the sitting Speaker then rule?

Even our rules provide for that; if we are to revisit this matter, a substantive motion must be moved. I would have expected the Government Chief Whip to be moving in that direction and should have known it.

Is it in order for the Government Chief Whip, to start derailing us and lamenting on issues of the law and yet then there was the Deputy Speaker and now you are the Speaker in the Chair?

THE SPEAKER: She was setting the stage for what she would like to say.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are in injury time. That is why I request that we lay the policy statement on Table and the committees begin their work. Time will come when we are passing the budget -(Interjections)- yes. And by that time, we should have consulted the Hansard and we should have known the issues pertaining then; how far the Prime Minister has gone with the reconciliation programme.

However, to deny us chance to lay the policy statement of Kampala Capital City Authority, will not be solving the problem. Kampala City is for all of us. I request that the Leader of the Opposition reconsiders and allows the minister in charge to lay the policy statement of KCCA on Table. Madam Speaker, it is in your hands.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to propose that we stand over this for a few minutes so that I look at the Hansard. Let us proceed with the other one of Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.

THE MINISTRY OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIOANL AFFAIRS

5.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker, in line with the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, I beg to lay on Table the Ministerial Policy Statement for the financial year 2015/16, for the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, which includes the following:

The Judiciary, the Electoral Commission, the Law Reform Commission, the Uganda Human Rights Commission, the Law Development Centre, Uganda Registration Services Bureau, Directorate of Public Prosecutions and the Judicial Service Commission. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. It is going to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for perusal and report back.

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

5.12
MR AHMED AWONGO (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The question I want to ask the Prime Minister is this: Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, you remember, His Excellency the President, during his 2011 campaigns promised to pay the ex-service men what he termed as ex-gratia and this has been quite a long time. Remember these ex-service men worked for various governments in this country, they did not work for individuals, but they worked for the people of this country. 

What plans do you have to ensure that the ex-service men are paid this ex-gratia? In my district alone, there are about 11,000 ex-service men and in West Nile prisons we have about 17,000 ex-service men and all of them are yearning to receive this. Even many of them have died and they are continuing to die. When do you think you can be able to pay these people so that they are able to enjoy the little that they get? I thank you so much, Madam Speaker. 
5.14
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA): Madam Speaker, hon. Awongo has raised the question which concerns the whole country about the gallant sons of Uganda who have made a contribution to this country. It is true Government has been carrying out a programme of both verification and payment of the ex-service men. It is an on-going programme and as I speak, many of the ex-service men in West Nile region have been paid although we know that some numbers remain to be paid. One can get the exact figures and made them available to the House, but the exercise is on-going and is doing well.

5.15
MR JAMES MBAHIMBA (NRM, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is the season for planting and cultivating our gardens. We have also received letters from the Ministry of Agriculture that we should go and pick seeds and deliver to our constituencies. 

I am supposed to deliver 700 kilogrammes of maize to Kasese from Kampala. I want to ask the Prime Minister, is it our responsibility as Members of Parliament to work as transport officers of the Ministry of Agriculture?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, it is true the distribution exercise of agricultural input is taking place. I see nothing wrong with an honourable Member of Parliament who is a leader in an area taking a leadership role in the distribution of agricultural input. I would encourage my brother Mbahimba not to be left behind. (Laughter)   

5.17
MS SARAH KAYAGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Manafwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In modernising NAADS we came up with a new programme of wealth creation operation and the reason as to why it was changed to wealth creation operation was that most of the money was going for salaries for the workers. 

As we speak, farmers are getting two kilogrammes of seeds, a sub-county is getting 200 kilogrammes of maize and a village is getting 20 kilogrammes. My question to the Prime Minister is we said that this money was all going to be for inputs. Why are we getting fewer inputs than we were getting then? Where is the rest of the money going?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, it is true that agricultural inputs are being distributed in some of the areas. The amount maybe inadequate; where such a situation arises, the leadership working with the technical people should be able to advise the wanainchi on different varieties or species that can be planted in case the inputs from Government are inadequate.

5.19
MS SYLIVIA SSINABULYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, the question I want to ask is about forest reserves in Mityana District. Mityana District has seven forest reserves managed by the National Forest Authority. At the beginning of this year, National Forest Authority started a programme of cutting down all the indigenous species of trees in the forest reserves. It has started a programme of planting eucalyptus trees in all the seven forest reserves. 

The question to the Prime Minister is: is it a policy of Government that the entire natural forests in Mityana District must be replaced with eucalyptus forests?

Secondly, Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, we have started seeing people coming to plant eucalyptus trees from different parts - they are foreign faces and there are rumours that these forests have been leased out. We want to know as people of Mityana, have these forests reserves been leased out to foreigners?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, It is true that there is a policy that National Forest Authority can lease part of the forest reserve which is not planted with commercial species to credible investors. Primarily, to the best of my knowledge, local investors are to plant trees. Some of the trees planted may be pine, eucalyptus and there may be different species approved and recommended by National Forest Authority. Therefore, with the specific situation in Mityana, the minister responsible for National Forest Authority could give us specific information.

Otherwise my advice to you is that you should talk to the District Forest Officer of Mityana, he or she should be able to give you factual information on the matter. 

However, it is true that it is Government policy to lease out to private people space for planting approved trees in National Forest Authority areas.

5.22
MR MICHAEL AYEPA (NRM, Labwor County, Abim): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On a daily basis, trucks of lorries carry marble from Moroto; that is good enough because it helps our industries and also gives us the royalties. 
 
Mr Prime Minister, what is the unit of measurement for these marble taken on daily basis from Karamoja so that we know what quantities are taken especially in the absence of weigh bridges where we can determine the quantities?

The other question is what is the unit price of this marble and who verifies the amount declared to confirm whether it is the right amount and whether we are getting the right share of the royalties? I thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: I do expect the measure of the unit of marble to be in tonnes.

Secondly, with regard to weigh bridges, I expect that hon. Byabagambi, the Minister for Works and Transport, would definitely have weigh bridges working not only to measure the marble from Karamoja but even more importantly to protect the roads from being destroyed by these heavy laden trucks.

But for more information, the minister responsible for minerals would be a good source of information. The question of royalties is a legitimate point and again, the Commissioner of Mines is the government officer responsible for handling this area.

5.24
MS SARAH NYIRABASHITSI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kisoro): Mr Prime Minister, in the recent registration of persons, the women of Rwandan origin married to Ugandan men were not registered. Is your office aware and what plans does your office in the circumstances that some of these women’s husbands passed away? What about those who want to apply to be Ugandans?

We do not have the facilities to apply for citizenship by naturalisation. Would you please help the Ugandans who stay near the borders? I thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: During the registration of persons, it is true that there were specific efforts to ensure that Ugandans were registered. If there are other nationalities in form of spouses - as long as they did not qualify to be Ugandans, they were not registered. At a later stage, the foreigners in Uganda will be registered but the initial phase was to register Ugandans.

5.26
MS SAFIA NALULE (NRM, PWD Representative): I would like to first of all take this opportunity to thank the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Equal Opportunities Commission for laying the National Budget Framework Paper together with a Certificate of Gender and Equity Compliance. I would like to request that all the committees observe the requirements of this certificate.

The question I would like to ask the Prime Minister is that even with the coming of that certificate – and for us as Members of Parliament representing persons with disabilities, having requested for years for the Ministry of Education to come up with a specific budget vote for special needs education, the National Budget Framework Paper is still missing that.  

There are children with disabilities who go to class and there are no teachers or scholastic materials. Madam Speaker, you have faced children with autism and they need a liquid that stabilises their condition but it is only being donated by the Americans. 

I would like to know from the Prime Minister what Government is doing to ensure that the special needs education budget comes to Parliament this financial year.

DR RUGUNDA: I am glad that Parliament is due to consider the policy statements from ministries. I am sure that my sister will be more than vigilant with our full support to ensure that the interests of the disabled young stars are effectively catered for not only under the education ministry but also in other ministries’ policy statements as well.

MS NALULE: I have asked a specific question. We want a specific budget for special needs education but the ministry says that it is now within your powers, Mr Prime Minister. We are serious and we want that budget.

DR RUGUNDA: The question is very well understood. We shall examine the statements and in case there is a gap, we should ensure that the gap is filled and that was the point that I was making.

5.29
MR STANLEY OMWONYA (NRM, Okoro County, Zombo): Madam Speaker, the government some time back came up with a plan to develop Nakawa and Naguru estates into a modern satellite city and a company, Prime Properties from the UK, was identified to carry out that project. They were supposed to invest about Shs 4 trillion into that project.

I would like to ask the Prime Minister about what has happened to that project. If the company has not worked, can the government reallocate the land in question to other Ugandans who are able to do so because many of our people were just sent away and some not even compensated and are now loitering? Can the Prime Minister tell us what has happened?

DR RUGUNDA: This is a very good question. All of us, even us in Government have been very concerned. I am happy to say that after long discussions, work has now started on the Naguru side of this project. At the same time, Kampala Capital City Authority leadership has been given the specific responsibility of overseeing the development in that area.

5.31
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Madam Speaker, the Daily Monitor newspaper published very vital information on Kampala University discharging raw sewage into Lake Victoria in Gaba. The pictures were very horrible but clear. You could see some sewage pipes discharging raw sewage into the lake, which lake we are using to get water for consumption and is going to be suffocated with algae. 

I would like to ask the Prime Minister whether the Ministry of Water and Environment, located in Luzira and which you oversee, has done something to stop further spillage of sewage into Lake Victoria. I want the minister to tell me what exactly they have done and if they have not done anything, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I want an answer. I thank you very much.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, discharge of raw sewage in Lake Victoria is really criminal. Therefore, as soon as this matter appeared, I expected that the ministry responsible would straight away take it up and I believe it has. In case it has not, I will ensure that definitely it is taken up immediately.

5.53
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, two weeks ago, I visited one of the health centres in my district specifically our health centre IV and I found a very disturbing situation. There were HIV positive patients that had come to pick their drugs but unfortunately, there were no anti-retroviral drugs even for the children. These health workers tried to make phone calls all over but unfortunately, they could not land on any paediatric ARVs.

For an HIV patient on drugs to miss out and, therefore, have a lapse on the routine use of these ARVs is unfortunate because they develop resistance. When they develop resistance, it means they cannot go back to use that line of drugs. They have to use a higher line, which most likely is more expensive and that would be very expensive for this nation. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I wish you could just ask the question because now you are elaborating and answering the question.

MS AKOL: Thank you for guidance, Madam Speaker. My question is: the National Medical Stores is the responsible organisation that was approved by this Parliament to supply ARVs to our patients. Do we still have capacity as Government and National Medical Stores to supply these drugs?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the point raised by Ms Akol is correct. Government is aware that there is a shortage of a drug particularly called abacavir that is used in the treatment of HIV/AIDS. The shortage has come as a result of the problems of supply from the manufactures and this is a worldwide shortage.

There is, however, an alternative drug that is readily available and the short time intervention that is being made is that, this alternative drug is collected from some centres where there is excess to areas where there is a shortage. The procurement process of new suppliers is already taking place and we expect that this shortage is going to come to an end between May and June. Nevertheless, Government is handling this shortage.

5.38
MR STEVEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Yesterday I was upcountry and I realised that the exercise of registering voters has started but there is a major problem about payment of the officers that have been recruited for the exercise. They are supposed to work for 21 days and they are being remunerated with Shs 120,000 for the whole exercise. The starting point is that a number of people do not have appointment letters and many of the officers that are supposed to be working have rejected the money on the account for being too little for the 21 days they are going to work, taking into account that that amount of money is supposed to cater for their lunch, transport and also the rest of the facilitation.

Is the government aware that the exercise of registration is endangered by the amounts offered? What intervention measures has Government put in place to address the important issue? I am raising this matter because of the short time we have to undertake this exercise.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thought we would make use of this Prime Minister’s Question Time to get so much from Government, but you meander.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, that expression from the chairperson is important. I also salute hon. Tashobya for giving us a feedback on what is happening with the updating of registers. I think that is very responsible leadership and representation of the people. This matter is going to be brought to the attention of the minister responsible and the Electoral Commission so that appropriate corrective measures can take place.

5.40
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. All police stations and barracks in Uganda are choked with car wreckages and accident cars, some of them for even over 10 years. The police stations are rather unsightly. Does Government have any plans to clean up?

DR RUGUNDA: The policy of Government is that if vehicles are either beyond repair or have reached the age when they are not economical, they sell them off. However, some of these vehicles you are talking about belong to some individuals but I agree that ministries should take extra efforts to clean their yards and ensure that junk is put where it should be and not at the ministry or departmental headquarters.

5.42
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Last week, we read in the tabloids that Uganda got Shs 4 billion from China in respect to the Standard Gauge Railway and the expansion of Entebbe International Airport. Indeed, it shows that agreements were signed. Can the Prime Minister tell this House whether these took place, knowing very well that there is a committee of Parliament that was investigating this matter?

Secondly, can the Prime Minister lay before this House the contract agreement and the loan agreement because these are the responsibilities of Parliament and to enable the committee to come up with a comprehensive report to this House?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, let me salute the Chinese people for supporting the people of Uganda in the period of transformation and economic renaissance that we are involved in.

Secondly, were the agreements signed? Yes; but these were agreements on general line of credit and principles. The detailed financial agreements have not yet been concluded and those agreements will inevitably, as required by the laws of Uganda, come to this august House.

5.53
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In May 2014, floods hit Kasese and the Maliba-Kyanya, Rubooni-Nyakalingijo, Kyoho-Katigunda bridges were swept and also the Nyakalingijo-Bugoye-Nkenda Road was dilapidated. Government initiated a process of procurement to fix these projects.

On Monday this week, floods started and there are indications that they are going to hit Kasese. The explanation that I would like the Prime Minister to give is, how far has Government gone to fix these projects?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, three bridges, as you know, have already been completed and procurement for additional three bridges has also been done. Therefore, construction should be starting anytime.

5.45
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Some time back, I think about nine years ago, there was the issue of the national health insurance scheme to cover every Ugandan. I think it was supposed to ably come around financial year 2012/13. To date, we are witnessing very many needy Ugandans dying of health issues -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you could have asked when the scheme is coming. You are taking so much time, other members want to ask. Please shoot quickly.

MS AOL: What is the status of the scheme and for how long should needy Ugandans wait? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, a task force prepared the Bill on national health insurance. It was submitted to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to get a Certificate of Financial Implication. The Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Health are still sorting out the resources. As soon as this issue is sorted out - and by the way, we wanted it yesterday and indeed we will press and insure that we get it as quickly as possible - the Bill will be then brought to Cabinet and subsequently to this august House. 

However, your desire to have national insurance is exactly the same desire that Government has and it is Government that is really pushing this. We expect that it will be coming soon, with our additional pressure.

5.47
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Prime Minister, in March 2015 the management of Mulago Hospital was to acquire a title for its land formally occupied by CMI. What is the current status?

DR RUGUNDA: There is some heckling from hon. Ssekikubo, Madam Speaker. If I can be protected from my brother, hon. Ssekikubo -(Laughter)

To respond to this specific question, I would need to get a clear update on this subject matter and inform the House.

Therefore, to cut it short and with your permission, the Minister of Lands – fortunately, he is here - will come to this House and tell this august House the state of affairs with regard to the land that you are talking about.

5.48
MS JENNIFER MUJUNGU (Independent, Woman Representative, Ntoroko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what remedy does Government have for the people whose land is compulsorily taken away to create town council roads since the town councils do not have a budget for compensation? 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, land belongs to the people of Uganda. If your land is taken by Government or a government agency for use, you will get proper and adequate compensation. If it is a city council or a town council and it has no capacity to pay, really Government takes responsibility depending on the specific details and ownership of the land.

5.50
MS WINFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to know from the Prime Minister what Government’s plan is to protect the people living around Lake George from a crocodile that is killing people. It is eating up the other animals that live within the water and the bird species that we have, for which we are actually proud, in terms of tourism. What is your plan as Government to protect these people and the other animals and the birds?

Secondly, is the Prime Minister aware that in addition to causing mayhem to the population and these other animals living in and around the waters, the crocodiles actually consume over 500 fish from the lake? One crocodile in a week is capable of consuming over 500 fish and therefore, are you aware that the lake is about to be depleted of fish and leaving our people with nothing to eat? What is your plan, as Government, to redeem the situation?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I thank hon. Kiiza for educating me about the eating habits of the crocodiles especially with regard to the fish diet. If they are consuming so much that the population are left with no fish, the ministry responsible will come in to control that situation and also to protect the citizens who are at the mercy of these terrible crocodiles that are hunting people instead of hunting fish.

5.52
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon Prime Minister, this is the second time I am raising this question. Can the people of Tororo and Bukedi in general be hopeful that this budget we are waiting for will have an element of compensation of the Lakwena war victims and complainants? This has been outstanding. Every election period, these people get registered. Is there some hope, Prime Minister?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, my brother, Oboth Oboth, should know that many parts of the country were affected by conflict and war and therefore a policy of compensating all of them for war issues would not be practical. Nevertheless, Government has a dynamic programme of supporting areas say with restocking, agricultural inputs and other related issues. 

Actually, the Operation Wealth Creation is one of the powerful weapons –(Interjection)- of empowering the people to get out of this poverty even caused by war. Therefore, my brother, Oboth Oboth, should get in touch with the Office of the Prime Minister, which has a responsibility of making sure that all war-affected areas are not only rehabilitated but are brought to the same level with the rest of the country, to see how best the area could be given additional affirmative support.

5.54
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Prime Minister, my question concerns the roads vis-à-vis the heavy rains we are getting. The equipment we received at the district does not have compactors for the roads after the murram has been poured on our roads. May I know how quickly we will get this machinery? When it rains, the water sweeps away the murram and the money that has been spent on these roads goes to waste. Can we know how quickly we are getting that equipment, Madam Speaker?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the point raised by hon. Boona is a legitimate point. Government has already ordered road construction equipment. We do expect that equipment from Japan to be arriving around October this year.

5.56
MR SULAIMAN BALYEJJUSA (NRM, Budiope County East, Buyende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Prime Minister, a few months back, the Ministry of Health through the National Medical Stores conducted a nationwide exercise to distribute mattresses to health centres IVs. I would like to find out from the Prime Minister when this exercise is being extended to health centre IIIs. 

Secondly, I would also like to find out from the Prime Minister when the power line that was promised by H.E the President for the people of the Kagulu rock will be effected. Madam Speaker, you are a very aggressive champion of this tourism promotion campaign in Kagulu and Busoga generally.  I thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, on mattresses, I am very happy that Government has provided mattresses in quite a number of health centre IVs. This is a big victory; we should salute Government and the Ministry of Health for that. It is true that the plan is to be extended both to health centre IIIs and actually hospitals. 

With regard to power in the affected area of Busoga, which attracts tourism and all of us are interested in that because as we know, tourism is a new egg on the plate. Therefore, I am sure that the rural electricity agency must have prioritised this. You could get the exact detail from the agency or from the minister as the exact time.

5.57
MR BOAZ KAFUDA (NRM, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Prime Minister, in 2012 here in Parliament, we passed a loan under the Ministry of Water to work on urban water projects. In fact, Katwe Kabatoro Town Council was one of the beneficiaries. The same applied to Rukungiri and Ishaka Municipality. However, since 2012, nothing has been implemented. As I speak, the Katwe Kabatoro water system has served for almost 30 years and it has never been rehabilitated. 

I would like to know from you, hon. Prime Minister, when the Government will work on or rehabilitate the Katwe Kabatoro water system?

DR RUGUNDA: The Katwe Kabatoro water system is going to be done this coming financial year.

5.59
MS FLORENCE IBI EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Madam Speaker, I travelled from Kyangwali to Hoima then Kampala on Thursday. In the four hours that I travelled, I came across over 30 trucks of charcoal. Hon. Prime Minister, what is Government’s plan to regulate the alarming rate of charcoal burning in the country? I thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the cure to charcoal burning, which we must have, is electricity and power to the people of Uganda; that will be the definitive curative medicine for charcoal burning.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have used 50 minutes; that closes the Prime Minister’s Question Time. However, I would like the clerk to help us and give us the list of those who have asked this Wednesday so that next Wednesday they do not repeat. That is a simple thing; sometimes we have the same people standing up every week. Therefore, we want that list every week. You must give it to the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker so that we know who has not been able to ask a question. Let the Leader of the Opposition ask the final question.

6.01
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Prime Minister, thank you very much for answering the questions. I have two issues I would like you to clarify: The first one is on Operation Wealth Creation. Of course, it is just a modified name of what you have been saying in the past. However, I have seen this is also like another headless chicken in the village; it has no guidelines. 

Many peasants have been registered for whatever they wish to have. Some of them are investing money expecting cows, goats, pigs and whatever. However, nothing is happening. When they bring seeds, they bring 70 kilogrammes for a sub-county; they are getting discouraged. I hope, Prime Minister, you are aware that if you do not do something about it, you are going to discourage the peasants on this operation.

The second point is to do with the loans from China. It would appear that the government is mortgaging our country to China. There are many loans that China is giving us. The recent report is that the President has got $4 billion from China; does the President have the power to sign contracts of loans without the approval of Parliament or he is going to start the process after he returns?

Lastly, during the CHOGM time, there were some projects, for example, the Uganda Television or Ministry of Information; that department was knocked down within a day because they were going to build a hotel. Shimoni Demonstration School and Shimoni TTC were knocked down within hours because they were going to build a hotel. The land opposite Kati Kati was given to an investor to build a CHOGM hotel. All these projects, up to now, are still incomplete. Were they given this land for free because they were going to build hotels? Did they buy this land? Can they now pay for the land because they have breached the contract that they agreed on with the Government of Uganda? 

Hon. Prime Minister, we need some updates on these.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, on Operation Wealth Creation, it is true that there has been substantial demand. In fact, when the teams went asking people to register and say what they wanted, some looked on and thought it was a joke. However, as soon as the input came, even those who did not register came in for inputs. Therefore, this has put some bit of pressure. Nevertheless, the point is well taken that we need to ensure that the expectations, as much as possible, are met to make certain that the programme of production is indeed sustained.

The issue of mortgaging Uganda to China; this incident has not arisen for two reasons: China, as my good friend Wafula Oguttu knows, is not a colonial power but an anti-colonial ally. You very well know the contribution of China to the liberation struggles of Africa and other colonies –(Interjections)– well, I am afraid this is a truism and I would like any factual contest on that to come.

The second point is that Uganda is militarily independent and there is nobody, irrespective of what they may have, who would subdue the people of Uganda in defence of their national independence - (Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you, hon. Prime Minister, for giving way. The clarification I am seeking from the Prime Minister is that Government is getting this loan from the EXIM Bank of China; it is not a donation from the Government of China to the people of Uganda. When you get this loan, you pay back with commercial interest. 

Therefore, it is not free money that China helps African countries to get liberated. This money has interest and this country has got so many loans from the EXIM Bank of China. Therefore, this is a concern to Ugandans. Do not confuse the loans with donations to this country. However, in any case, we have not seen any donations from the Chinese Government given to the Uganda Government. Can you clarify on that?

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, let us go to item 4.

LAYING OF PAPERS

MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2015/2016 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I indicated to you that we should stand over this matter while I study the Hansard of 19 December 2014. I have studied it and it is apparent that the issue the Deputy Speaker was talking about was his personal decision not to preside over any matter of KCCA until the governance issues were resolved. 

If you read the second paragraph, this is what he says: “I will say again that personally, if these matters of governance in KCCA are not resolved to finality, I will not be prepared to preside over a matter involving KCCA again.” It is him who will not preside. “This is because it is stressful experience.” 

He further says, “Whether the loan is approved or not, if by the time we resume in February next year the matter of administration and governance in KCCA is not resolved, no matter should be brought to this House that has anything to do with KCCA…” Wait! “…and the House expects that Jacob Oulanyah will be presiding.” That is how he completed the sentence. “I will not…” I am reading the Hansard, honourable members. 

Please, he said, “I will not because I am only a human being and cannot preside over the same thing over and over again.” That is what he said and he goes on to talk about a mad person who does the same thing again and again, expecting a different result. Then he said, “Members, this is my final directive. It is personal but also a personal commitment to this because it is not good. We have other urgent business: Registration of Persons Bill, Anti-Corruption Bill and all these things; but one matter has taken us five hours. It is something we could have resolved very easily. 

Rt Hon. Prime minister, I urge you that by the time we resume in February next year, if you have not resolved this matter of governance in KCCA, be put on notice that Jacob Oulanyah will not preside over any matter involving KCCA if these issues remain outstanding. I would like your commitment that you will adhere to what I have just said.” This is the Hansard of 19 December 2014.

Honourable members, I want us to be realistic. Supposing today that Bill was brought for first reading, would we then say we shall not consider it? Where else will they have the Bill done other than this House? No! Honourable members, he said, “Jacob Oulanyah will not preside over any matter involving governance of KCCA”. This is the Hansard. 

Honourable members, in coming up with this solution, the solution can actually be here in the House and not outside. By receiving the policy statement, it is not changing anything. Honourable members, you cannot embargo the work of KCCA in perpetuity; it is not possible. Therefore, what we want is a commitment from Government about how they are going to handle this issue. Make a commitment here about when you can finish this matter to the satisfaction of this House.

Honourable members, that was what he said, that he, as an individual, is not prepared to continue handling the KCCA issue. I have read the Hansard; this is what the Hansard says. It is not saying the Speaker’s office shall never handle anything concerning KCCA. Therefore, let us proceed as we receive the policy statement.

6.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT) (Mr Simon Lokodo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In accordance -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is my ruling! 

MR LOKODO: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Ministerial Policy Statement for Financial Year 2015/2016, vote 122 - Kampala Capital City Authority.

THE SPEAKER: It is sent to the Committee on Presidential Affairs. You can now raise your matter.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Madam Speaker, if the statement has been laid, it is useless for me to make my procedural point. I would like clarification from you, Madam Speaker, on whether you people sit there as Speakers or as individuals; either as Kadaga or as Oulanyah. We would like to know that. When are you a Speaker? When are you Kadaga or Oulanyah? 

THE SPEAKER: Search where the Deputy Speaker said in his own words and his own names. He said, “Jacob Oulanyah will not preside over KCCA issues.”

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Madam Speaker, I would like to explain what happened. There was a loan of Shs 500 billion brought to this House. We objected to the passing of the loan because of lack of quorum. We thought this was good for our country because they told us that the loan would be time barred if we did not pass it. We left this House. We went to the Speaker’s Chambers -(Interruption)

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In his opening remarks, the Leader of the Opposition whom I respect very much said and I quote, “Since the ruling has already been made, it would be useless for me to make any comment.” Is it in order for the Leader of the Opposition to proceed to present useless material to this Parliament? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we should stop wasting time. I wanted to draw your attention to the fact that no question was put on that proposal and voted on in this House. Let us go to the next item.  

Do not argue with the Hansard; that is the text of the Hansard. I was not here -(Interjection)- you are not dealing with Rebecca Kadaga; you are dealing with the Speaker and that is the difference. Let us move to the next item. 

PETITION

6.14
MR MARTIN BAHINDUKA (Independent, Ntoroko County, Ntoroko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is moved under Rule 29 of our Rules of Procedure. The humble petition of Mark Niwamani presented to this august House about tax evasion showeth and states that: 

The petitioner is a Ugandan citizen who is concerned about the mass tax evaded by British American Tobacco, BAT Uganda Star Provident Fund Company and Leaf Tobacco Commodities Limited amounting to a tune of Shs 41,673,883,471 and Shs 20 billion respectively.

BAT Uganda Star Provident Fund Company is a tax payer recognised under Tax Identification Number 100027817 and was registered as a non-trading Tax TIN. 

During the year 2012 and 2013, BAT Uganda Star Provident Fund Company made 409,919 exports amounting to a tune of Shs 72,720,000,000 -

THE SPEAKER: Just go to the prayers. Do not go into the body.  

MR BAHINDUKA: Wherefore by this petition, the petitioner prays that:

1. Parliament carries out an investigation into the various concerns raised by the petitioner against the conduct of BAT Uganda Star Provident Fund Company and Leaf Tobacco Commodities Limited.

2. Parliament investigates the Uganda Revenue Authority to establish why the alleged anomalies were not detected.

Your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray and hereto your humble petitioner has appended his signature. 

Niwamani Mark P.O.Box 29640 Kampala, Uganda. 

I beg to lay it on the Table. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Finance for perusal and report back. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE UGANDA WILDLIFE EDUCATION CENTRE BILL, 2013

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This petition I have heard is about tax evasion and BAT, which has closed office; that was 2011 and they are raising it in 2012. The procedural issue I am raising is that if it is an issue of tax evasion, the matter should be reported to URA. If URA cannot do it -[Mr Okupa: “Tax tribunal”]– then the tax tribunal. Why are we bringing things which can be handled by some organisations to Parliament? Somebody is complaining that there is a provident fund. As far as I know, provident funds are not taxable. 

There are issues that should not waste Parliament’s time. Madam Speaker, why don’t you first send this to URA or ask the tax tribunal or the Ministry of Finance to look at it other than sending it to the Committee on Finance, which is already bogged down with a lot of financial Bills and the budget process? Even now elections are on hand. 

The procedural issue I am raising is, is it procedurally right to bring things that can be handled by URA, the tax tribunal, the Ministry of Finance or even the IGG here?  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, if you take time to read what he has written, it says that the URA has ignored the complaints relating to that matter and has not acted on them. We sent it to the committee. Do not worry. If it fails, they will tell us but part of the complaint is that URA has not acted on that company. 

6.20
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM AND WILDLIFE (Ms Maria Mutagamba): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and honourable members of Parliament who will be proceeding to the second reading of the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Wildlife Education Centre Bill, 2013.”

Unfortunately, I do not see my chairperson and vice chairperson here. I do not know whether somebody has been designated to do that job for me. Otherwise, I am more than ready to follow it up. 

THE SPEAKER: You can move your justification. What is it for? 

MS MUTAGAMBA: I beg that the House supports the motion of having a second reading of the Uganda Wildlife Education Centre Bill, 2013. I beg to request.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you are supposed to tell us why you want that law. What is the objective? What is it going to cure? 

MS MUTAGAMBA: The Uganda Wildlife Education Centre Bill, 2013 is meant to legalise and put in place a law that governs the establishment and management of the Uganda Wildlife Tourism and Conservation Training Centre. 

The Bill was considered here and was sent to a committee of Parliament. The report is available on our website. Basically, there are no major amendments except in the title which introduces the word, “conservation” between “training” and “education.”

I beg the House to discuss -(Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, according to the Order Paper, this Bill is for second reading. I have heard the minister say that there are no major amendments. I am seeking clarification whether the minister is acting as the minister as well as the chairperson of the committee. She is even pre-empting amendments on her own Bill. I am just seeking guidance and clarification.

THE SPEAKER: The minister is trying to convince you, why she wants a Bill; that it is not very hard and that there are not many things –(Laughter)  

MS MUTAGAMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members of Parliament, the objective of this Bill is basically to establish the Uganda Wild Life Education Centre, which is a basic necessity for this country if we are to continue with conservation. 

It is also to provide for the board of trustees of the centre, which is automatic if we are going to have it. We are also looking at facilitating the promotion of conservation, establishing and maintaining of conservation education facility country wide.

We are also looking at providing for showcasing Uganda’s unique wildlife heritage and eco system at the centre, also providing the establishment and management of the wildlife education data bank at the centre.

In addition to that, we are looking at promoting the rescue, rehabilitation and release of wildlife and to also promote wildlife breeding within our country. 

Looking at the report, which I believe every member has got on the website and your iPad, the amendments that are being suggested are not controversial and I believe each one of us has looked at them. If there is anything that needs amendment, we can discuss that.

I am happy the chairperson has finally reported. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Okay, it has been seconded. Let us receive the report.

6.25
MR JOHN MULIMBA (NRM, Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is report of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on the Uganda Wildlife Education Centre Bill, 2013; is moved under rules 117 and 118 of our Rules of Procedure. 

The report has already been uploaded on the website of Parliament and honourable colleagues can access it on their iPads. The report was signed by 12 members of the committee, therefore surpassing the quorum that is required. 

Before I move the report, Madam Speaker, I beg to lay a copy of the report and minutes of the committee proceedings dated 23 March 2015, on Table. Thank you.

I will not go into the introduction of the Bill; I will just go quickly to the objectives of the Bill that is no.2. 

The objectives of the Bill are:

    i) To establish the Uganda Wildlife Education Centre.
    ii) To provide for board of trustees of the centre.
    iii) To facilitate the promotion and conservation of Uganda’s unique wildlife resources through conservation and education.
    iv) To establish and maintain conservation, education facilities and programmes on site through extension services.
    v) To provide for showcasing Uganda’s unique wildlife heritage and eco system through the centre.
    vi) To provide for the establishment and management of the wildlife bio data bank at the centre.
    vii) To promote the rescue, rehabilitation and release of wildlife.
    viii) To promote wildlife breeding with focus on rare endangered endemic species as well as for commercial purposes. And
    ix) To provide for establishment and maintenance of hospitality and recreation facilities and support services for the centre.

The methodology is as hereunder.

Observations

The committee observed that –

i) the Uganda Wildlife Education Centre does not sit on the Wildlife User-Rights’ Committee, despite the fact that they have the technical expertise to regulate private zoos and enforce required standards.

The committee recommends that UWEC should sit on the Wildlife User- Rights’ Committee, to enable it participate in setting and enforcing standards for private zoos.

ii) The committee noted that the mandate of UWEC is education of the people about wildlife. However, the centre has only one branch in Entebbe, hence denying other regions in the country the opportunity to learn and appreciate the importance of wildlife.

The committee recommends that the UWEC opens up more branches in the different regions in the country, to educate the country about the importance of wildlife.

iii) The committee observed that the UWEC has been constrained due to inadequate funding. The centre relies on donor funding and entry fees collected, which is not much to run the centre effectively.

The committee recommends that Wildlife Education Centre should be provided with sufficient funds to enable it operate effectively and efficiently, given its importance in the tourism sector.

Conclusion

The Uganda Wildlife Education Centre is important since it plays a significant role of educating the public about the importance of wildlife. The committee recommends that the Uganda Wildlife Education Centre Bill, 2013, be passed into law, subject to the following amendments:

With your permission, Madam Speaker, I will go to the proposed amendments.

THE SPEAKER: No, let us commit it instead.

MR MULIMBA: I beg to move, Madam Speaker, that the report of the committee be passed. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, minister and the committee. Honourable members, you have heard the report. It has been signed by the minimum one third; I do not know whether you are ready for debate –(Laughter)

MR ATIKU: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee and the minister for bringing this Bill for debate. However, the way I see, we may start the process and fail to conclude it today. Being an important Bill, I pray that we skip this matter and then we mobilise so that since it is a small Bill, we should do it when the House is full so that no problem arises. I therefore propose that we skip it and go to the next item.

THE SPEAAKER: Is that what Members think? Should we defer the debate?

MS MUTAGAMBA: Madam Speaker, I appreciate the concern of the honourable member. However, I really would like to request that we start the debate so that tomorrow we conclude. Otherwise, if we postpone, we may fail to debate it. I beg, Madam Speaker.

MS KABASHARIRA: According to the report, Madam Speaker, the Bill seems not be big and we have recently passed a related Bill, which was touching our institution. I am therefore requesting that if members do accept, we should debate it and then go to the amendments, which seem not to be many and we pass it. This will allow these people get what they are supposed to get so that our tourism is a full package because we just passed a Bill on the institution. Now, what does it mean for us not to pass this one so that they can go and then we task the ministry to perform better when they have everything that we have put in place; the legal matters that will help them? I pray and ask that we debate this Bill and go on and pass it as it is because it is small and short.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Personally, I have no problem with passing the Bill and I highly support it because the tourism sector in my district needs to be boosted. However, the issue is that we may go into debate and then we reach a point where an issue of quorum will be raised and we hit a snag.

Why don’t we just be calm, postpone the debate and then pass the Bill tomorrow first thing when people are still fresh and are many. We will take it upon ourselves to whip our colleagues to ensure that we are here, discuss it shortly and then pass it. That is what I suggest, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it seems members want to defer this to tomorrow. The motion has been moved, has been seconded, the report has been presented. Debate will continue tomorrow and we complete it. Let us go to the next item.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO 
HEALTH WORKERS WHO HAVE WORKED TIRELESSLY IN 
FIGHTING EBOLA IN UGANDA AND WEST AFRICA

6.33
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Madam Speaker, this is a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to health workers who have worked tirelessly in fighting Ebola in Uganda and elsewhere.

I am moving it under rule -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am sorry but I wanted those doctors to be in this Chamber when we are paying tribute to them. It is something I committed to do when — I think they should be here. (Applause) We need to do it when they are here. We need to invite them; they sit in the gallery and we pay tribute to them. I am sorry. I think I should have remembered that. Let us defer and invite them and they be here and hear what we are saying. Thank you very much.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT 
TO ASSERTIVELY COMBAT THE FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE

6.35
DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (NRM, BUGANGAIZI COUNTY WEST, KIBAALE): Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament urging the government to assertively combat the Foot and Mouth Disease. I am moving this motion under rules 47, 48, 50, 51 of our Rules of Procedure of Parliament. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Okay, there are seconders on both sides of the House.

DR KASIRIVU: Madam Speaker, “WHEREAS agriculture is the most important sector of the Ugandan economy and currently contributes up to 24 per cent of the GDP and accounts for 50 per cent in export earnings and provides a large proportion of the raw materials for industry;

AND WHEREAS the sector also employs the biggest proportion of the country’s working population estimated at 73 per cent  of the population aged 10 years and above and as growth from agriculture is one of the most effective ways for trade income for the majority of our population;

FURTHER AWARE THAT livestock and livestock products constitute a similar proportion of Uganda’s official export trade and contribute to over two per cent of the total national GDP;

AWARE THAT the agricultural sector is crucial to the country’s development and its development ultimately enhances the development of other sectors through backward and forward linkages;

NOTING THAT the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy have obligated the Government of Uganda to, among others, institute effective machinery for dealing with any hazard or disaster arising out of natural calamities or any situation resulting to the serious disruptions of the national lives of people;

COGNISANT OF THE FACT that the agricultural sector, particularly livestock production, has since the early 80s recorded a decline owing to other factors like pest and disease outbreak;

FURTHER COGNISANT OF THE FACT that Foot and Mouth Disease is an extremely contagious viral disease which affects ruminants and has greatly contributed to the decline in livestock production since it was first confirmed in 1953;

CONCERNED THAT the Foot and Mouth Disease, if not contained, shall lead to the imposition of trade bans and export restrictions of Ugandans link from the international market and the economic impact of unchecked Foot and Mouth Disease spread can cause loss of billions of shillings;

FURTHER AWARE THAT that control measures of Foot and Mouth Disease in Uganda have been grossly weak and for this reason the outbreak is on the rise; 

NOW THEREFORE be it resolved by this Parliament that:

    1) Government reviews the Foot and Mouth Disease virus control policy and ensures its effective implementation.
    2) Government urgently carries out a massive sensitisation and vaccination campaign against Foot and Mouth Disease.
    3) As a long term measure, Government should establish a Foot and Mouth vaccination production plant to ensure affordable and sustainable availability of vaccines.
    4) Government brings a progress report to Parliament within three months from the first.” 

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Point of procedure.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, we have a Government. Government is in place and we have the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the Government is mandated to do its work in accordance with what is prescribed in our Constitution and in the manner that the country should be governed.

I wonder if we are now, as Parliament, going backwards to say, can the government come and tell us why they are failing to combat the Foot and Mouth Disease when there is a fully fledged Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. 

We now have to come here and tell the government to tell us how to manage the police. Are we now trying to take the work of the Executive? I thought it is clearly demarcated. The government should come and tell us why certain things are working - Now Parliament has to come with a motion. We now must compel Government, by a parliamentary motion, to do the work which the government is supposed to do. Madam Speaker, can you tell me whether we have a government? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know the weapons you use are these, the resolutions of the House and recommendations, to continue alerting the government that you are not doing your work. We were just whipping the Prime Minister to tell us why there is Foot and Mouth Disease in the country. How else do you get a resolution passed here other than by a motion? Please justify; we need to complete.

DR KASIRIVU: Madam Speaker, the Foot and Mouth Disease is a serious disease that attacks livestock. As we talk, 43 districts out of the 112 districts are affected by the Foot and Mouth Disease and the disease seems to be spreading very fast. 

The implications of this disease is that we can never export animals and meat products, and in areas where livestock are used for social functions like bride price and there is a quarantine imposed by Government, then livestock is prohibited from being moved from one area to another and  slaughtered. Apart from the economic value of livestock, we are affecting these social functions and causing malnutrition because milk is a wholesome food. Whenever there is an outbreak of Foot and Mouth Disease and there is imposition of quarantine, milk, ghee and other products are prohibited. Therefore, malnutrition is another factor that will affect the population.

Madam Speaker, for as long as there is Foot and Mouth Disease in the country that country will never get certification from the international organisation Epizooties, which is based in Paris. Once you do not have that certificate, you can never be allowed to export meat, animal products and livestock. People should know that Uganda has livestock, especially cattle, which has the best meat in the world. But we cannot access the market where these animals and meat would be exported and we get money for this country. The problem of FMD must be taken on head long and combated and it is something that can be done. What we need is an effective vaccination campaign; vaccinate all the animals.  Whenever there is an outbreak somewhere, there is vaccine readily available to make sure it is combated. I believe we can do it; other countries have done it.

Madam Speaker, I beg that this Parliament supports this motion and we urge Government to become serious on this disease. This is a serious disease that is affecting our economy and the livestock sector. I beg to move. (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Is there any objection? Hon. Epetait, two minutes and then I will come to the minister.

6.45
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I would like to beg your indulgence - may be it would be better to explain why this motion? In Uganda, we have a cattle herd of about 15 million. In the last few financial years, constantly Government has been appropriating money to Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for procurement of only 300,000 doses of FMD vaccine and yet there are 15 million heads of cattle at risk.

In the last financial year, out of the 300,000 doses of FMD vaccines that were procured, only 158,000 animals were vaccinated. FMD is a highly contagious viral disease and has a very big economic impact if not checked. There is a supplementary that is being proposed of Shs 2 billion. The Ministry of Agriculture ordinarily required about Shs 28 billion in order to have mass vaccination of livestock and contain this disease.

The money given only for 300,000 heads of cattle is very unfair. The Ministry of Agriculture has its hands tied. Even the decentralisation policy has not helped us. Much as the extension services were decentralised, disease control was a function of the centre. In each of the districts, the veterinary officers are under the command of their various district local governments. They have no obligation to report to the centre. There is a very big breakdown of the chain of command in as far as disease control in livestock subsector is concerned.

Even when quarantines are sometimes imposed, the district local authorities prevail on the veterinary officers as to which side of their bread is buttered; “Why are you sabotaging me? Please, let people sell their livestock.” In that way, the disease has ravaged the country.

We would like to urge Government to prioritise the building up of our economy. We are talking about Operation Wealth Creation. We are literally shooting ourselves in the foot if we do not provide money for disease control.

Moreover, FMD is an endemic disease; it is in Uganda all year round and its endemism is being propelled by non-intervention. You cannot talk about spot vaccination; if a disease has broken out in Kamuli, they go to one small sub county and call it a day.

We need to have mass vaccination of all the livestock at risk, well aware that it is an endemic disease in our country. What stops us from injecting money to help our farmers?

Madam Speaker, I beg to support the motion. On that note, we will come up with another motion to do with the restructuring of that ministry because things fell apart at a time when Ministry of Animal Industry and Fisheries was merged with the Ministry of Agriculture. 

Currently, the livestock subsector, under the giant Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is suffering from underfunding within the underfunded ministry. It is the sub sector which is the most ignored within the ministry because there is very little allocated to this ministry, which is responsible for our food; by the way, food is a very serious issue.  We need to help Ministry of Agriculture to help this economy grow. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.49
MS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support this motion. Every patriotic Ugandan would propose to support the Ministry of Agriculture, regardless of which sub sector. Each time Government pronounces itself on quarantine in this country, animals are not vaccinated and farmers suffer for over 10 months. 

In Teso, normally around Christmas time and the big days, there is no vaccination going on even when Government has imposed quarantine. The onus is on the Ministry of Agriculture; we cannot push. At times, we do the talking but even the ministry itself does not do the pushing. When you ask them for their unfunded priority areas - some of these issues remain unfunded priorities for over ten years and they are in the shelves in the ministry.

I would like us to move to have equity in the budgeting process. There are some ministries that are getting trillions of money, which is lying idle and then you get a sector like the Ministry of Agriculture grassing.

The onus is on us; we are moving into the budgeting process, what percentage of this year’s budget are you allocating to the Ministry of Agriculture and especially on the question of vaccinating the animals?

Madam Speaker, I had a privilege of visiting Peru; they do not have any meat at all. Why wouldn’t Uganda vaccinate the animals and we export all the meat we have in this country. We are crying about the capital flight and the dwindling shilling against the strength of the dollar. We cannot achieve this unless we do something to promote agriculture.

I feel Members should get serious during the budget process. We are late as far as this is concerned. If we can do this and help the agricultural sector - and hon. Bright Rwamirama I am dressing myself to hon. Bright Rwamirama, who is deeply engrossed in –(Laughter)- I urge your docket of animal industry not to leave the question of vaccinating animals to unfunded priority. What is it that you are doing; what is on the table in this year’s budget that you are thinking about vaccinating the animals that we have in the country? Otherwise, our children will even die of drinking milk from sick animals if this is not promoted, if Parliament does not do anything about it.

Madam Speaker, we are going to receive the report from committees but how much of the money in the Ministry of Agriculture this year will be allotted to the vaccination of animals?  Otherwise, I am very supportive about this but I urge you to stop imposing quarantine and then, you leave animals unvaccinated and the people of Teso, Busoga and other regions keep on suffering when they eat meat and they call it supermatch and people keep on eating the meat even when they have imposed quarantine. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

6.54
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of the motion and I support the motion. 

The stock of animals we have is three times the stock Botswana has. Botswana has less than six million herds of cows but what they did, they eradicated diseases, fenced off their country to avoid these wild animals crossbreeding with their animals and they are able to be number one African exporter of beef to the European market.

We are approaching almost 15 million heads of cattle. It is very unfortunate that the Ministry of Agriculture just laments to Ministry of Finance whenever there is an outbreak. Currently, during this supplementary, the Ministry of Agriculture is demanding from Ministry of Finance Shs 2 billion to buy about 500,000 doses just to do the fire brigade. It is time for us to seriously engage Government if we are looking at Operation Wealth Creation to be successful. If we are to have this country disease free, we need to resolve and urge Government to carryout massive sensitisation and awareness campaign to ensure that all the animals are free from diseases.

Secondly, the alternative would be to establish a vaccine processing factory here so that animal keepers can be able to easily access vaccines; people are buying acaricides to spray their animals for FMD to be eradicated; you need to conduct a bi-annual vaccination process but this has not happened because the Ministry of Agriculture is curtailed with lack of resources; Ministry of Finance retains the docket of providing finances at emergency level. 

I am appealing to the minister who is here, the dock holder to make sure that Parliament is here to support the ministry to make sure we get the adequate resources to eradicate the disease and invite investors so that we are able to have a manufacturing vaccine factory - it is here in Kenya; Kenya has got it. Even Botswana was willing to partner with us. (Member timed out.)

6.57
MS NAOME KABASHARIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the movers of this motion. I am happy with the veterinary doctors we have in this House. They have at long last thought about animal husbandry.

Madam Speaker, when we talk of Ministry of Agriculture, many of our indigenous people and peasants deal with crop husbandry. Therefore, we tend to look at the food that we eat but we forget that much of the earnings, if we put much of it in the animal husbandry, we would even get much more income for peasants than the crop husbandry.

I would like to say that we need to separate this ministry into two; we leave the animal and crop husbandry as separate so that the functionalities can be - I can see you, Madam Speaker saying this- but I think it would have a better impact. 

They are talking of vaccination for FMD but there is also vaccination for brucellosis, which affects the human beings. In fact, today when you go to a clinic, every individual is diagnosed of brucellosis, especially people who live in cattle rearing areas. It is affecting the people and animals and this is because they are not vaccinated. We have our neighbours in Rwanda who normally come and buy our animals but before they buy, they look at the cows, take the blood samples and go and check. Those ones which are infected - in Ankole we are suffering; people who eat a delicious sauce called eshabwe get that problem.

Madam Speaker, we cannot export our products just because of these diseases and -(Member timed out.)

6.59
MR DENIS HAMSON OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Madam Speaker, I rise to support this motion, especially the aspect of funding for vaccination against FMD. Every time this Parliament debated the question of quarantine - because my area was not affected, I would not feel the pinch but when recently Alebtong District was among the districts that were put under the quarantine for over eight months, that is when we as leaders at parliamentary level started feeling the multiplier effect of declaring an area to be under quarantine.

Our people could not sell the animals in markets within Lango; our people who even had money could not buy meat to eat; the pressure on school fees descended on the Members of Parliament. My colleague hon. Benson Obua can bear me witness. Therefore, I call upon this Parliament and Government - maybe for those who are not affected the day you will get your area declared under quarantine, you will see the pressure that will descend to you by your voters.

We need to support the ministry. I know the ministry has a very pro-active Minister in charge of Animal Industry. He is pro-active but at times, his hands are also tight because the resources are not there to get the vaccines for animals. We need to support him, especially the question of putting aside some resource envelope to enable the minister, through his technical officers, execute the vaccination of animals as opposed to the question of waiting for the time or an area to be put under quarantine.

I support the motion. I salute the two veterinary doctors for realising the fact that this Parliament must speak loud and clear on the question of vaccinating our animals against FMD. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

7.02
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues in supporting the motion and would like to thank the mover. For those of us who come from pastoralists areas know that the minute you see your animals with blisters on the foot and froth in the mouth, then you know there is a problem.

The mover of the motion has used the word “strict” because indeed, as hon. Cecilia Ogwal pointed out, it is the responsibility of the government. We are talking about a report that we shall expect from the honourable minister within a timeframe that we should agree on, on certain measures that you have taken in order to combat the problem.

Let me highlight six measures from my own understanding in terms of strict enforcement that I would love to hear in the report of the minister. One, they have talked about enforcement of quarantine in the affected areas. We would like to hear what the affected areas are, and what we have done?

The second one is wide vaccination and distribution of vaccines to the various districts affected.

The third one for me would be distribution of disinfectants. If you visit a farm and you are not disinfected, there is a possibility of carrying the virus onto the next farm. So, we would love to hear how the ministry has assisted the farmers to have disinfectants on their farms.

The fourth one is the destruction of infected livestock. In your ministerial report, I hope there will be something about how many animals have been affected and how many have had to be –(Member timed out.)

7.04
MR MARTIN BAHINDUKA (Independent, Ntoroko County, Ntoroko): I would like to thank Dr Kasirivu, the mover of this motion and the MPs who are veterinary doctors. This issue is key, especially in a place like Ntoroko, where we have 130,000 animals and only a population of 65,000. The animal numbers are big and if you go down, you will realise the margin of the cattle keepers is actually 20 per cent of the population. Therefore, you can imagine how important the animals are to the people of Ntoroko especially in the lower lands.

Madam Speaker, the issue being debated today could be FMD. I heard hon. Obua saying that his area has been quarantined for eight months. If you did that in Ntoroko, everyone would die because those people do not cultivate save for the ones in the mountainous areas. They survive on animals for food, school fees and medication, among others. So, if we had such a quarantine - and hon. Rwamirama knows that - we would shift to DR Congo and leave the cattle in Uganda. I just do not know what would happen. You can imagine how much we need this.

A member was talking about Brucellosis, which was in Ntoroko some time back. There was a mobilisation for our youths going to Iraq to look for jobs and 80 per cent of them did not qualify because they were suffering from brucellosis, which takes quite some time and money to treat. All these diseases can be controlled through vaccination - think of anthrax that can actually kill in one day.

One of the biggest challenges is facilitation. Whenever we invite the minister to Ntoroko to intervene, perhaps apart from the words of hope, the minister will come with one litre to spray the ticks on the cattle – he cannot carry much. If we look at the veterinary centres down in our districts, where we put drugs for intervention to vaccinate animals in Ntoroko – these drugs for animals are kept in health centre IVs –(Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: I thank you for giving way. Madam Speaker, I would like to give information in support of the debate. Vaccination is a high impact public health measure in terms of controlling diseases.  However, you need to vaccinate up to 80 per cent of the subject – in this case, cattle, in order to break the transmission cycle of the disease. 

If we say that we have about 15 million heads of cattle and we are going to break the transmission cycle of FMD, then we should have enough doses to vaccinate about 80 per cent of the cattle so that you can have herd immunity within the community of the cattle. 

Therefore, maybe, the challenge, as being raised, is the issue of resources and the ministry needs to quantify what that translates into so that when we go into the budgeting process, we explore how Parliament can support the sector to have those resources. Otherwise, the spot vaccination where the ministry hears there is an outbreak and then you vaccinate will not control the disease. We shall continue having the disease if it is not controlled through vaccination. I thought that as a Minister of Health, I should give you that information. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Maganda.

MR BAHINDUKA: Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: You donated your time. (Laughter)

MR BAHINDUKA: Only one minute.

THE SPEAKER: You donated your time.

MR BAHINDUKA: Only one minute was donated to the minister. I thank you, Madam Speaker. The doctor equally did his part and I thank him for the information.

Finally, for any budget that you are going to bring before this House, please, consider this. Whenever it shines in Ntoroko, we lose around 2,000 heads of cattle because it gets so dry and there is no pasture. It is now going to rain and they are going to suffer from FMD and all these other diseases will come up because there are no dams. When it rains, we would capture all this water so that we can have it there for both the animals and human beings. Honourable minister, let this be considered this time so that we can save our animals and the lives of our people. With this, I support this motion and please, allocate more money to the ministry. I thank you. 

7.10
MR JULIUS MAGANDA (Independent, Samia Bugwe County South, Busia): I would like to support the motion and share the experience that we have in Busia where we have also been affected by the quarantine since December, which has had a very big impact on the livelihood of the people since we have been surviving on selling beef. 

The only problem that I would like the minister to appreciate is that there has not been proper control of this disease and yet, we come from the border where the grazing system is sometimes free range. Our Kenyan neighbours sometimes cross over and graze in Uganda. We have that kind of relationship. The problem is that even the control system sometimes breaks down. For example, Uganda has quarantined while Kenya has not and yet, these animals continue to cross over. 

Therefore, even if they open up, we may not know whether the animals are being re-infected and this is what I need the minister to clarify on. What mechanism does the minister have in place when there is quarantine in a district, which is at the border point where we know that animals are grazing free range?

During Easter, I was in the constituency and I heard many pronouncements about communities and people within families applying for animal distribution. Are we going to distribute these animals under the Operation Wealth Creation even when we are still quarantined within the district? Is there any other measure that Government has to stop the quarantine, like it says probably at this time in May the problem would be solved and people are free to consume meat?

The final aspect is, in Busia, I just want the minister to know that we no longer have fish -(Member timed out.)

7.12
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Minister of Agriculture in charge of Animal Husbandry, hon. Rwamirama has been in this ministry for quite a long time and many reshuffles have happened and he has remained. (Laughter)

Year in, year out, he has witnessed the challenges in this ministry but in the maiden speech of the late hon. Matovu then representing Bukanga, he talked about FMD. I remember when we paid tribute to him, Members referred to his catch word as being FMD, which has always been a problem. 

When the Committee on National Economy was travelling to Karamoja, some colleagues gave this issue a political dimension and I want to bring it to the attention of hon. Rwamirama. Some Members have over a period of time monitored in a specific period, they will mention that there is FMD in a particular, say Eastern, and in another period, they will say there is FMD in the Northern. This is especially announced during either Christmas time or Easter when the farmers are supposed to sell their animals and earn some income.

There are also areas, which will never be mentioned to have FMD. Members were saying that there is a political dimension to this, and hon. Rwamirama, you need to listen to this. They were saying that possibly, some areas are disadvantaged because they will be mentioned as having FMD while other areas are never mentioned. (Member timed out.)

7.16
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to say that I fully support this motion. Animal rearing is an enterprise that is not weather-bound and would be a more reliable source of income for our people. Let us look at what is happening with the crop enterprises, the changing weather patterns, crops being destroyed by floods and drought; our people would be getting some income from animals. 

The issue of spot vaccination is a total waste of time and resources and it would rather stop. In Northern Uganda and other regions, the Government is injecting some good money under the re-stocking programme. However, what would be the impact of this programme if this disease is not controlled? Therefore, I urge Government to ensure that whatever it takes, we should really find funds to carryout mass vaccination of our animals.

What hon. Obua talked about as happening in Alebtong has been happening in Pader in Acholi sub region time and again. We have really been suffering. Madam Speaker, you remember last year when you went to Pader, it was the same problem. Sincerely, we urge Government to see that this resolution can be taken up seriously so that we help our people.

THE SPEAKER: May be some information, I was given some cows in Pader. I have failed to move them because of the quarantine up to now. (Laughter)

7.17
MR AMOS MANDERA (NRM, Kooki County, Rakai): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the movers of the motion.  I stand to support the motion. My area of Kooki is a livestock area and I want to add my voice to what my colleagues have said. I would like to react to the issue of spot vaccination, which is used all over the place. It is wastage of vaccine and resources. If any of us has never had a cow or livestock suffering from FMD; it is very hard to nurse such an animal. It paralyses income in area OF quarantine.

I would also like to mention that often, Members here talk about the low budgetary allocation to the Ministry of Agriculture and particularly, there are also sectors in the same ministry which are marginalised like the animal sector. This means that efforts to cab the epidemic like FMD becomes very futile.

I would like to urge the minister that much as we put efforts in massive vaccination of the FMD, we should also look at other diseases such as East Cost Fever where many of us do claim to have fake acaricides. If we leave that area un-attended to, we shall not solve issues of some epidemics in our area -(Member timed out.)

7.20
MR JAMES KABAJO (NRM, Kiboga East, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand in support of the motion that has been brought by our colleague. This problem of FMD and brucellosis affect Kiboga District. Animal and human health is affected as other Members have informed the House.

There is a lot of damage to the local economy, our cattle markets have been closed for more than 6 months and farmers who had loans with banks may have had their properties taken over by the banks. There are all the other attendant problems relating to education, farmers failing to pay school fees for their children, health not just resulting from the failure to get proteins from animals but also the inability to purchase the other goods and services that they might need for their own health.

It is very important that this disease is controlled; the people of Kiboga and other places of Uganda will welcome Government to deal with this issue in a much more serious manner. They should dedicate much more money to this problem of FMD, brucellosis and all the other cattle diseases.

The other important issue is the need for this country to also export animal products to other countries so that we improve incomes of farmers and the country -(Member timed out.)

7.22
Mr ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to support the motion and thank the mover. 

Recently, when my neighbours in Teso were put under quarantine, we lost the market and therefore, my people of Amolatar could not sell. Being a district in a peninsula, people found themselves in a complete state of quagmire. Like hon. Hamson Obua said, as a Member of Parliament and a leader in the area, my people came and I had to either pay fees or buy the cow and they knew they were selling it to a Member of Parliament; you can imagine the cost. It was, indeed, quite exorbitant. I want to announce here that this was the most stressing time in my political career as a Member of Parliament in the area. 

If I may seek clarification from Government, with limited vaccines available, what affirmative action do you have in place to eradicate FMD especially in areas being re-stocked after cattle rustling - areas like Lango and Teso? I would have expected Government to put keen interest in such areas and insure rapid response in case of an outbreak. (Member timed out.)

7.24
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the motion and ask the Minister in charge of Animal Husbandry to take advantage of this motion. I would like to ask the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to pay very serious attentions to issues that are being raised by Members here. They are talking about serious business of the farmers and wealth of this nation.

We are crying now that the Uganda shilling is losing value against the dollar and we do not have good products to export and yet, we have 15 million heads of cattle in the country. A country with only 6 million like Botswana is exporting and fetching a lot of dollars. Our only problem is because we have failed to manage and stop FMD. That is why world over any country with outbreak of FMD is not allowed to export its beef. That, therefore, means the only solution for us as a country now is to take a radical move and control FMD so as to have our beef ready for exportation. We would not be dealing with the question of Uganda shillings losing value against the dollar. 

I am asking Government, through the minister, that when you are dealing with this budget, let us take a radical approach and we increase on the funding in the budget so that you have enough money to vaccinate. The Minister of Health has advised Government that you can only succeed when you vaccinate up to 80 per cent. I think this should send a very clear signal to us.

I am a cattle keeper myself. Recently, when there was threat of FMD around, I had to spend up to Shs 3 million to vaccinate my animals because I keep Boran and I would not allow any of my animals to die because of FMD. However, other farmers who are my neighbours have not vaccinated their animals.  As a person I feel I am going to lose because most of our people take their animals to one well or dam for drinking. You will find that the spread of the disease to animals will move very fast. Let Government monitor the spread of this FMD. (Member timed out.)

7.27
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also rise to support the motion. 

The adverse effects of FMD have been very well articulated by the previous speakers as well as the economic benefits of having healthy herds of cattle. 

Let me say that I sit on the budget committee as an ex-officio member and I will definitely support the supplementary of the Shs 2 billion but year in year out, hon. Rwamirama has been coming here pleading for money for a supplementary to address some of these problems such the FMD. 

It is a problem that has been recurrent overtime. Why don’t we take lessons of what has been going on and provide money for this sector so that we address the problem once and for all? A supplementary of Shs 2 billion every other time will not sort out this problem. That also goes to the fundamental aspects of the problem, which is the funding to the agricultural sector, in this case, the dairy sector but also the crop industry because here in this Parliament, I have also raised the matter of disease and pest control for crops. We have invested a lot of money in coffee, tea growing - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I think that was an important point on where do we put our priorities, just complete that.

MR TASHOBYA: I am very much obliged, Madam Speaker. We have invested a lot of money in coffee growing; we are even providing for Shs 100 billion for growing of coffee in the next financial year. We are also providing a lot for money for growing of tea but we are not providing money for disease and pest control for these crops. So, we have to look at sectoral-wide approach of funding this important sector. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.30
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also rise to support the motion. I would like to tell this House that vaccination for FDM should be done when a calf is only four months and then, it should also be given by-annually. This should be routine regardless whether there is an epidemic or not; simple practice of veterinary medicine. 

I want to thank the Minister of Agriculture hon. Bright Rwamirama. Sometimes I pity him because he comes from near Mbarara municipality. Whenever there is a problem of FMD, people who rare cows go to the President and say, “We want you to sack this minister.”

He has every day come here saying he wants money for vaccines and we have not given it to him. I think now that the motion has been raised by hon. Dr Kasirivu, it is either now or never. I beg this House to say that we are going to make sure we give the money to the ministry because prevention is better than cure. I have got animals in both Kashari and near the air strip and I can tell you rearing them is very costly and losing them is also very dangerous because when these cows die you are finished. (Laughter)

We have got very many young boys in Mbarara, Ankole region, who are exporting meat but in an event of FMD, they cannot export any meat at all. When it comes to quarantine, the Minister of Animal Husbandry is almost killed. Can we save hon. Bright Rwamirama? I want to thank you so much for being a wonderful minister in this country and for dying for us like Jesus died for sinners on the cross. (Laughter) Let us give this man money to buy vaccines for the animals. 

Madam Speaker, I want to thank you so much for giving chance to talk on behalf of the people of Mbarara municipality. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion has been supported 100 per cent. I do not see any objection. Can I put the question? I put the question that this House do adopt the motion as proposed, 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Minister you have the support of this House. We want to help you; is there anything you want to say? 

Minister of Agriculture -

7.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to make some clarifications. It is important that we make some clarifications. It is not true that we have not attempted to deal with FMD. We have tried to use the money given to us by this Parliament to deal with it and we have somehow managed to contain it.

It is true FMD is a viral disease that has got serious economic consequences. It has been very tricky because it is trans-boundary in nature. We have attempted to harmonise our policy with our neighbours – using EAC – on the border with Tanzania, Kenya and Rwanda. We have successfully done so with Kenya and Rwanda. We still have problems with our Tanzanian border in Kagera Basin where livestock movement is really difficult to control.

Somebody asked what measures we are taking. We have taken the following measures: The first one is when the disease breaks out, we put quarantine restriction. We cannot avoid this because even the mover of this motion knows how fast it can spread. One infected cow has capacity to spread to over 60 cows in a day. In that regard, we have put quarantine restriction to avoid spread. What is very interesting is that even when the cows recover from FMD, three months after, they do not have clinical signs but they can still spread the disease.

Secondly, we have carried out vaccination in affected and high-risk areas.

Thirdly, we have sensitised the community and there is no where we have not reached to sensitise the community about the dangers of FMD. We have also, recently on cost-sharing with Government, provided water for livestock to restrict unnecessary movement.

Madam Speaker, we have tried to control the disease and in some areas where we have co-operation with the local leadership, we have managed to persistently export livestock products. I would like to assure Members -(Interruption)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I know this motion has been supported by both sides of the House. The minister is trying to tell the House that the ministry is working hard to deal with the situation, which is supposed to be grievous to us who are cattle keepers.

The clarification I am seeking is, to justify the statement the minister is making, has he ever come to the House with a statement to inform the country and this Parliament of the seriousness and gravity of the FMD?

Secondly, I am aware that Shs 28 billion is required for FMD vaccine alone. The Government is proposing Shs 2 billion as emergency fund. If you are really serious and you are sitting in the same Cabinet, I do not know whether you are co-ordinated. Madam Speaker, I am just seeking clarification from the minister. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Please, answer and conclude.

COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, it is true that we have not had adequate funds. Therefore, I am not actually refuting this. I am not saying that we have had good money. If we had good money for it, I would be here to make accountability for it. However, I am trying to clarify that it is not all in vain. Even with the money you appropriate, we have moved some mileage.

It is not true – Madam Speaker, I was very disappointed by hon. Nzoghu – that quarantine is imposed on some areas to disadvantage them. It is not true because by law, at least the movers of this motion know that the veterinary officer of the domicile area is the one who declares the presence of the disease. Unless people disadvantage themselves, then I would maybe think otherwise. However, there is no where there has been an outbreak that I have not reached personally with the team to find out that there are clinical signs that actually the animals are sick.

Finally, if we have to look at exports, I really would like to agree with hon. Baryomunsi and the movers that we need to vaccinate; there is not short-cut to it. The good news is that Government has taken a decision to step up funding in vaccination drive and we have brought a statement before this House. We shall appear before the committee and articulate most of these things. I am very sure the report will come to the House. Otherwise, I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the time to explain. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Honourable members, thank you for the work done. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. We shall conclude the issues which are on the Order Paper tomorrow.

(The House rose at 7.39 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 9 April 2015 at 2.00 p.m.)


