 

PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Tuesday, 27 April 2021

Parliament met at 2.41 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. The Clerk has organised  a two-day seminar on “Life after Parliament” slated for Thursday 29th and Friday 30th April, here in the tents, starting at 8.00 a.m. on both days. The first day of the seminar - 29 April 2021, will end at 1.00 p.m. to allow time for Members of Parliament and staff to prepare for the House sitting in the afternoon.

Honourable members, I am also giving notice that starting Monday 3rd to Friday 7th May, the House will be sitting both in the morning and afternoon so as to enable us dispose of all pending business before the House; part of which is the budgetary process. Therefore, I would like to urge Members to get ready for the marathon sittings so that we execute our cardinal duties as bestowed on us under the Constitution and other legal frameworks.

Let me also appeal to the committees with pending business to urgently expedite their conclusion for the House’s attention. The Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Budget Committee in particular are to expedite consideration of business related to the Budget process so that we can conclude it.

Honourable members, last week, I indicated that I had received 22 names of Islamic scholars, which I am submitting to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. For the record, let me read out the names which I am submitting:

    1. Dr Lujja Suleiman 
    2. Dr Walusimbi Abdul Hafiz 
    3. Dr Muhammad Hussein Bbowa
    4. Sheik Waiswa Muhammad Ali 
    5. Dr Sowedi Juma Mayanja 
    6. Dr Muhammad Kisuule
    7. Dr Ssemuddu Rashid
    8. Dr Kasozi Edrisa
    9. Yahaya Kasujja 
    10. Sheikh Ismail Njuki
    11. Katongole Imran Hussein
    12. Nanyunja Shuki Nakato
    13. Sheikh Faisal Abdulaziz Alzamir
    14. Sheikh Associate Professor A. Hassan
    15. Dr Sabir M Hassan 
    16. Dr Seguja Hussein
    17. Dr Semambo Hussein Kakembo
    18. Dr Taaha Ahmed Kasule
    19. Dr Ahmed Moses
    20. Dr Tuma Teko
    21. Mr Musobya Abdullatif
    22. Ms Kasiimire Aisha.

Therefore, there is now no excuse not to execute the Islamic banking. These are the names I have submitted to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Honourable members, I would like to thank the Uganda Parliamentary Forum on Malaria who has been celebrating the World Malaria Day. Among the activities they have is a blood donation drive. Please go and support the Uganda Blood Transfusion Services. There are tents outside in the garden so that you can support our people to have good health. Thank you very much.

There are just a few matters of national concern.

2.45
MS JANE AVUR (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank Parliament and the Government of Uganda for making free movement of human beings and animals mandatory. 

However, I stand here to raise a matter of national importance on behalf of the people of Uganda, particularly the people of West Nile. We are finding it extremely difficult to move on some of some of our roads, particularly the road from Karuma to Arua due to the deplorable state of the road.

Madam Speaker, this road is not only a national road; it is an international road that brings in quite a lot of revenue for this country. There are so many trailers to South Sudan, DRC, and the Central Republic of Congo, let alone the buses plying the West Nile route every day.

However, if you had the opportunity to move on this road one of these days - it is unbelievable that we make it home and back wherever we have to use it. The kind of potholes on this road and the kind of maintenance being done on this road – It is unbelievable that we can still have such in the 21st Century.

One time when I was going home, I could not believe it - I found a team from UNRA using debris from somebody’s site and using it to fill the potholes. It has become increasingly difficult and the road is in a very bad state.

My prayers are that the Minister of Works and Transport brings to this Parliament and to the attention of Ugandans, particularly the West Nilers, a holistic or comprehensive plan that his ministry has for the major repair of this road. We think that what they are doing now or what they have done before can no longer help us and the traders that use this road.

Madam Speaker, my other prayer is that the Karuma-Nebbi-Arua Road be urgently worked on. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I saw the Minister of State for Works. I do not know whether he heard the state of the Karuma-Nebbi-Arua Road.

2.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr Peter Lokeris): Madam Speaker, with your indulgence, I would like to beg you to allow me to come and respond tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the Minister of State for Works will respond to that issue tomorrow.

2.49
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here to present a matter of national importance concerning the people who died last year in December when the security forces of Uganda had gone to crack down the demonstration against the arrest of former presidential candidate, hon. Robert Kyagulanyi.

During that month, more than 50 people died at the hands of Ugandan security. Some of them died because of stray bullets while others were part of the riots. However, none of their family members has got compensation due to the loss of the lives of their loved ones.

Secondly, no Government representative reached out to those families to comfort them. At the moment, a number of people are wondering what the Government is thinking about their families because they lost present and future livelihoods.

Over the weekend, a one Kassim visited me in my constituency. He lost his son who was a fresh graduate of Engineering and had just got a job. You could see tears; he wonders how he is going to survive because he is aging. I have discovered that in the entire country, no compensation has been made and no report has been presented concerning how those people died.

Madam Speaker, I have prayers that Government presents a report showing how those people died because not all of them died in the riots.

Secondly, the Government should compensate the families which lost their loved ones because they are losing their livelihoods and that way, it might breed a cycle of conflict because I do not believe they will ever be happy with the Government of Uganda. Thank you.

The Speaker: Thank you, honourable member. I do recall that a few weeks ago, I informed Parliament about the mother of one of the victims  who was demonstrating here because ever since the incident happened, no one from Government had been there to see them. They have been struggling with issues of exhuming dead bodies to get post-mortems, etc.

I remember proposing to the Minister of Internal Affairs that they needed a taskforce to deal with that issue countrywide but it seems nothing has happened. Therefore, let me ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to come and update us on how they propose to deal with the situation of supporting the people who lost their loved ones during the riots of last year. 

Today is Tuesday; can he come back to us next Tuesday morning.

2.52
Mr Hassan fungaroo (FDC, Obongi County, Obongi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent national importance to do with the security of our people in Somalia. We have forces there; the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) and the Uganda Police. We sent them there in 2007 under the African Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) to keep peace and help stabilise the country.

There is a new development, which is worrying to all people who are concerned about our forces. A new conflict has broken out in Somalia and the Somali National Army is split into two. The conflict is based on extension of the presidential term limit for the term of office of the current president of Somalia.

The UPDF was sent there to keep peace. The enemy of focus at that time was the Al-Shabab. Now that the National Army of Somalia has split into two, on which side is the UPDF going to be? Is it the one supporting the extension of the presidential term limit and delay of the elections or the one opposing the extension? What about the security of our people there if the situation continues to deteriorate?

Therefore, this is my prayer:

The Minister of Defence particularly should come and explain the status of AMISOM, the UPDF and the Uganda Police in Somalia. Where do we stand in this new conflict? Why don’t we bring home the UPDF if the first mission is over? Don’t you think that it is now necessary for the UPDF to come home from Somalia after like 14 years? 

If the United States of America have withdrawn their forces from Afghanistan when they did what they could and left what they could not, why don’t we consider revising the AMISOM and bring home our troops? Our security forces should be protected and accounted for. Thank you.

The Speaker: Honourable members, the Minister of Defence is required to come and advise us on the situation of our forces taking into account the new situation and developments in Somalia. He can come and speak to us next Tuesday on the same issue.

2.55
Mr francis zaake (Independent, Mityana Municipality, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker for the opportunity to raise an issue of great national concern touching the continued brutality of journalists by men in uniform. 

Last week, plain clothed security personnel moving in a military vehicle with number plates covered in cow dung, raided the home of a one Enoch Matovu, an NTV media correspondent in Mityana. In Mityana, they are locally known as busa because they hide their number plates with cow dung.

The military vehicle stopped and the occupants beat him into comma. According to his children who narrated the incident, they noted that their father was beaten for what he has been reporting on and exposing the growing extortion by the security agencies in Mityana disguising as COVID-19 SOPs enforcers. 

The people of Mityana have since 2020 been exposed to severe brutality by these men in uniform who claim to be enforcing curfew regulations. To date, Enoch Matovu is nursing serious injuries in Mityana Main Hospital. 

Several Members of Parliament in this august House have always come up with different complaints of brutality and extortion by security agencies who claim to be enforcing curfew and COVID-19 SOPs. – 

There are several other journalists who have been brutalised in a similar manner like Enoch Matovu. We saw this in February last year. Security agencies of the military police commanded by Lt Col. Franklin Namanya brutalised several journalists who were accompanying hon. Robert Kyagulanyi Ssentamu to the United Nations (UN) Human Rights offices in Kololo. To date, he is scot-free and has never been punished. Many of them are still nursing wounds, to date. 

Madam Speaker, 3rd May will be the Media Freedom Day. I pray that the Prime Minister, since I see the Deputy Prime Minister right here, can explain to us the account of this brutality meted on the journalists and the general public.

Also, we need to know when this brutality will end and how many of them have been punished for the same. I pray.

The Speaker: Honourable members, the Prime Minister is requested to come and address the House on the issue of brutality against journalists and the general public and also say whether or not anyone has been prosecuted or brought to book for inflicting brutality on citizens. He should come and respond by next Wednesday. Thank you.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2021

2.59
The Minister of state for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2021 be read the first time. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Bill is sent to the Committee on Budget for perusal and report back. 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER ON THE IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGY OF THE PROPOSED PARISH MODEL

3.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, the last time we were here, this statement was widely debated and there was critical support for the Parish Model. What remained was to agree with the House on the roadmap of the activities and when actual implementation of this programme, including the recruitment period and the training of the committees. 

Therefore, we have developed a draft roadmap and we would like to request that after this sitting, and with your guidance, Madam Speaker, we consult with you so that tomorrow, we present to the House a harmonised roadmap before we finally adopt the Parish Model.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, I think it is essential that we harmonise the roadmap so that the House and Government can move smoothly. We shall introduce the harmonised programme tomorrow. 

Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, why don’t you wait until tomorrow when we shall introduce the timelines? Thereafter, we can debate it because what you are debating is what we debated the last time.

PRESENTATION OF THE REPORTS OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEES ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2021/2022

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can the Chairperson of the Committee on East African Community Affairs make his presentation?

3.04
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Mr George Ouma): Madam Speaker, allow me lay the report of the Committee on East African Community Affairs on the policy statement and budget estimates for the Financial Year 2021/2022. 

Allow me to also lay on Table the minutes of the Committee on East African Community Affairs to support the report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.  

3.05 
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS (Ms Jesca Ababiku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on Table the report of the Committee on Presidential Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the Presidency, State House, Ministry of Kampala Capital City Authority and Metropolitan Affairs, Kampala Capital City Authority and the Office of the Prime Minister for the Financial Year 2021/2022. 

I also beg to lay on Table, the minutes attached to this report. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and members of the Committee on Presidential Affairs.

3.05 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Agnes Kunihira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay the report on the sectoral Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on the ministerial policy statement on the social development sector for the Financial Year 2021/2022. Thank you. 

3.06
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr Lawrence Mangusho): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay the report of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry for the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the Financial Year 2021/2022. 

I also beg to lay the minutes of the meetings and other attachments of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry. I beg to lay. 

3.07
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay the report of the Committee on Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the Financial Year 2021/2022. 

Madam Speaker, I also beg to lay the minutes of the committee meetings while processing this report. I beg to lay.

3.08 
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Godfrey Onzima): Madam Speaker and colleagues, I would like to lay on the Table the report on the local government and public sector transformation on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the Financial Year 2021/2022. 

I also would like to lay on Table the minutes of the meetings we had. I beg to lay. 

3.09 
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mr Jacob Opolot): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the report on the ministerial statement for the Committee on Education and Sports for the budget estimates for the education and sports sector for the Financial Year 2021/2022 together with the record of the proceedings. I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

3.09
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Ms Violet Akurut): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the sectoral Committee on Foreign Affairs, on the Ministerial Policy Statement and the budget estimates for the Foreign Affairs Ministry for the Financial Year 2021/2021.

I also beg to lay on the Table the minutes of the proceedings of this report. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

3.10
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Ms Janet Okori-Moe): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the Ministerial Policy Statement and the Budget Estimates for Financial Year 2021/2022. 

I also beg to lay on the Table the minutes of the committee meetings while considering the Ministerial Policy Statement for the agricultural sector for the Financial Year 2021/2022.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much honourable chairperson and members of the committee.

3.11
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Michael Bukenya): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the sectoral Committee on Health on the Ministerial Policy Statement and the Budget Estimates for Financial Year 2021/2022. 

I also beg to lay on the Table the minutes of the committee interaction with the sector on the same.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson and members of the committee.

3.12
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Ms Jane Avur): Madam Speaker, I would like to pass on the apology of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We shall be ready tomorrow to lay on the Table our report. We had something to reconcile with the Committee on Budget.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, go to the next.

3.13
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (DR KEEFA KIWANUKA Kiwanuka): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the Committee on Natural Resources and Environment, I beg to lay the report on the Ministerial Policy Statement and the budget estimates for Financial Year 2021/2022; and the minutes of the interaction with the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and the Ministry of Water and Environment. We are reporting together with our minutes for the interactions with the agencies. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson and members of the Committee on Natural Resources and Environment.

3.13
MR DONONZIO KAHONDA (NRM, Ruhinda County, Mitooma): Madam Speaker, I am standing in for hon. Doreen Amule, who is attending a classified meeting together with the Committee on Budget. 

I also beg to lay on the Table the report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, on the Ministerial Policy Statement and the Budget Estimates for Financial Year 2021/2022 together with the minutes. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, members of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. 

3.14
THE CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION (Mr Bwino Kyakulaga): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation, on innovation, technology development and transfer programme, on the Ministerial Policy Statement and the budget estimates for the Financial Year 2021/2022, together with the minutes. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson and members of the Committee on Science, Technology, and Innovation.

3.15
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the Chairperson, I beg that we lay on the Table the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs tomorrow. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. I saw the Chairperson of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. I think he is ready now.

3.16
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Robert Kafeero): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the Ministerial Policy Statement and the budget estimates for the Financial Year 2021/2022, which takes care of the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and the Ministry of Works and Transport.

Attached hereto are the minutes of the meeting that considered the report. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and members of the Committee of Physical Infrastructure.

Honourable members, under rule 148, we are expected to consider these sectoral reports and send them to the budget committee. However, this is not feasible in the circumstances because we are supposed to consider them and send them to the budget committee not later than 30th April each financial year. 

I want to propose that one of the Members moves that we suspend rule 148(2), so that the reports can go straight to the Committee on Budget since we are not in position to fulfil the timelines under the Public Finance Management Act. The days would expire after Parliament has also expired. Can we ask the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to move for that suspension? You could do it tomorrow, when you bring your reports.

Let us ask the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to move a motion tomorrow to suspend rule 148(2), which requires that we debate the reports here and then send them to the Budget Committee so that they can go straight to the committee.

MS KAMATEEKA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, they are sent to the budget committee but the formal motion will be moved tomorrow when the final reports are brought. Thank you very much.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE NATIONAL CLIMATE CHANGE BILL, 2020

3.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Anywar Beatrice): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The National Climate Change Bill, 2020” be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: No. Honourable minister, we had already moved that. There was some consultation we asked you to do with the Attorney-General and that is what you are supposed to report on. Otherwise, you had already moved to second reading. Just give us an update on the consultation.

MS ANYWAR: We did our consultation – I just wanted to give the title. We had no disagreement and the chairperson of the committee is here with us. I request that he comes and makes that report.  Otherwise, we do not have any disagreements. We agreed and we consulted as you directed and we are here to report. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.20
MR LAWRENCE BIYIKA (NRM, Ora County, Zombo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable ministers and members, I am here to clarify on the concerns that were raised when the Bill was read for the second time. 

At the time, I gave the report of the committee and all the minutes were laid on the Table. Concern No.1 was, when Uganda signed and ratified the International Convention Protocols and Treaties, were there were some reservations?

For your information, Uganda signed the Kyoto Protocol on 25 March 2002 and ratified the same document on 8 July 2015.

Uganda also signed the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) on 8 June 1992 and ratified it on 22 September 1992. Then the Paris agreement was signed by Uganda on 22 April 2016 and ratified the same document on 21 September 2016.
 
When you look at all those documents signed and ratified by Uganda, the concern on whether there was reservation or not in signing and ratifying the Kyoto Protocol, Article 26 clearly indicates that there was no reservation on the side of Uganda.

Article 24 of the UNFCCC indicates clearly that there was no reservation and the Paris agreement also clearly indicates in Article 27 that there was no reservation. So, what does it mean? It means that we accepted those documents and we need to come back home and domesticate them. Above all, the domestication must be done in the local context of Uganda.

Fortunately, in the UNFCCC, the agreement was that the parties to the convention have common but differentiated responsibilities. That means that each party to the convention, depending on her capabilities and level of socio-economic development, will make their own laws which are locally in context of the country.

That is exactly what the Uganda Government has done with this Bill. It is in the local context of Uganda. The Bill came up with 32 Clauses and they are all in the local context of Uganda.

Even without signing or ratifying those conventions, we would go ahead and work on a law to address climate change in the country. Fortunately, it came after the ratification, so, the Bill is going to help us to address climate change in the country.

Another concern was on Clause 4(1 and 2); should we leave it in the current form in the Bill? From the background as I explained, we have to leave Clause 4(l and 2) in the Bill as it is. 

The relevance is that Uganda will only pick laws that are relevant to the socio-economic development of the country, and the best way to do it is to have that exemption indicated in Clause 4 (1 and 2).

It is better to be broader; there are some things we would like to list; those that we want to do and those that we cannot do. We are likely to leave some very important aspects that may become relevant to Uganda. So, it is better to be broader and the only way to be broader is to cater for Clause 4 (1 and 2).

In the conventions, there are two parties; there is the party of developed countries and the developing countries party and each have obligations. However, we said that we do not want only to fulfil the obligation in this Bill; we went ahead to say that we want to fulfil the obligation but also get the benefits from signing and ratifying these conventions.

Now the two parties are in negotiations. So, there could be some issues that will emerge and those benefits and obligations must also come to Uganda.

From this clause, it is very sufficient to address concerns in climate change. Another obligation on the developed countries side is that they are supposed to generate $100 billion to address climate change in developing countries, including Uganda. That is an obligation put on the developed countries but the benefits are coming to developing countries.

So, being party to that and domesticating that will bring that benefit. Moreover, Uganda has already benefited from that agreement without even having the law locally on the Green Climate Fund, where we got about $24 million to address the wetland issues in Uganda. Being party to that gives us a good position to get resources to finance climate change challenges in the country. 

Another concern was whether this was an importation of a law and then imposing it onto Uganda. The answer is no. It was not an importation; it is the normal process of domestication of laws. 

An example of what has already been ratified by Uganda is the Rome Statute; that is the International Criminal Court Act. It was done in the same format with the exception that we put clauses that can exempt Uganda on things which are not relevant to Uganda.

Therefore, with this background, I would like to clarify on that - but there was also a concern raised by a Member on whether there is a difference between the National Environment Act and the Climate Change Act. There is a clear difference. When you look at the objects of the Bill, the National Environment Act addresses the principles of environmental management.

The National Environment Act is focusing more on conservation, the management of natural resources; and the conventions linked to the environment Act are to do with the United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity (UNCBD).

The object of the Bill is unique and when you look at the National Environment Regulations, there is no mention of climate change in the document.

On the climate change side, the Climate Change Bill is addressing reduction of greenhouse gases; there are so many sources of greenhouse gases and we would like to reduce on that. We made that decision in our Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC), and this is a commitment made by Uganda, after the Paris agreement.

We committed to do all we can to address climate change in the country by reducing greenhouse gasses and this is where the Bill is focusing.

This is also in line with our Vision 2040 National Development Plan III and other document strategies we have developed, like the green growth strategy, plus the readiness strategy for Uganda.

The Climate Change Bill is more linked to the UNFCCC, the Kyoto Protocol, and the Paris Agreement, which Uganda accepted, signed and ratified.

The Bill is also important because there are other emerging issues like the carbon emission trading. This Bill is addressing that because Uganda has to benefit from the carbon emission trading. For example, the European Union has the European Union Trading Systems and we need our own emission trading here.

There are people who want to plant trees for carbon. However, you know we have land shortage in this country yet the population is growing. On average, smallholder farmers have only two acres of land. So, if they sacrifice one acre to plant trees to absorb carbon dioxide under carbon trade, we need to negotiate good money to be paid to this land owner so that he or she can use that money for alternative income generating business and leave the trees for a longer time.

Also, this person who wants to plant trees may not have money to do that. That is why we propose that we must have a climate change fund so that anyone who wants to plant trees – whether under carbon or for business – should be having access to some money which does not have tedious procedures to access.

These emerging issues like carbon emission trading are very important and are catered for under this Bill. However, we have trees in the national parks and protected areas that are also absorbing carbon dioxide. Uganda is not getting money from that apart from getting money from tourism. 

Why can’t we also quantify those emissions so that we know that these natural trees in the parks are also absorbing carbon dioxide? Why can’t we be paid for it and use the money for environmental restoration? This is still an area where Uganda needs to negotiate with these parties.

This Bill will also help Uganda to develop what we call the low carbon development pathways. Many countries are doing that already but as Uganda, we want to take the low carbon development pathway. That is why we developed the Green Growth Strategy and the REDD+ Readiness Strategy.

However, this low carbon development pathway should make Uganda - at a certain time – achieve what we call the “Net Zero Emissions” to greenhouse gases. Above all, this Bill is supposed to help Uganda become resilient to the climate change effects. It should help Uganda to adapt and also mitigate some of the effects.

When you look at the Climate Change Policy of 2015 – this was a concern raised by a Member; whether we have a Climate Change Policy. Yes, we have. In 2015, Uganda developed a Climate Change Policy and it supports this Bill.

In that policy, it was recommended that we should have a robust institutional framework that can help to address climate change in Uganda. It also urged Uganda to enact an overarching, standalone legal framework. This Climate Change Bill is the standalone legal framework, supported by the Climate Change Policy.

This Bill also gives climate change prominence in our negotiations. Climate change also being a crosscutting issue, we need coordination. There are many efforts we are doing which are scattered. The Ministry of Water and Environment, Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, Ministry of Works and Transport, Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and almost all the ministries are doing something to address climate change but their efforts are scattered. So, this Bill will help us to address that in a very coordinated way.

When you look at the Water Policy, 1999; the National Environment Act, 1994; the Energy Act, 2002; the Renewable Energy Policy, 2007; the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, 2001; the Health Policy; the National Adaptation Plan of Action, 2007; the Oil and Gas Policy of 2008; the Disaster Management Act, 2010; the National Agricultural Research Act, 2005; the Physical Planning Act, 2010; the Uganda National Meteorological Authority Act, 2012; the Land Act, 2004; the National Planning Authority Act, 2002 - all these are not adequately addressing climate change and yet it is cross cutting.

So, this law is needed for prioritisation of climate change, easy governance, coordination, direction, consolidation of the scattered efforts but above all, to generate climate change financing locally and beyond Uganda. These are the clarifications I wanted to make, as far as the reading of the report of the committee is concerned. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, those are the clarifications on the issues raised, after the report was presented. Are there Members who have comments?

3.35
MR MOHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to commend the committee for such a wonderful report. I would like to applaud this august House for having given their time and resources to invest in this research and even further, do that benchmarking that we hear some people are not interested in; which we definitely know has a lot of benefit towards our countrymen.

The world is moving to a new phase, where it is investing heavily in reduction of greenhouse emissions and in controlling the flow of carbon in the environment. 

I would like to thank you for presenting this law from the Ministry of Water and Environment. We commend you because it was long overdue. Last year alone, our neighbours in Kenya benefitted over $900 million privately and through Government.

We have a lot of plant and forest cover that help a lot in the reduction of carbon emissions that are emitted from all over the world. The equatorial belt of Africa alone – from Congo Brazzaville and Gabon – plus the Amazon account for 70 per cent of what they grab from the world’s carbon that is emitted.

Therefore, the big powers that are producing a lot from their countries like China and others have to pay something more because we – as the third world countries - do a lot in helping to purify the air of this world, for the world to have a lot of oxygen.

What I would like to add is that if we have leverage, let us call upon our countrymen and rally them - that there is a budget for every single person who has empty land to plant trees. “If you restore and preserve them for a given number of years, this is what you will earn.”

For plan approvals in city authorities - for areas where we have cities - if we want to restore every tree that is cut down, let us make it mandatory that for every plan to be approved, someone should plant at least four trees in their homestead.

In so doing, we shall be restoring plant cover, but we shall also be protecting the environment and contributing to what we call the carbon bank of the nation. We must discuss what the carbon bank is and what Uganda trades on the carbon market of the whole word.

I know the whole world is sitting now and leaders are convening to discuss this matter. Please give it priority, so that Uganda gets leverage. For every single tree that absorbs emission that will help this world to purify the air, we must have an equal share. Those that are emitting more must pay more.

This should also go to the companies that are into production, Madam Speaker. Factories and companies in the corporate social responsibility section must pay something. For those that take part in the restoration of the environment, so that farmers and people with idle land can come up and realise that this is another wave of investment, from which we can harness as a country but also as private individuals.

Thank you very much, honourable members and thank you, chairperson. All the support you need from us you will definitely have. Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity.

3.39
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, I would like to join my former colleague and thank the committee for this wonderful report-

THE SPEAKER: Your former colleague?

MR MUWANGA: No, hon. Nsereko, who was here previously and not a former colleague - for the wonderful report. Madam Speaker, I also would like to support this report and the Bill. When we went to the Washington African Centre for Strategic Studies, in the National Defense University, the four biggest threats to Africa were - the second one was environment and climate change.

Therefore, climate change is not just an economic issue but it is a security and existential issue. If we are not very careful with the way we do our business like the report has mentioned, if the current rate of destruction of forests continues, in the next 40 years, we are not likely to have a single forest standing.

Therefore, this Bill is not only timely but it must be adequately and thoroughly provided for. I have since discussed with the prisons - and I have also given an idea to UNRA that for every single highway we build across this stretch, where we are investing a lot of money, we should have tree cover on all our highways.

In a single year, we are putting a lot of money in infrastructure development; if we can align all our roads from Nimule to everywhere with trees, we will not only create beauty but we will be economically sound and also protect the environment.

Madam Speaker, it cannot be emphasised but I have gone to countries where you need to seek special permission to cut a tree. Here in this country, if you want to cut a tree, you just pick your panga or an axe, go down and destroy it.

We should also put very heavy penalties and I would like to join the committee to also look at what the National Forest Authority is doing. I come from an area that has a large forest belt from Mpigi down to Gomba, the so-called Mabira stretch. However, it is disheartening that every single forest I knew when I was a young boy, today, has been destroyed.

Madam Speaker, NFA has taken it upon itself to give out standing forests to private tree planters to plant eucalyptus (Kalintusi). As we enact this law, we must reflect on the actions that have degraded our environment. 

The other point I would like to make is that even if we have a debate on climate change, without necessarily tackling the issue of affordable energy for home use, we will not go very far. Therefore, the need to cut down the cost of energy in this country such as the electricity bills will go very far in helping this law.

However, I also want to pledge that I will do anything in my power to help this Bill go through this Parliament. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

3.43
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the committee and the minister for this Bill. This is what is worrying all of us; climate change and environmental degradation. We know about carbon emission, which is so dangerous to human life. We all know that we are experiencing more heat these days compared to the past. We all know that the forest cover of this country has gone too low, maybe right now we can estimate that less than 10 per cent is left for us.

That means that this Bill has components of motivation to Ugandans to plant trees. What we want you to come with - you know this motivation of rewarding people for planting trees, we need it as quickly as possible so that the motivation starts right away about what trees to plant in order to earn for this carbon emission. We need to see what can absorb carbon or carbon dioxide from our environment. 

Therefore, what are the species of those trees and how old should the trees be in order for me to start from them? If I plant at different places but it totals to up to 50 acres of trees, how much do I earn?

I also would like to support the idea of planting trees along the roads. At one time when UNRA was making roads from Nwoya going to Kitgum through Gulu, they told us that we were going to have Shea butter trees planted along that road. The proposal was already included in the Budget but to date, there is nothing and very soon the roads will start getting spoilt without trees being planted along the road. What is happening? We need to plan them.

I also would like to condemn people who cut trees and pretend that they are untouchable. It is as if they do not have children, grandchildren and as if they do not care for the country. We went to Bundibugyo to check on the floods which occurred there. We found a complaint by the district; they did not know the people cutting the trees in Semiliki National Park but trucks and trucks of trees were being ferried.

Honourable minister, you need to put your eyes on those untouchables who export our trees. These people are doing a big disservice to us as a country. Also, when it comes to climate change, it is not only Uganda, even the neighbouring countries and Africa and the World at large. We need to take this law seriously and thank you for bringing up the Bill. I thank you.

3.48
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Specifically, I stand to support this Bill, which any Ugandan would want to hear that it has been assented to. This is a Bill and although the chairperson did not mention bringing climate change into the school curriculum, according to the report, climate change is supposed to be taught in schools such that our children grow up knowing so much about it and they become part of us in protecting the environment.

Therefore, it is a very strong element which has been introduced by the committee and we believe that it will go far to improve the conditions of climate in the country and even in the neighbourhood.

We need funds to make sure that our people get engaged in protecting the environment and improving the climate. How do we get money? It is international money and we need to have a law that specifies how we are going to use the money. Therefore, this law is timely and I believe it is going to help the country.

Thirdly, it comes to augment the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) Act, which has been working but does not reach all parts of the environment. Of course, we find that emissions are not part of the NEMA Act so it comes to augment the Act and the other Acts, which have been in place.

It is a great Bill but we need to implement the outcomes because at the moment, the NEMA Act has been in place since 1995 or 1994 but we have been losing a lot of trees and wetlands. It is as if the NEMA Act has not helped us enough. 

Therefore, as we support this Bill, Government needs to look at how to implement these Acts, which can improve the conditions of Uganda. Otherwise we shall have written laws, put them in place but lose a lot in our environment and suffer climate change damages. Thank you.

3.51
Mr Johnson ssenyonga (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in supporting the Bill. 

However, there are some components, which the Bill should take serious interest in. There are so many companies or contactors, for example, Sogea. Good enough, Madam Speaker, you have been traveling to Kamuli almost every year while passing through Mukono. In 1998 when I was first elected, I planted over 400 trees around the town. When Sogea came, all the trees, which were over 20 years old, were cut down. When I approached them, they said there is no law that tells them to compensate. Therefore, there must be a component in the Bill forcing the contractors to compensate.

In addition, we have so many programmes and projects. In one of the Northern Uganda projects, there is a component of tree planting but when you go to Kitgum or Gulu, you cannot find any tree yet the component is worth over Shs 2 billion.

The same thing applies to road contractors. In every road construction project, there is a tree planting component but because there is nowhere it is indicated in the Bill, they just help you to either implement it or not.

Finally, some organisations like MTN and Umeme have come up with tree planting projects but when it comes to implementation and taking care of the trees, some are mismanaged. We offered, through the Rotary Foundation, to pay a certain amount to disadvantaged children so that they can take care of the growing trees. 

Otherwise, even here, we are going to pass Bills and money but when it comes to implementation, we do not involve LCIs and parish chiefs who can take care of the trees. As a result, we end up losing billions of money. Otherwise, I support the Bill if they can cater for that.

When it comes to planning, all plans are approved by the local urban councils. Let it be a must that at every building site, at least five to eight trees must be planted. I have seen it help some areas in the urban fraternity. That will help us to have cities, which are green and can also protect –(Member timed out.)

3.54
DR KEEFA KIWANUKA kiwanuka (NRM, Kiboga East County, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the Committee on Climate Change for the wonderful work you have done in processing this Bill. 

I would like to support the Bill and pray that it is expeditiously handled. As we all know, climate change is one of the greatest threats that are facing modern humanity, not only in Uganda but the world over.

In some countries, it is classified as a security issue threatening human life, economic growth and food price stocks, undermining livelihoods and obviously causing lots of displacement.

It is being manifested in many ways while we are all somehow turning a blind eye. Hopefully, this is going to awaken our enthusiasm about climate change issues. The issues that we are experiencing including frequent floods, landslides, extreme temperature and rising water levels are all associated with climate change.

I am pleased that we are moving to accept the United Nations Framework on Climate Change and the various protocols which we have not institutionalised before and providing measures for our own emissions and protecting the environment.

The anxiety I have on this is that one part of me is asking; is it because of lack of laws that we are where we are? One very good example I can bring out is that some years back, about 2018, the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources did a lot of work on sand mining in Lwera. We thought that Uganda and everybody was awakened to the reality of this. We warned that we were moving towards that road caving in and being unmotorable. 

That is what is happening now; we have turned a blind eye to what is going on there. We are seeing more rice growing there and the sand mining is continuing unabated, probably even on a greater force than we had experienced before.

We have issues of wetland management. It sometimes surprises me that we wait until after wetlands have been filled –(Member timed out.)

The Speaker: A minute to conclude.

DR KEEFA KIWANUKA: We wait until people have settled in there, turning a blind eye to what is happening and we later start crying; how did they get there? We then say we are now evicting them. 

Why are these happening? I do not think it is just a lack of law. We should forget about what has been happening and with climate change, awaken to the reality. All of us should renew our commitment to make sure that we enforce issues to do with climate change to protect our environment. Thank you.

The Speaker: To compliment what hon. Keefa has just said, when I read, during the Easter season that the road in Lwera had caved in, it reminded me of the work we did here through our committee. We had taken up the issue to stop sand mining and ensure that NEMA enforces conditions for sand mining but we were ignored. Of course, it depends on who is doing the sand mining. You saw that no one took action and the roads are going. The people of Uganda are the ones losing.

3.58
Ms jovah kamateeka (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the Bill and most especially to comment on the issue of implementation and sensitisation of the masses. It does not matter that you are Government and you have got as much money as you want and you can buy trees and all that but other masses involved, such as the stakeholders. We need ownership of these programmes. 

For example, in the issue of planting of trees, we need to work with them. Someone said that we need to make sure that everyone plants trees in their compound. What type of trees do they plant in the compound? 

Right now, I am in a situation where I have to cut trees in my compound that have been there for 17 years because they are eating up my wall. Therefore, you plant trees without advice from the technical people. I think we need a programme where we go out and sensitise the people that it is very important for us to maintain forest cover for the good of all us because we have seen how we have suffered harsh weather conditions to involve them. 

The other day, I saw the Executive Director of KCCA and I would like to thank her for the initiative she has taken. This is the job she should be doing but seeing her out there involving the people in cleaning the city meant so much. Indeed, right now, when you go through Nakawa, the streets are clean everywhere. Therefore, it is very important that we involve the stakeholders in protection of the environment. 

On the issue of wetlands and our water bodies – following our debate here, people were able to arrest a truck that is dumping waste into the wetlands and then you want to ask where we have been all this time. 

I think we need to urge – I am looking at the “Minister for Mabira.” We pray that you maintain your portfolio and you are able to follow up these issues. We want to see you out there involving the masses. The Minister of Trade should be able to visit all these industries. We need to know where they are dumping their waster rather than letting the waste flow into our waters. You saw how the people were up in arms; they were stranded. They cannot drink the water and their crops are drying but at least now that the truck was arrested, we hope something will be done. 

Honourable Minister for Water and Environment, we would like to see the soldiers protecting those cutting trees and escorting charcoal to Kampala, apprehended. 

Madam Speaker, the issue of implementation is very important. We all support these programmes and want a healthy environment but we need to know the people for whom we are working and make sure that they get involved, are sensitised and are aware of these programmes. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the national Climate Change Bill be read for a second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NATIONAL CLIMATE CHANGE BILL, 2020

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

MR BIYIKA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to beg that on clause 2 on the interpretation, where we have the word “committee”, we need to change the National Environmental Act, 2015 to 2019 – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are not handling clause 2. We normally do interpretation last. Let us go to clause 4.

I put the question that clause 4 do stand part of the Bill – Honourable chairperson, I think you forgot to change this. You had something on clause 3. 

MR BIYIKA: Under clause 3(e), we added the word “change” between “climate” and “financing” to provide for “climate change financing.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question that clause 3 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

MR BIYIKA: In clause 5(1), the department shall develop a framework strategy on climate change for Uganda and we amended it to read, “Within one year after commencement of this Act.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: There are four proposals under clause 5. Can you speak to all of them? 

MR BIYIKA: In clause 5(d), we added the words, “the need to ensure food security.”
Those were the amendments under clause 5. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not know whether my document is like yours. Mine says 5 (3). 

MR BIYIKA: Yes, it is clause 5(3)(d), which is “the need to ensure food security.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is this a new insertion? 

MR BIYIKA: Yes. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Then finish the next one.

MR BIYIKA: In clause 5(4)(e), we added the word “out” between “communities” and “resilience” so it will read, “identify the most vulnerable areas, including the ecosystems and communities without resilience without the impact of climate change and its variability and extremes.” Therefore, the word “with” becomes “without.”

Clause 5(5) will now read, “The framework strategy on climate change shall be reviewed every five years or earlier as they may be deemed necessary.”  


THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 5 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6

MR BIYIKA: Madam Chairperson, we have inserted a new subclause under the National Climate Change Action Plan.

Insert a new sub-clause immediately after sub-clause (1) to read as follows, “The National Climate Change Action Plan referred to in subsection (1) shall be developed within one year after commencement of this Act.”

In clause 6(2)(a) we propose to substitute the word “of” appearing in line two with the word, “two.”

In subclause 2, add these words, “The National Climate Change Action Plan shall indicate the action to be undertaken to assess and manage the impact, risk trend and vulnerability to climate change.”

In clause 6(3), which reads, “The National Climate Action Plan shall be reviewed every five years or as may be deemed necessary.” We propose to add the word “earlier” after the word “or.” 
 
The justification is to provide a timeframe in which the National Climate Change Action Plan should be prepared, after commencement of this Act; and

To ensure the National Climate Change Action Plan is reviewed timely or earlier when need arises but not after more than five years.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, first, we shall insert a new subclause. I put the question that clause 6 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

New clause 

MR BIYIKA: Madam Chairperson, insert a new clause to read “Lead Agency Action Plan

1) 	The lead agency shall prepare a Climate Change Action Plan in conformity with the National Climate Change Action Plan and Framework Strategy on climate Change. 

2) 	The Climate Change Action Plan referred to in subsection (1) shall indicate: 
    (a) An assessment and management of risk and vulnerability;
    (b)  An identification of greenhouse gas mitigation potentials; and
    (c) Options and prioritization of appropriate adaptation measures for joint projects of national and local governments.

(3) The Climate Change Action Plan referred to in subsection (1) shall be reviewed every five years or earlier as may be deemed necessary.”

The justification is to ensure intermediate government agencies not operating at local government level develop plans for adaptation and mitigation of climate change effects and to cater for inter district and trans-boundary resources and projects.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that a new clause be introduced as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause, agreed to.

Clause 7

MR BIYIKA: Madam Chairperson, Clause 7 is about the District Climate Change Action Plan and we propose to insert in 7(5) the word “earlier” immediately after the word “or.”

The justification is to ensure a timely review of the District Climate Change Action Plan or earlier when need arises but not after more than five years.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question is that clause 7 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8

MR BIYIKA: In clause 8(4), we substitute the word, “rules” with the word, “regulations.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question is that clause 8 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9

MR BIYIKA: In clause 9(1), insert the word, “gas” immediately after the word, “greenhouse” appearing in the third line of the provision. 

It will read, “For purposes of the national inventory referred to in section 12(1) the targeted greenhouse gas emissions, the reduction of those targeted greenhouse gas emission and the removal of the targeted greenhouse gas from the atmosphere shall be measured or calculated in terms of carbon dioxide equivalent.”

In clause 9(2), insert the word “gas” to read, “the amount of greenhouse gas emission.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 9 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 10

MR BIYIKA: In clause 10(1), replace the words “may” with the word “shall” to read, “The minister shall, in consultation with the committee…”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 10 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 11

MR BIYIKA: In Clause 11(2), we propose to delete the words, “the national reports” for it to read, “The committee shall review the national communication report and such other reports, and if satisfied with the reports, recommend to the minister to sign and cause the report to be forwarded to the secretariat in the discharge of the national obligation, under the convention, its protocols and the agreement.”

Clause 11(4), we propose to insert the word “annually” immediately after the word “minister” to read, “The minister shall annually lay all reports referred to…”

THE CHAIRPERSON: My only difficulty is the structure of the sentence.

MR BIYIKA: Of clause 11(4)?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you proposing that the minister shall annually lay all reports to - I do not understand how you have put it.

MR BIYIKA: We are deleting the words, “the national report” immediately after the word, “sign” appearing in line three of the provision. We are also deleting clause 11(3). 

THE CHAIRPERSON: My concern is the structure of subclause (4). The issue is just the grammar.

MR BIYIKA: Subclause (4) will read, “The minister shall annually lay all reports referred to in this section, before Parliament.”

The justification is for consistency and clarity.

THE CHAIRPERSON: My problem is the structure of the sentence. 

MR TIMUZIGU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think the problem is with the word “on”. The word “on” corrupts the structure of the sentence. If the word “on” can be removed from the middle of the sentence, then the sentence depicts that it will be laid in Parliament. I, therefore, propose that we remove the word “on”.

MR BIYIKA: The redrafted subclause (4) will read, “The minister shall annually lay all reports referred to in this section before Parliament.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not know whether the word “annually” should be there or it should come separately. My problem is how the sentence is put together. I understand what you mean but I do not know whether that is the right sequence.

MR BIYIKA: The understanding is that this subclause is urging us to allow the minister to lay all these reports before Parliament every year.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Under clause 14, there is also a provision for the minister to bring the report to Parliament. I want to understand from the chairperson of the committee how different the proposal is under clause 14 from that under clause 11?

MR BIYIKA: Clause 11 is more to do with the national reporting and then clause 14 - actually, we have moved clause 14 somewhere else. We are coming to it; this is to do with national reporting.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I hope the draftsman can put it better. I put the question that clause 11 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12

MR BIYIKA: Madam Chairperson, we are deleting clause 12(3), 12(5) and substituting clause 12(6) with the following: 

“A person who not being registered as a verifier, makes a verification or any oral or written statement that appears to compromise a verification or rejection of information, a report or a national inventory will be referred to in this section, or gives a misleading or wrong oral or written statement, comprising of a verification or rejection of information or report, commits an offence and is liable on conviction, to a fine not exceeding 1000 currency points or to imprisonment not exceeding two years or both.”

In clause 12(7), we are deleting the words “as a verifier”, appearing in the second line of the provision. 

The justification is:

    1. To ensure internationally accredited verifiers are vetted for competence and compliance with the laws of Uganda by the department before practice in Uganda.

    2. To provide for a sanction for verifiers, who give wrong or misleading verification and those who make verification while not registered. This is for clarity.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you have noted the proposal to delete clause 12(3), (5) and the proposals for substitution. I put the question – 

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The proposal for the fine or imprisonment seems to be a mismatch. I request that it is harmonised. 

If you look at the currency points and the number of years being proposed in terms of criminal jurisdiction, there is a mismatch. We either reduce on the currency points or increase on the number of years so that they match each other.

MR BIYIKA: Yes, we have put 1000 currency points or two years. If they do not match, we can amend that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Odur, what are you proposing?

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Chairperson, the principle is that one currency point is equivalent to two months of imprisonment. We just have to agree on which one to take and then convert the other. Otherwise, one currency point equals two months of imprisonment. Can we harmonise this?

THE CHAIRPERSON: How many years is 1000 currency points?

MR BIYIKA: One currency point is equivalent to two months of imprisonment. However, we need two years of imprisonment.  

MR JONATHAN ODUR: It will come to 240 currency points, which is very far from 1000 currency points.

MR TIMUZIGU: Madam Chairperson, if one currency point equals two months, this means that if we want two years, it will be 12 currency points. Otherwise, two years is 24 months. 

One currency point is equal to two months. This means it will be 12 months. We are looking for currency points for two years, which is 24 months. Twenty-Four (24) months divided by two equals to 12.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Have we identified the quantum?

MR KAFUZI: Madam Chairperson, can we stand over it as we harmonise the calculations?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Let us go to clause 13.

MR BIYIKA: In clause 13, we inserted the words “and benefits from” immediately after the word “under”. Clause 13(1)(a) will read, “Ensuring that Uganda meets her obligations and benefits under the convention, its protocols and the agreement.”

MR NSEREKO: Madam Chairperson, given the magnitude of what we are handling on climate change, I have reservations on having it as a department for climate change under a ministry.

My proposal, in good faith, is that we create the national executive committee or a commission, with members stipulated. When you look at the magnitude of investment in relation to the funds and policies, a single department – you have been through thick and thin, Madam Speaker, when ministries come here back and forth, to tell you that there is no one who can perform a particular duty in the department, “We have failed to hire so and so”. 

However, if we want masses involved in this matter of climate change, let us have a seven-member committee at the national level, which will formulate policies to do the monitoring work and come up with an annual report; amalgamating reports that will come from the districts and having stipulated the number like –

If it goes down to the districts, then we can have that institutional framework of districts and cities, where we clearly stipulate that there shall be district committees on climate change, with this number of youths, women representatives and people with disabilities.

Let us have it with involvement like it is. I was reading about the one in the UK. You see that they are trying to have this up to the ward so that you involve people. The more you involve persons, the more we shall reach the goal that we want to achieve. 

I do not think we shall achieve a lot by leaving them as departments gifted to technocrats. However, the more we try to involve people - I think we might find ourselves achieving much more, like other countries are trying to do.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Unfortunately, honourable members, we are not able to amend the report at this stage to include that. If the minister wants to amend later, when the law is in place, she can look at that.

I put the question that clause 13 be amended.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Chairperson, although we have not handled interpretation, we have defined the department there. I find that we will constrain ourselves by naming the department -unless the minister can assure us that this department is going to be a permanent fixture in her ministry.

We would rather say, “The department responsible for”, so that any other name that the ministry gives to any department in future, as long as he is responsible for climate change, rather than confining ourselves to the Department of Climate Change.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why don’t we handle that when we are doing Clause 2, when we are doing interpretation? [MR JONATHAN ODUR: We are already naming it] Are you naming it here?

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Yes, under that, it is already named “The Department of…” we can simply say, “The department” and leave it so that when we go back to interpretation, we define it; other than saying, “Department of Climate Change”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, did you define “department” in your interpretation?

MR BIYIKA: Yes, it is defined, Madam Chairperson. However, in Clause 13(2)(e), we are deleting the word, “management”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 13 (2)(e) be amended, as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 14

MR BIYIKA: Clause 14; annual report. We are actually amending that and taking it to Part 7, before Clause 26 – the whole of it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you are not dealing with it now?

MR BIYIKA: The national –

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are on Clause 14.

MR BIYIKA: Yes, we are on Clause 14. That is the annual report. I think we are just taking the whole of Clause 14 to Part 7, before Clause 26.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you will submit it when we are doing Clause 26. Should we leave it for now?

MR BIYIKA: Madam Chairperson, can we stand over that and then come back to it?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Let us go to Clause 15.

Clause 15

MR BIYIKA: Clause 15 is the policy committee on environment. Under that, we are amending it to remove the word “management”. We are saying, “The policy committee on environment, established under the National Environment Act, not National Environment Management Act”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 15 be amended, as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.

New clause

THE CHAIRPERSON: There is a new clause, honourable chairperson.

MR BIYIKA: Yes, we have inserted a new clause to read, “The National Climate Change Advisory Committee.

    1. The minister shall constitute a National Climate Change Advisory Committee, comprised of technical experts from the field of energy, minerals, environment, natural resources, works and transport, science and technology, agriculture or any other relevant field, as may be determined by the minister. Four other persons from the National Planning Authority, academia, private sector and civil society – one each.

    2. The National Climate Change Advisory Committee shall provide independent technical advice to the committee and minister on climate change science, technologies, interventional programmes on climate change and best practices for risk assessment, enhancement of the adaptive capacity to potential impact of climate change and establishment and achievement of the set targets.

    3. In execution of its mandate, the National Climate Change Advisory Committee shall:

    i. Advise on assessments of climate change impact at the sectoral level for given priorities identified in the Climate Change programmes.
    ii. Advise on the identification of priorities and strategies for adaptation and mitigation programmes;
    iii. Advise on the technical implementation of climate change programmes and initiatives;
    iv. Analyse climate change impact and implications on the environment, agriculture, land use, fisheries and other sectors;
    v. Advise on appropriate policies, laws and measures for effective implementation of adaptation and mitigation;
    vi. Advise on new developments and technologies and anticipate emerging developments and trends in climate change research;
    4. The Department shall be the administrative office of the National Climate Change Advisory Committee. The minister shall designate the chairperson of the National Climate Change Advisory Committee. The National Climate Change Advisory Committee shall meet at least four times in a year.

The justification is to provide for a technical forum for discussion of climate change and related issues and to ensure experts on the subject matter are involved in climate change policy and related matters.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there is a proposal for a new clause. I put the question that a new –

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. On the composition, we can insert a subclause that one third of those members as enumerated must be women. This is to comply with the provision of the Constitution.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, it is important.

MR BIYIKA: Madam Chairperson, I have no objection to that.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Instead of saying, “they must be a third”, can we say that “at least a minimum of a third be women”. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that amendment is a clear one because it is complying with the Constitution. I put the question that a new subclause be added as proposed?

(Question put and agreed to.)

New subclause, agreed to.

Clause 16

MR BIYIKA: Madam Chairperson, clause 16 is on the lead agencies. 16(2)(b)(1), there is an amendment where we added the words, “technology needs” immediately after “capacity” and before “gender”. Therefore, it reads, “undertaking vulnerability and impact assessment including baselines of vulnerability and risk adaptive capacity, technology needs, gender and human rights to inform decision making on adaptation.” And - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that still on clause 16?

MR BIYIKA: Yes still on clause 16. In clause 16(c) - we added 16(c) where we inserted two new paragraphs to read as follows; “(c) enhance development and dissemination of technology for climate change adaptation.” and “(d) allocate financial resources for climate change resilient investment.”

(3) We inserted a subclause immediately after sub clause (2) to read “a lead agency shall designate a unit to coordinate the mainstreaming of the climate change action plans and other climate change statutory functions. The unit designated by a lead agency shall be adequately resourced.”

In subclause (4) we also replaced the word “rules” with “regulations.” In subclause (6), we replaced the word, “this section” with “subsection (1)”.

THE CHAIRPERSON:  Is it subsection (1) or (4)?

MR BIYIKA: Sorry subsection (4). And then subclause (7) will now read, “Whereas any offense referred to in subsection (6) is committed by a private entity, a director, secretary or any other person in a position of control in that private entity may be held liable together with the private entity for the offence.”

The justification is that the use of technology encourages more resilience, mitigation and adaptation and to ensure the liability of the private entity is not extinguished. This is for consistency and also clarity.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Again, in the structure of the sentence, I don’t know whether you cannot remove the words “liable for the offence” just immediately after “liable” then end with “together with the private entity”. It will make more sense if you move “for the offence” soon after “liable”. You are holding them liable for something and then together with the private entity. Do you mind if we changed those three words to move to the middle?

MR BIYIKA: I don’t mind, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the words, “for the offence” are moved to come immediately after “liable” in that sentence. I put the question that clause 16 be amended as proposed?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 17

Mr BIYIKA: In clause 17(2), “for the purposes of this Act, the natural resources department shall be responsible for the implementation of the district climate change action plan.” Then, we have inserted a new paragraph (h). Therefore, in subclause (2)(a) we replace the “district climate change committee” with the “district environment and natural resources committee”. Thereafter, whenever it appears in the clause.

In clause 17(2), insert a new paragraph immediately after paragraph (g) to read as follows;
 
“(h) Prepare and submit an annual report on the implementation of the district climate change action plan to the district environment and natural resources committee for review.” 

The justification is for consistency.

The district environment and natural resources department implements the district climate change action plan as formulated by the district council and advised by the district environment and natural resources committee. The district environment and natural resources committee is more of a policy and coordination body at the district level; hence should be receiving reports from the district natural resources department for review and guidance before they are submitted to the department.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 17 be amended as proposed?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 18

MR BIYIKA: In clause 18(1) we are just changing “2015” to “2019”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But you are also deleting another subclause.

MR BIYIKA: Then we are deleting clause 18(h).

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 18 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20

MR BIYIKA: Madam Chairperson, in clause 20, we are amending the heading from “Financing for climate change” to “Climate change fund”. 

The justification is to create a special mechanism for climate change financing and management.

Then we are substituting clause 21 with the following; “there is established a climate change fund which shall consist of money appropriated by Parliament, fees and monies charged by the departments under this Act, fines collected as result of breach of the provisions of this Act, money collected from environmental levies, loans, grants, gifts or donations from the Government and other sources made with approval of the minister.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I do not know whether this proposal does not breach the Public Finance Management Act. Are you allowing the fund to collect their own levies and keep the fines?

MR KIWANUKA: Madam Chairperson, besides what you have just mentioned, in the National Environment Management Act, we created an environmental fund and the sources of money seem to be similar to what is here. However, the money being collected all goes to the Consolidated Fund, which I think is to do with the Public Finance Management Act. 

In the report that we submitted, we are trying to explore a way of how money from that can be remitted to the relevant agency for such work.

In this context, I wonder whether Government is doing away with such funds and that is why the money, which should have been going to the National Environment Management Fund, is instead going to the Consolidated Fund and nothing at all is being remitted to the environment fund.

The Chairperson: We have a standard practice in this House. Money should be appropriated by this House.

Mr kafuuzi: Madam Chairperson, indeed like you have said, the money has to be remitted to the Consolidated Fund and through the normal processes of appropriation, it can go to the environmental management fund.

Therefore, the environment fund cannot be a standalone and self-contained, collecting levies and managing its own resources. The money has to go to the Consolidated Fund and be properly appropriated through the normal processes.

The Chairperson: Even if there are loans, grants or gifts, they should come to this House. They are appropriated by this House.

Ms kamateeka: Madam Chairperson, I wonder if it would not be proper to say that the money shall go to the Consolidated Fund but the Environment Management Fund should be given a percentage of that money, which is collected.

The Chairperson: Even that is something, which Parliament has to do, because it means we are now appropriating money.

Mr kafuuzi: Madam Chairperson, if we start mentioning percentages in a Bill, we are taking away the role of appropriation, which is allocated to Parliament. Therefore, we cannot say that a percentage of any amount of money collected under this Bill goes here. 

There is a normal process of appropriation through Parliament. The money is approved, it comes from the Consolidated Fund and goes to the allocated vote. It would be wrong for us to start saying in a particular Bill that we provide for a percentage of the proceeds.

The Chairperson: We have been very strict on this issue.

Mr othieno: Madam Chairperson, the Deputy Attorney-General is referring to something different. The issue here is that there is supposed to be a fund to be dedicated towards environmental issues. That is why there is even what we call an environmental levy. 

The appropriation is another matter altogether. We are saying that that fund is supposed to be there. The entire environment levy is supposed to go to that fund but what is happening now is that the environment levy is being levied but the environment fund is not receiving any part of it. 

We are not talking about appropriation. Let it go there so we know that the environmental levy, just like the contingency fund now, has this amount of money. The Ministry of Water and Environment will come to the House to have that money appropriated for the purposes it is intended. That is the issue now at hand.

The Chairperson: Honourable members, do not try to engineer the Public Finance Management Act. We have a standard practice in this House that all funds are appropriated by this House, whether it is a loan, grant or gift. 

Therefore, we cannot allow one body to say, “I am here collecting the fees or fines.” 

DR KEEFA KIWANUKA: Madam Chairperson, this was passed by Parliament. It was initiated by Government and agreed by Parliament. That is the law at the moment –

The Chairperson: Which one?

DR KEEFA KIWANUKA: The National Environment Management Fund, which we are talking about. It is in the Act, which was assented to. If things have changed, then probably we need to bring it back and amend it in this Parliament. I wonder then, what was the view then that has now changed? 

The Chairperson: Let us have the text of that Act. Let us stand over this one and we proceed to clause 21.

Clause 21

The Chairperson: I put the question that clause 21 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Mr biyika: We are substituting clause 22 with the following:

Duties of private entities and individuals

The minister shall make regulations prescribing:

    a) climate change obligations on private entities and individuals;
    b) activities for which private entities, and individuals shall be required to prepare mitigation and adaptation plans;
    c) the nature and procedure for reporting on the performance of private entities and individuals with regard to the obligations imposed by the minister under this section; and
    d) Mechanisms for monitoring and evaluating compliance with the Act.

The justification is for clarity.

The Chairperson: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 22 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 23

Mr jonathan odur: Madam Chairperson, on clause 23, the 1000 currency point is Shs 20 million. I would like to find out from the chairperson whether he actually intends that somebody who has breached that information under this clause is supposed to be fined that much. Aren’t there other mechanisms that you can use because this is within the ministry - other than putting Shs 20 million first?

Mr biyika: Madam Chairperson, for all the developments that take place in Uganda, they require an environment impact assessment. Periodically, they do what we call “environmental auditing.” 

For climate change, it talks about measurement, verification and reporting about the greenhouse gases. There are projects that will come to this country and will be emitting gases. If we sent a verifier who could be locally or internationally recognised, even if he or she comes from outside the country, they must still be accredited by our ministry before they can proceed to verify.

However, in a situation where this person, after the verification, if it is not because of the fault in the machine for the measurement, gives wrong information just to allow the project to proceed, the person should be charged on conviction 1000 currency points or two years imprisonment.

The Chairperson: There is no amendment to clause 23 as far as I can see.

Mr biyika: We stayed over a punishment to do with giving wrong information. We shall come back to it.

The Chairperson: I am saying that from your report, there is no amendment to clause 23. I put the question that clause 23 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24, agreed to.

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26

MR BIYIKA: We have moved clause 14, which we stood over, to clause 26. There is no amendment on clause 26. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Clause 14 has to do with the department annual reports. 

MR BIYIKA: Yes. Madam Chairperson, we substitute clause 26 with the following: 
“26. Reporting by lead agencies 

(1) 	Lead agencies shall submit to the department annual reports on the status of implementation of the standards, measures and performance levels for responding to climate change as established by the respective lead agencies. 

(2)	Where an annual report of a lead agency discloses unsatisfactory performance, the department shall undertake investigation and report its finding to the minister. 

(3)	An investigation referred to in sub-section (2) shall be undertaken and processed by the department within 45 days of the receipt.”

The justification is to provide for a proper hierarchical reporting system and prescribe a timeframe within which investigations should be undertaken. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 26 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 26, as amended, agreed to.

New clause

MR BIYIKA: We propose to insert a new clause 27: Integration of climate change into the curriculum. “The Ministry of Education and Sports shall ensure that climate change education and research are integrated into the national curriculum.” 

The justification is to mainstream climate change into the curriculum and create climate change awareness. 

We are replacing clause 27(a)(1) with the following – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us first deal with the new clause. Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 27
MR BIYIKA: We propose to replace clause 27 (a) (1) with the following:

“1. Insert immediately after the word “development” the word “climate change.”

    1. Substitute paragraph (b) with the following; 
    2. 
Insert immediately after sub-section (6) the following:-

    a)  The minister, in consultation with the chairperson of the National Planning Authority, shall issue a certificate certifying that the Budget Framework Paper is climate change responsive and contains adequate allocation for funding climate change measures and actions. 

    b) The minister and the chairperson of the National Planning Authority shall evaluate all Votes of the Budget Framework Paper before issuing the certificate referred to in 6 (a).”

The justification is climate change issues are crosscutting hence budgeting for climate change should not be restricted to only Votes responsible for implementing climate change measures and actions but rather to all Votes. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 27 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 27, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Chairperson, I see that clause 29 appears to be redundant. The powers to amend the currency points are with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and it cuts across. If we start allocating each minister powers to do that amendment, this minister may wake up and put another standard for the currency point different from the other laws. As such, it could be deleted. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Schedule 1 is the currency points. I think there is one minister in charge of the currency points, isn’t it? Can any minister amend the Schedule? Should we delete clause 29? 

Honourable chairperson, the proposal is to delete clause 29 for being redundant. The minister in charge of this cannot amend the currency point. 

MR BIYIKA: Okay, I agree to that. I think we can delete clause 29.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The question is that clause 29 be deleted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 1, agreed to.

Schedule 2, agreed to.

Schedule 3, agreed to.

Schedule 4, agreed to.

MR BIYIKA: Madam Chairperson, we stood over clause 14.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, honourable chairperson. 

MR BIYIKA: We amended clause 14 to read, “Replace clause 14 (1) with the following: 

    (1) The department shall submit biannual reports on climate change to the minister, who shall submit it to Cabinet for consideration and approval by 30 September of the year immediately following the year in which the reporting is due.” 

In 14(2), we replace the words, “annual report” appearing in line 1 with the words “biannual report on climate change.” 

Replace clause 14 (3) with the following: 

“(3) The minister shall, upon approval of the biannual report on climate change by Cabinet, lay it in Parliament.” 

Replace clause 14 (4) with the following:

“Parliament shall, within three months after receiving the biannual report on climate change, make recommendations to the minister.”
 
Insert a new subclause immediately after subclause (4) to read as follows: 

“A person, who fails to comply with the minister’s directives in subsection (2) commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 500 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding one year or both.” 

The report referred to in this section shall be disseminated to the public. Clause 14 shall also be moved to Part VII immediately after clause 25.

The justification is, reporting updates to facilitate decision-making requires data, information study and compilation. Collecting data with a view of reporting every year is quite cumbersome in a short time and makes the reports none- comprehensive.

Issues of policy have to be handled at the ministerial level.

To provide sanctions for noncompliance with the directives of the minister and enhance the department’s authority in giving directives to lead agencies, private entities or individuals.
 
To ensure climate change information is disseminated to the public.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 14 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12

THE CHAIRPERSON: We had stood over clause 12, I do not know whether the Attorney-General has had time to complete comparing the - you were checking the equivalence of the currency points to the sentence.

MR TIMUZIGU: Madam Chairperson, we have discovered that when a currency point is equal to two months, that means a person cannot be in prison for two years when the currency points are 1000 because 1000 currency points would mean 500 hundred months in prison, which equal to 41.6 years.

I now propose that to make it appropriate, we can say five years, which are equal to 60 months, and since one currency point is two months, then we can put 30 currency points because they are equal to five years, based on the calculation that two months are equal to one currency point.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But is it two years or five?

MR ODUR: Madam Chairperson, it is the opposite; one month is equal to two currency points.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Two years would translate into how many currency points?

MR ODUR: That would be 480 currency points. But what I wanted from the Chairperson is if they actually meant if two years is adequate, then we can go the currency points but if they are proposing three or four, then we can convert.

MR BIYIKA: What we meant was two years.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, I wish to clarify something. Apparently, one month is equivalent to two currency points and not the other way round.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, what are two years in currency points?

MR TIMUZIGU: Madam Chairperson, when I calculated, according to his information that one currency point is equal to two months, I got 12 currency points. Therefore, if it is the other way around, it is 24 times 2 which is 48 currency points.

THE CHAIRPERSON: 48 currency points or two years.

MR BIYIKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Our position is two years and if two years is equal to 48 currency points that is what we shall go with.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 12 be amended as proposed

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 12, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR BIYIKA: We only amended where there is the word “committee”. Replace “2015” with “2019” because the National Environment Act was 2019 not 2015.

Replace the definition of “district” with the following;
“District includes Kampala Capital City and other cities;”

The justification is to cater for other cities other than Kampala Capital City.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What about the issue hon. Odur raised about the department?

MR BIYIKA: This Bill was supposed to strengthen the department but we are hopeful that the minister will come up with regulations that can help to strengthen that department or maybe become a directorate.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Chairperson, I had raised something different. I just wanted a small change; instead of saying, “department of climate change”, we say, “the department responsible for…” because if in future, if the name of the department changes, it means you have to come back to Parliament. But when you say the department responsible for climate change, by whatever name that department will be, it will still implement this Act.

MR BIYIKA: Thank you, hon. Odur. I agree that we go with, “department responsible for climate change”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, if there are no other changes to the interpretation section, I put the question that clause 2, do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 20

THE CHAIRPERSON: On clause 20, we were waiting for the Environment Act, has anyone brought it?

DR KEEFA KIWANUKA: We were talking about the National Environment Management Fund, which is clause 20 here as climate fund.

In the National Environment Management Fund, it is clause 32 and it is provided for as the continuation of the National Environment Management Fund. “The National Environment Management Fund existing immediately before the commencement of this Act shall continue in existence, subject to this Act and the Public Finance Management Act.” 

It goes on to state where the funds will be coming from; disbursement from Government, environmental levy, fees charge for the use of the environmental resources, and other fees charged under this Act, administrative fines collected as a result of breach of the provisions of this Act, gives donations and other voluntary contributions to the Fund with approval of the minister responsible for finance.

Then with administration of the National Environment Management Fund - clause 33, the board shall be responsible for the administration of the Fund. The Fund shall support the implementation of the following activities; management of sensitive and fragile eco systems, critical environment restoration activities, support the review of the follow-up of compliance with the environmental and social impact assessments and environment audits.

Research intended to further requirements of the environmental management, capacity building, environment publication and scholarships, innovation for environmental conservation and management by the public. I think that gives a feel of what had been enacted.

THE CHAIRPERSON: When was the law enacted because what you are talking about now is appropriation-in-aid. You collect fines and use - I do not think that is what we intend.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Chairperson, that the proposal is going to confuse this House - those other funds are established under body corporates. For example, the National Environmental Authority is on its own.

However, for this Act, we are going to implement it under the ministry. It is just going to be a department and so the department already processes its budget and revenue through the normal structures in the ministry.

So, if you are going to create another fund as if this entire Act will be administered by another board or another statutory organ - I suggest that the issue of funding does not come here because the legal mechanism for NEMA - and this one is quite different, if you had established a board here or an authority in this Act, then we would be able to provide for its funding and then follow the actual procedure.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The two are not synonymous.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, section 32 that Hon. Dr Keefa Kiwanuka has just read still makes reference to the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 meaning that while it is permissible for these levies to be collected, they cannot be spent without the appropriation processes provided for under the Public Finance Management Act, which also requires coming to Parliament, because the money goes to a central pool known as the Consolidated Fund.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson of the committee, you are creating an authority indirectly; a body corporate.

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, could the Attorney-General clarify to us why the law has to specify that the funding for the fund will come from the environmental levy, which will have been charged and the other funds?

Yes, it does mention the Public Finance Management Act but why would it mention the sources of funding for the money to come direct from the Consolidated Fund because it would mean that all of it will go to the Consolidated Fund and then Government will dish it out like it gives to other Government departments yet the law here is specific about where the funding for the fund shall come from.

THE CHAIRPERSON: This is the committee’s amendment.

DR KEEFA KIWANUKA: Madam Chairperson, there is section 32, which makes reference to the Public Finance Management Act but further -

THE CHAIRPERSON: You are talking about the Environmental Act yet I am talking about climate change. Please, you are mixing up. How is this department going to collect fines and use them, levy environmental levy and use it; that is what I want to know?

MR BIYIKA: Our understanding was that for a very long time we had been addressing climate change as a cross-cutting issue but we thought, to make the department stronger and to make us have impact in addressing climate change in the country, a fund should be provided for to address climate change in the country.

MS ANYWAR: Madam Chairperson, all these issues are being raised because the originally established environmental levy as we are aware, is not doing its role.

We are concerned that the effect of climate change, which is globally ravaging the world - we need to put our minds to this. I beg that if we are to let it go through the Consolidated Fund, we should get a way of ring-fencing the funds that are concerned with climate change and the environment.

Otherwise, it is going to be a vehicle for collecting funds and then at the end of the day, it does not do its supposed work and that is where there is frustration.

Maybe for purpose of the law - we can accommodate it but this House, which I think is still under your firm control, should ensure that we have funds for environment and climate change ring-fenced to do its rightful work. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister, I understand what you want and I also want this fund to work but you cannot tell me that a department will now go to collect fines paid in the court go to the department, levies go to the department, appropriation- in-aid -

MR OTHIENO: Madam Chairperson, having listened to the Deputy Attorney-General, I realise there is a problem somewhere. It seems it is not practical to create a fund but what the minister is advocating for is funding, that can cure but again the minister talks of ring-fencing, which maybe a bit more problematic; we can just talk about funding instead of a fund.

MR BIYIKA: Madam Chairperson, in the current Bill, we talked about climate change financing. If this is going to be problematic, then we can leave it as it is drafted currently because it talks about climate change financing.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I know what you want but it is not feasible in this law. Let us revert to the text of the law as it came then maybe later, we can help the minister find money. Otherwise, we cannot create this authority here. Okay, honourable members, I put the question that clause 20 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause, agreed to.

The Title

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the Title do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Beatrice Anywar): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)


REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Beatrice Anywar): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The National Climate Change Bill, 2020” and has passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Beatrice Anywar): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE NATIONAL CLIMATE CHANGE BILL, 2020

THE SPEAKER: Minister? - [Mr Biyika rose_] No. Please, let the minister move for a third reading.

5.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Beatrice Anywar): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The National Climate Change Bill, 2020” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, honourable chairperson, you had something - but you did not give us notice about your recommittal.

5.28
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON CLIMATE CHANGE (Mr Lawrence Biyika): Madam Speaker, under Rule 137, I would like to recommit clause 9(2): Instead of two years, we make it five years. That is the only recommittal. It will now read as follows:

“9(2) The amount of greenhouse gas emissions and the removal of greenhouse gases for a period shall be determined every five years, in accordance with the internationally accepted reporting practice under the Convention and its protocols and agreements”. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: What is the rationale for that recommittal?

MR BIYIKA: This is the internationally accepted reporting procedure. If we make it every two years, it will still bring the issue of the work being very cumbersome to report every two years. Otherwise, there is a lot of work in measurement of verification and reporting.

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from Members.

5.30
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the recommittal by the chairperson but let him direct us to that instrument so that we can satisfy ourselves that it is actually five and not two years. Which international protocol states “five” years, rather than “two” years?

THE SPEAKER: By the way, if the international protocol says two years, you cannot change it. Those are the questions I asked the other day: have we made any reservation? If it is two years in the convention, we cannot change it; you cannot amend a convention.

MR BIYIKA: Madam Speaker, under the convention and protocols in the agreement, we are supposed to report every five years. Under the convention, we are supposed to report every five years and it is –

THE SPEAKER: To the international body?

MR BIYIKA: At national level, we can leave it in two years.

THE SPEAKER: You cannot alter the convention. 

MR BIYIKA: Okay. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the National Climate Change Bill be read for a third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE NATIONAL CLIMATE CHANGE ACT, 2021”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passes. (Applause) 

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, I am more delighted for the passing of this Bill. I would like to thank you, in a most sincere way, for having come a long way with this Bill.

I remember, Madam Speaker, when I approached you to create the Committee on Climate Change in the Parliament of Uganda. You were more than ready to support it and it was created. I thank the committee at that time, which created the Committee on Climate Change. Thereafter, we had to process the Bill that will move us forward. 

Madam Speaker, you are the champion of this. You have seen it go through.  I really want to thank you. We look forward to making this Bill and more so, the effect of climate change adaptation and mitigation, as undertaken by this country, be fully addressed to save the mother country, Uganda.

I would like to thank the Chairperson of the Committee on Climate Change and all the committee members. I would like to thank the technical team that has made this Bill come and see this day.

I would like to thank you, honourable members of Parliament, for processing this Bill that was much needed yesterday. I look forward to seeing a positive change in how we handle environmental issues in this country. This should also send a signal to all those who thought they could do any degradation or defiling our environment without laws in place. Today, as a country, we have put in place this law. 

As the Government, we are very appreciative. We make commitments. It has a global connection and puts us in a position of talking with authority that yes, we are committed to encountering the effect of climate change.

Madam Speaker, once again, I would like to thank you. God bless you all. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR BIYIKA: Madam Speaker, first of all, I want to thank you, in a particular way, for standing for climate change in the country and for all the support you gave, to see that we reach this level.

Climate change is a very serious problem affecting the economy of Uganda and the rest of the world - we see that the economy of Uganda is climate change-dependent. If we do not manage climate change in the country, our economy can collapse. This is a very important milestone in ensuring that our economy is healthy, so that we can have a resilient economy, cities, infrastructure, and agricultural practices that can withstand the impact of climate change.

Our priority as a country, being to promote energy access, transport and industrialisation heavily depends on the management of climate change. If we do not address climate change challenges, these economies cannot support us.

I want to thank you, in a particular way. I want to thank members and the Honourable minister. I want to also thank the development partners, who, through the Forum of Climate Change, ensured that we made wide consultation. There are many civil society organisations that also made input to this like the Youth Go Green, Parliamentary Forum on Climate Change and Partners for Resilience. 

Other development partners that came in through the forum included the UN Food and Agricultural Organisation (FAO), Code 8, GIZ and Care International. We want to thank you, for enabling the consultation over this Bill through the forum very successfully.

I want to thank you and we appeal that the regulations for this Bill should be developed quickly so that we can implement our policy, to address climate change in the country. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Can I also thank the minister for the enthusiasm, the committee for the hard work and of course, the Members of Parliament? You know, when we go to these international meetings, and your country has not domesticated, you sit there as if you are not listening but you know other countries are reporting and you are not saying anything.

Finally, we are here. However, let us now support the implementation. I just want to assure the minister that Parliament will continue to support efforts to mitigate climate change and improve our environment. Thank you very much. (Applause) Let us go to item seven.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE SEXUAL OFFENCES BILL, 2019

THE PEAKER: He is not here? Is the chairperson of the Committee on Trade here? There is an item which has been on the Order Paper for a long time. Can we go to item 11? Is item 10 yours? Okay it is item 10.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY ON THE FAILURE BY KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (KCCA) TO ADHERE TO THE BUY UGANDA, BUILD UGANDA POLICY IN THE PROCUREMENT OF BUSES FROM INDIA

5.37
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON TRADE, TOURISM AND INDUSTRY (Mr Lawrence Mwangusho):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to present a report of the Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry, on the failure to adhere to the “Buy Uganda Build Uganda” policy in the procurement of buses from India by KCCA.

Madam Speaker, this report was sent to our committee on Wednesday, 19 February 2020. This was after Hon. Alex Ruhunda, Member for Fort Portal Municipality, raised a matter of national importance over plans by Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) to procure about 1,000 buses from India, and disregarding the policy of “Buy Uganda, Build Uganda” (BUBU). 

Madam Speaker, the issues raised by Hon. Ruhunda, were concerned that KCCA was planning to procure 1,000 buses from Ashok Leyland in India, which undermines local investors like Metu Zhongtong Bus Co. Limited, which was commissioned by the President, on 9 March 20I9. And a demonstration was made to him on how the buses were fabricated, has the capacity to assemble 50 buses per day, using locally available raw materials, with importation of a few items like the engine, chassis and gearbox. 

It is very important for the local industry to participate in the project of city buses which is managed by KCCA, in order to build capacity for our country's rapid industrialisation. KCCA is buying a complete bus, implying that all the parts put together to make a bus are from foreign investors. 

Terms of reference

The Committee was guided by the following terms of reference, arising out of the matter raised by Hon. Alex Ruhunda:

    1. To establish whether Kampala Capital City Authority is procuring buses from India.
    2. To ascertain the capacity of Metu Zhongtong to manufacture buses for the local market.
    3. To examine any other matters incidental, thereto.

The methodology 

Madam Speaker, In pursuit of the objectives above, the committee employed the following methodology-

THE SPEAKER: They can read that one. You can leave that.

MR MWANGUSHO: I can go to the recommendation and visit.

The committee visited Ms Metu Zhongtong bus company limited factory in Namanve, Kampala to understand and verify the capacity of the company.

Findings and Observations

Procurement of 1,000 buses from India by KCCA: 

The committee was informed that KCCA is not procuring any buses from India as is being reported in the media rather, KCCA is providing a platform for operation of the transport industry in the city. It is important to note that the idea of any potential investor in the provision of city bus service is to alleviate traffic congestion is welcome. 

The committee was further informed that due to the inefficient public transport system comprising private vehicles, mini-buses, buses, taxis and motorcycles, competing for passengers in a free market, KCCA and Ministry of Works and Transport were approached by Tondeka Metro Company Limited and Ashok Leyland, with a proposal to operate 980 city buses in the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area. Subsequently, an additional 2,000 buses, in phase two and 3,000 buses in phase three would be sourced locally from Kiira Motors Company.

Tondeka Metro Company Limited

The committee interacted with Tondeka Metro Company Ltd, a local firm which partnered with Ashok Leyland of the Hinduja Group of India. Through the partnership, they want to provide buses to curtail traffic congestion in the city. Ashok Leyland has a proven record of commercial transport interventions in Senegal, Nigeria and Ghana.

The committee was informed that a pre-feasibility study was conducted by Ashok Leyland and established that, in order to have an efficient and reliable public transport within the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area, a tripartite approach was necessary, that is; quality of service, fares and frequency. 

The project intends to use information technology at the core of its operations with a cashless ticketing system, develop terminals, depots, parks, bus stops and build local capacity to assemble the buses. The buses would allow affordable transportation within and outside the city, and the collections would be dedicated towards payment of the loan used to purchase the buses. 

The committee was further informed that Ashok Leyland submitted the report of its findings to the Indian Ministry of Commerce, through the National Export Insurance Agency, with a request for funding to address the traffic congestion problem in Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area.

The Indian Ministry of Commerce referred the project to Exim Bank of India for further consideration. Through Ashok Leyland, Exim Bank released a term sheet to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development of Uganda. The committee was further informed that Ashok Leyland, through Exim Bank, required a letter of comfort from Uganda's Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

However, the committee established that the Ministry of Finance has so far not released a letter of comfort to Exim Bank of India. The letter of comfort that intends to be given does not have any financial implications.

The committee was informed that Uganda Development Corporation is conducting a feasibility study on the project.

The committee interacted with the Lord Mayor of Kampala City, Hon. Erias Lukwago, who said that he has not interacted directly with Tondeka Metro Company Ltd, apart from hearing about their plans from the media. He cited a mismatch between Tondeka Bus Project and the Kampala Bus Rapid Transit Project, under the Ministry of Works and Transport.

Observations

There is lack of a plan for dealing with the various transport operators in the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area (GKMA) like private vehicles, mini-buses, buses, taxis and motorcycles, which compete for passengers in the free market. This has made the traffic congestion worse.

There is inadequate internal communication within KCCA. This is because the political head who is the Lord Mayor has not been directly involved and is not aware of what is happening besides reading about the issues in the media.

Committee recommendations

In managing the transport system capacity in the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area, KCCA should have a well laid out plan on how to deal with the various transport operators such as private vehicles, mini-buses, buses, taxis and motorcycles, which compete for passengers in a free market.

The committee also recommends that KCCA officials involved in this project be transparent and bring the Lord Mayor on board.

Capacity of Metu Zhongtong Bus Company Limited

The committee visited Metu Zhongtong Bus Company Limited’s plant in Kampala Industrial and Business Park, Namanve. We established that Metu is an automobile manufacturer, which has been in existence for over four years. It is able and ready to manufacture buses. 

Currently, Metu manufactures assorted buses, coaches and commercial vehicles such as city buses, staff buses and special purpose buses, among others. Some of the buses manufactured by Metu are Larem Bus Services of Gulu and Perfect Coach, which are being operated in Uganda.

The committee found out that these buses are manufactured using locally made materials covering about 60 per cent of the vehicle’s body with only a few parts being imported like the gearbox, engine and chassis.

At the time of the committee’s visit to the project site, works were ongoing. The factory floor area is estimated at 6,000 square meters, adequate enough for mass production of buses, with a 300 bus capacity bonded warehouse for parking the completed manufactured buses as seen in the pictures that have been uploaded on the parliamentary website.

Those are some of the pictures showing the structures and process of manufacturing.

During a meeting with Metu Zhongtong, the committee was informed that the company requires financial support so as to boost its capacity to manufacture buses for mass transportation and bid for large contracts when they arise.

Committee observations

There is lack of a regulatory framework to guide local manufacturers on the standards to be met to enable them benefit from the Buy Uganda, Build Uganda policy.

Metu Zhongtong does not have the financial capacity to manufacture a large number of buses for mass transportation.

The committee observed that despite the fact that the National Industrial Policy of 2008 emphasises the need to develop domestic resource-based industries and promotion of competitive industries that use locally produced materials, this has not been possible because most of the industries in Uganda still lack capacity. 

In addition, most of the industries have opted for foreign investors due to the common bias on the locally manufactured products.

Metu Zhongtong has not invested in advertising and marketing, both locally and regionally, so as to boost market for its buses.

Plans to decongest the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area need the involvement of all stakeholders like Local Governments, Kampala Capital City Authority and Ministry of Works.

The committee recommendations

In line with the Buy Uganda, Build Uganda policy, Government, through the relevant implementing agency, should give priority to local manufacturers of buses like Metu Zhongtong when purchasing buses to decongest the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area.

Metu Zhongtong should enter into partnerships with financially-sound private enterprises or the Government with the aim of increasing its capital base in order to boost its production capacity to be able to compete for large procurement contracts.

Government should put in place a regulatory framework to guide local manufacturers on standards to be met for proper implementation of the Buy Uganda Build Uganda policy, and provide incentives to them to boost local capacity including financing options.

Local industries like Metu that have got a lot of potential to compete favourably both in the local and foreign market, should invest more resources in advertising and marketing in order to be well placed on the market worldwide.

A Greater Kampala Transportation Commission should be formed and housed at the Ministry of Works and Transport, with representatives from KCCA, Local Governments in the GKMA, Ministry of Local Government and the Ministry of Works and Transport.

Other related matters like operations of Pioneer Easy Bus Company

The committee was informed that in 2009, Pioneer Bus Company competed with five other companies and emerged the best in an effort to decongest the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area using mass transport.

However, in 2011 a parliamentary committee recommended that a halt be put on their contract, but Pioneer was later recalled and resumed work in 2012; but KCCA did not give them ample routing, which has hindered their operations. They have 40 buses operating and 50 grounded.

The committee recommends that Government through the existing legal regime such as the Traffic and Road Safety Act should make regulations that aid implementation of the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area decongestion plan. This should include allocation of a bus lane to make public transport meaningful and competitive.

Conclusion

Although there is need to decongest the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area, the committee established that Kampala Capital City Authority is not procuring buses from India; rather, it is a proposal from Tondeka/Ashok Leyland. The proposal was presented to the Ministry of Works and Transport after a pre-feasibility study was done by the two partners.

While the BUBU policy exists alongside local content sentiments, there is need for the local industries and manufacturers to position themselves to take advantage of the policy.

There should be deliberate efforts to implement the BUBU policy. There is also need for an enforcement mechanism for the respective policy.

The committee further established the need for all stakeholders to be involved in plans to decongest the city, the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and members of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry. Honourable members, the report has been signed by the necessary minimum number of members. The findings are that there was no procurement. Our interest is how to resolve the issue of congestion of the greater Kampala. Do members have comments? 

MR MANGUSHO: I would like to lay the report and the minutes of the committee meetings. 

5.59 
MR CHARLES NGABIRANO (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and the committee for the report. 

I have been prompted to make a contribution because yesterday, I asked the Minister of Finance about the investment policy in this country in terms of investor identification, putting up products that are ready for value addition and investment, like our crops such as coffee, sugarcane, the iron ore and all the things that we have. 

It seems we are losing direction in terms of identifying investors and we are just a country of deals. This also originated from our visit, as the Budget Committee, to some industries in Namanve on several projects. 

For example, we were told that Uganda is going to procure nine million radios which were being made in Namanve. However, when we visited that factory, Madam Speaker, they rushed to Kikubo and bought five radios. We found them assembling them and we could not find any other radio. 

If you go to all these industries that we claim to get, first of all, they are not manufacturers. The chairman’s report also talks of manufacturing but that company is not manufacturing, but simply assembling. The buses are not even manufactured there but are being assembled.

We went to a transformer company in Namanve; we found that they were just collecting transformers all over the place and refurbishing them. The President has also been going around telling us that we have a transformer manufacturing company but it is not there.

Therefore, in terms of industrial development in this country, we need a serious revolution because what is being done is that people are just coming with deals. Where they feel there is a gap, they come with a deal. This was a deal because they heard that Kampala is problematic with transport so they just came to look for a deal and were fighting for BUBU but there is nothing on ground. That is my first point on investment and industrialisation. 

To develop an efficient system, we should start with the plans. We are lucky that the minister has come out; but KCCA should have a grand plan of the metropolitan transport system with clear specifications so that everybody coming in the system complies with the available specifications. 

Otherwise, what is happening is that people just make guesses, like those people of the pioneer buses. They bought minibuses; if you have sat in them, you will notice that it is a minibus and it is not like that of Tanzania or Rwanda. It is a small bus with a sitting capacity of 30 seats. 

Therefore, it was not brought in accordance with the specifications of the city council but people just came, got a deal and dumped the buses here. 

We should start from the planning phase; put up specifications. We need very many buses so we need to create lanes and put up that plan for implementation so that we get investors and manufacturers feeding into that. 

Otherwise, Madam Speaker, as the population increases, joblessness is also increasing. We have no proper policy in all these manufacturing and investor identification; even identifying the raw materials in terms of minerals or crops, which should be done for investors so that we can go outside and lobby. Everything is in a mess and this is the time that we should rectify all this. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I agree with Hon. Ngabirano. We have been complaining of sugar and the lack of value addition for almost seven years but no one is listening.   

6.02 
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to make a contribution. I would also like to thank the chairperson and the committee for their good report and time in compiling that report. 

The committee raises very pertinent issues but I think the bigger problem we have in this country is that we make ad hoc decisions all the time. We do not invest in planning, like Hon. Ngabirano has said. You find that people just wake up one morning; once they identify a deal somewhere, the group just conspires and makes an ad hoc decision. 

The problem we face in this country is one we cannot solve. Traffic has become a problem. I remember when we were dealing with the Traffic and Road Safety Act, the minister pressed us to pass this Bill very fast so that they could fix the traffic problems in Kampala and Uganda at large. 

In the law, there is a provision that every transport operator must belong to a SACCO. It is now more than two years since this Parliament passed that Act and the President even assented to it. Ask the Ministry of Works and Transport what has happened and why they have failed to reorganise this, since they said they wanted the law to help them reorganise the sector. We passed the law but there is no taxi or transport committed vehicle here that belongs to any SACCO. This is where there is a problem. 

In Kenya, every transport vehicle belongs to a SACCO and is very well regulated. They have got fixed routes, are well managed and well regulated, unlike the chaos we have in Kampala here. 

Even at Kampala City Council level, I think there is a phobia for taking critical decisions that can help the country. Madam Speaker, it is only Kampala in the East African Region where we have failed to regulate transport, especially these boda bodas. 

If you go to Kisumu, you will find that boda bodas are well regulated. The same applies to Nairobi and Kigali. In Dar-es-Salaam, boda bodas do not enter the central business district. However, in Uganda, they claim that they are creating jobs; lack of jobs is not a problem for Uganda only. It will not stop Tanzania from attaining middle-income status by removing the boda bodas from the city. 

The reason we can never attain middle-income status is because of the time we lose in traffic jam. I stay in Kira and if I leave at 7.00 p.m., I will reach Kira at 10.00 p.m. I never watch the news because by the time I reach home, it is over. That is how much time we lose. It is a big cost to the country but nobody seems to be bothered. 

I only pray that since the elections are over and nobody is looking for votes, we use this opportunity to fix these problems head-on. 

Madam Speaker, I know the Minister for Kampala is here and it can be painful but for once, let us help this country and solve the problem. We are losing a lot of time in traffic jam. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: I think there are a lot of jokers in these ministries.  

6.06
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. I saw the ingenuity in trying to respond to the issue, as it had been raised. 

What we see is a symptom of a bigger problem. To start with, the President was dragged into launching that company which they said was manufacturing buses in Uganda. The President had to reschedule his activities and attend to that. Of course, they were not manufacturing but assembling.

I appreciate how Government has been interchangeably using words: “cooperatives” for Sacco, “manufacturing” for assembling as we have seen in this report. However, the meaning and intention is different.

Madam Speaker, you will realise that the chairperson, in a subtle way, tried to educate us about how a letter of comfort has no financial liability; that these people were just asking for a letter of comfort, which did not have any liability. There is no letter of comfort, which has no financial liability because it is acted on. If it had no financial liability, then there would be no reason why they would be asking for it.

The point in issue was whether there was a local manufacturing company, which was being denied a chance to participate in this process. I want to say that we need to do further investigation into how this matter came about. I remember we had Pioneer Easy Bus Company - they used to operate but if you recall, they were all frustrated and all buses were parked in Namboole. However, if you took a walk around City Square or bus centres, you will realise that there are a number of people who are fighting to get to these buses.

I want to advise the Minister of Kampala that when we were growing up, we heard of people’s transport - I do not know where you were at that time. At least we knew that those bus companies provided transport service to our people.

I want to conclude by inviting the minister to invite competent people. Let them do a feasibility study, let them present something on which you will base to seek for approval from the powers that be, other than wanting to see opportunity - You will receive another company which will not have the capacity to do anything.

Finally, the routing - I remember they created new routes for the buses and those coming from the other side would end in Nateete. That also took a lot of time even after KCCA guaranteed. There is a certain gentleman, the owner of Nateete Park called Mr Ntale, who had to be paid a lot of money for guaranteeing and then failing to give him a route. He took Government to court and they paid him over Shs 4 billion as compensation for loss of business.

Therefore, this ad hoc manner in which we are running Government - I think as my colleague has said, politicking is over, we shall paralyze the country. Let us start work. I beg to submit.

6.10
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for the good report. I would like to insist on the same thing I said last time; some of these ministers should go to Akokoro, visit Obote’s grave and ask him how he was doing these things.

Madam Speaker, I qualified as a grade three professional teacher in 1992 and started teaching. However, before that time, we used to come to Kampala during Obote II regime while we were in secondary school and there were buses; People’s Buses, UTC and no school child would take a taxi in Kampala. It was free of charge, including for soldiers and nurses. These buses were moving in the whole of Kampala and there was no corruption.

Madam Speaker, we have travelled worldwide and the UK does not have major economic activities but they base on transport and fines to get money. When you go to the UK, you have to buy a card, load money on it, slot it in the bus and enter. However, these companies they are talking about - I even thank them for pulling out because what roads do we have in Kampala?

Madam Speaker, along Salama Road where I come from, there are potholes where you can put a dead elephant and cover it with soil and it will fit in there. Those days, people used to live around Makindye, now they are going as far as Lukuli - You must work on the roads. However, even where they are working on the roads, a simple road of just two to three kilometres is taking KCCA three years to construct.

Madam Speaker, Hon. Mwiru has just talked about Pioneer Buses. They came with a good spirit but the moment KCCA failed to work with the political wing, all problems continued growing day by day. That is why the chairperson is telling you that the Lord Mayor was not informed. At one time, I told the Minister of Kampala, Hon. Beti Kamya, that if you feel you do not want to work with the Lord Mayor, write to him officially that “we shall have these kinds of meetings” and all that.

The man is seated in his office but with no communication from the ministers! They are also playing a political role like the Mayor but the people of Kampala elected the Mayor. There must be a spirit coming back in this country.

Madam Speaker, as we talk, Kampala has the oldest taxi vehicles. I was in Makindye, I worked in Military Police for 10 years, you could find taxi owners driving brand new vehicles and by 10 a.m., they have their money, give them to other drivers, and start enjoying their lives.

Today, there is no taxi in Kampala that one can sit in comfortably and enjoy himself. They are very old and dilapidated because the system has hit everybody. However, they are still increasing money on fuel without looking at the problems.

We had UTODA; they know how it went away. It did some organisation and indeed, things were moving but now it is not there. There is nobody who would wish - We need trains in Kampala. I studied from Mugwanya Preparatory School, Kabojja. People going to Buddo, Kitemu and Nsangi were using a train as well as those going to Kireka. However, the city is congested now. 

Ask Hon. Amongi whether she has ever brought any programme on boda bodas. They can even knock the Speaker’s vehicle or even Ssewungu. They are spoiling people’s vehicles but they are enjoying themselves with no system. Now you hear that we have another contractor who wants to bring in buses.

Let me end by saying that this country has no capacity to manufacture buses. Even the vehicles they say they are manufacturing - When they take them to Kyankwanzi, they use a car carrier to take them there because they cannot drive those cars by themselves. How do you take a vehicle to be showcased but you take it using a car carrier yet it is a new vehicle? This means it cannot perform or move. 

Kampala must change. There is no order at all, Madam Speaker. As we talk, if you are a pedestrian, you cannot cross the road. You just have to hold your Rosary like Ssewungu, pray to God, look left and right, then run. That is what was in Kenya but it has changed. Let us look at Rwanda; it has improved transport in Kigali. They have good transport and there are Government vehicles. Kenya and Tanzania have the same. In Uganda, we are in speculation! Everybody is saying, “Steady progress” when we are actually moving backwards.

I pray that we revisit what Obote and Amin left behind. All the parking areas where these buses were stopping were sold out and that is another problem. People have constructed malls without looking at the core values of people’s transport.

A Government transport facility can be cheaper than anybody’s transport but even those who are doing business can enjoy as long as there is good order.

Therefore, honourable minister, since he was your mentor, go to Akokoro, spend some nights praying and then you will improve Kampala as God wishes. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.16
MR VICENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank colleagues for the report. It is disturbing that we always see projects happen, fail and yet we cannot learn from them.

We were here when Pioneer Buses was beginning, there was a lot of talk, and we were excited as Ugandans that now at least we heave easy transport but things have failed and we have not learnt from that.

I do not know whether the committee members undertook to review what happened to the Pioneer Bus Service because it is not operational. 

First of all, the buses themselves are not commensurate to the standards but another issue I would like to raise-we talk of manufacturing and yet we do not undertake to process locally available material into products that can make these final products.

For example, the country has iron ore deposits but have we undertaken to process iron ore into finished products that we can use for manufacturing machinery?

Before we go not saying whether Ugandans can take advantage of manufacturing and supplying products vehicles, Government needs to come in and support the industry by providing, for example, support to processing local material like iron ore, steel and yet we say we can manufacture.
We have industrial parks which have been started- it is a very good initiative and we appreciate Government for that but what is going on there is assembling.

We have industrial parks in all over, in Mbale and some other places but they are not buying local material to process into finished products.

I think Government needs to take interest in this and support the industrial sector so that Ugandans can benefit. Even the local people can supply local material, thank you.

6.18
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker and the committee for the report. We are debating a report presented to this House as a result of a petition presented on Wednesday 19th February, 2020 to the effect that Kampala City Council Authority was proposing to buy 1,000 buses from Ashok Leyland rather than our own buses being manufactured here, the Metu Zhongtong.

Members have pronounced themselves on this - I do not want to use a hard word - misinformation. We have seen how this country has been taken for a ride; tagging the assemblies under manufacturing.

I remember when the President took power in 1986, he was wondering how European countries were competing to go to the moon and Africans were suffering from jiggers but worse that we could not produce safety pins. 
The Leader of Government Business is not here but at least can remind the President that after 36 years, we are importing toothpicks having faired on the safety pins to remove jiggers, we are now importing tooth picks. This means that there is no way you can talk about manufacturing buses here.

The petition itself must have been misconceived because where are the buses. What was being said is that we are failing to have buses manufactured here, which are using local input but which spare parts are we manufacturing here in Uganda?

Right from the rims, tyres, even the busy rails as you enter, handle in the bus. What are we producing here? Ministers, please stop this position of embarrassment.

When the President commissioned these buses on the 9th March, which other bus has been produced? They were convincing the President that they had the capacity to produce 50 buses per day. And he ran very first to commission this.

You Cabinet ministers, there is a way you make up stories and the President unfortunately believes them. This country must move away from wishful thinking to being actively involved in the emancipation of the people.

I had expected my friend Hon. Betty Kamya, once she entered Kampala City Council Authority, to come up with robust proposals she used to enunciate while she was a backbencher.  I do not know what has happened to her. She is here; can she come up with any proposals now to say, “Members, here is the way forward”. I think we need to recast ourselves as a country.

We need a comprehensive transport system in Kampala Metropolitan, we need to decongest the city. There is no doubt about that; but we need a working transport system within the city to begin with before talking about the country.

The other time when we talked about the Standard Gauge Railway, whereas Kenya, Tanzania and other countries have moved along with it, the Standard Gauge Railway was commissioned at Munyonyo in 2011, it has remained there to date.

How do you commission a standard gauge railway in a resort hotel? And each time we find this reason, we put that reason. The moment we take this country for granted I do not see us moving forward.

I urge Government that we look at this report seriously. There is need to involve all stakeholders irrespective of the political affiliation, because once you have elected leaders those are the leaders you have to work with. I am glad that the former wars at the KCCA have now subsided but you should move very fast to decongest the city rather than keeping us hoping against hope. Thank you.

6.25
MR LAWRENCE BIYIKA (NRM,	Ora County, Zombo): Madam Speaker, I thank the chairperson of the committee for this report. Any city that is not safe for children is not safe for anyone. If you look at Kampala City, you cannot leave your children to move alone because it is not very safe.

Look at how pregnant women are surviving to cross the road in Kampala, the disabled people how they are suffering crossing the road in Kampala or even going somewhere to buy something, the place is totally congested.

We would say that we have got good news that we are now going to make our buses so that we decongest the city. But even before we think of that, KCCA has a lot of work to do, right from the planning level. We have a whole National Planning Authority and the KCCA planning department; we really need to plan our city. 

Every day, I move around, I find at least one road being dug up and, in some areas, one may think it is a garden. This road was just done about three or five months ago but they are digging it up again. 

Why don’t we plan to create utility corridors, so that when we say, “Now, we are going to tarmac the road to Kisugu” we lay the electric lines, put the water ways and everything underground, so that we do not dig again when a telecommunications company wants to put a line there. Let us think along that line. In that way, we shall decongest.

There is the issue of allocating business areas in a crowded place. For example, a lot of printing work goes on along Nasser Road. Why do we need to put printing work around Nasser Road in the centre of the city? Why don’t we take it somewhere, so that anybody who wants to do some printing work will know that he or she should go there? Why don’t we put all the banks in one place?

I have seen some countries where they have segmented this; where if you need banking services, you go to the west of the city. If you need electronics, you go to the east of the city. You do not mix but here, you get someone selling vegetables, together with phones nearby and everything is crowded. Why don’t we plan along that line in order to decongest the city?

Coming to waste management, Kampala can generate 6.5 megawatts of electricity from waste but up to now, there is no investment. We have signed so many documents to turn waste into energy yet we are just dumping and our dumping sites are not actually recommended disposal sites. They are just dumping sites and are affecting water for the people who are surviving in those low-cost areas. They are drinking from the streams around those areas.

I like the creativity of people in Katwe. This kind of creativity and innovation should be nurtured, so that one day, we can make our own but we are leaving it to die like that. It is very important that we explore some of these, so that we can have a better planned city. I have just presented a Bill here, which is talking about smart, green, resilient and low carbon cities. KCCA should be thinking along that line. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can I invite the minister, if she has something to say?

6.29
THE MINISTER OF KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY (Ms Betty Amongi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report and indicate that from the beginning, the petition was brought in the context that Metu Zhongtong was probably not being considered because it is a local company. It is good the committee has brought out the actual picture.

I want to give information that last year, we signed an MOU with Metu Zhongtong because they convinced the President and us, at the city hall that they have capacity to supply us over 1,000 buses in the city and we should give those routes. We signed an MOU last year but it has lapsed and they have not yet fulfilled it.

Sometimes, most people, when probably they have not managed to undertake what they ought to do at the Executive branch, come here. It is important that this committee and many times Parliament gets to the root of the problem.

Many people talked about Pioneer Bus Services. I have also been meeting Pioneer Bus Company. I gave them my commitment but there are certain things in the MOU, which they have also not fulfilled. That is why their buses still remain at Namboole.

On the general issues, where Members are questioning whether we have plans, I want to inform the House that when I came into office and for my friend, Hon. Ssekikubo, do not be disappointed - I presented to Cabinet the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Economic Strategy, which deals with all the sectors in the city because the city runs as itself. All the sectors are in the city - from roads to health, education, gender, manufacturing and all that. 

I presented a comprehensive plan, which Cabinet approved. When Cabinet approved the plan, we started costing it and developing programmes with the National Planning Authority and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

I am happy to notify Parliament, Madam Speaker, that this plan has been approved at the financing level, where the World Bank has been invited by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to examine the financing cooperation with Government. 

They have already done pre-visits and in that, they have chosen the key issue of transportation. Under transportation, we are looking at the Rapid Bus Transit System. We are looking at the trains and in the long run, we will be looking at the metro system. We are going to begin also with other partners like Japan International Cooperation Agency, which has picked the physical planning aspect within the plan because we cannot plan Kampala alone.

An honourable member said that he lives in Kira. In most cases, if we only do roads in Kampala and do not have good connectivity outside the city, then the planning is not proper. So, the plan that Cabinet has approved talks about connectivity in the Greater Kampala, meaning it will cover the four districts surrounding Kampala, the city of Kampala, Mukono, Wakiso and Mpigi.

This will be a robust plan to enhance connectivity. It is also dealing with expansion of the roads in the context of bus lanes, cycling lanes and pedestrian lanes. Because most members have dealt with transport, I do not want to go to the other issues in the plan.

We, of course, understand the members’ concern on the issue of potholes and all that. However, the problem with most of the roads in Kampala is that they have already outlived their lifespan. No amount of patching on some of these roads – for those who are engineers – will ever help. So, we have also given a robust plan. 

Good enough, His Excellency, the President has approved the financing modality for the city, from which, as a city, we are supposed to develop a pre-financing modality; where contractors will be encouraged to sign a framework contract with us and the financing will come in the Budget. They will be paid on a quarterly basis.

So, His Excellency has approved this because usually, we do financing for construction on the spot but this time, we have been permitted to get contractors to do pre-financing. We are now developing the plan for pre-financing, to be approved by Cabinet.

Once that is done, then all the plans related to the Greater Kampala Economic Strategy on Transport will be implemented. In this plan, we also have the plan for the boda boda free zones in the central business district. 

We launched the boda boda free zones and wanted to start implementation immediately, as we were opening up. However, Madam Speaker, when we tried to implement that, most of these people, including the boda boda cyclists and taxi drivers, came to your office when we started the routing.

When we discussed in our inter-ministerial committee, we realised that people were coming out of COVID-19 and the economy was still very fragile. Therefore, we decided to allow them to operate until February.

However, when we came out of campaigns, the inter-ministerial committee again reviewed it and we agreed to do that after the swearing-in of His Excellency and Parliament. Then, we shall go into the robust implementation of the boda boda free zone. 

Madam Speaker, the plan for the boda boda free zone and that of the city bus is available. That money was approved by Parliament. We are grateful to African Development Bank (ADB) for purchasing the pilot buses. That approval has both road construction for expansion of the lane - In fact, we are already contracting for the roads. In the second phase, we shall contract for the buses.

Again, for the Metu Zhongtong’s case, he had indicated that he would be able to make the buses, under the city bus project. However, as the committee has assessed, their capacity might not meet the credential and specification. Madam Speaker, I wrote to them and I constituted a technical team to look at the specification of the buses that they can manufacture. However, up to now, they have not given us the specification.

The only local company that has given us specification under the project is Kiira Motors Company Limited. Therefore, we are still waiting for Metu Zhongtong to see if they can meet the criteria of buses we want to start.

I would like to indicate that the transport master plan for the city is there but the implementation lacked financing. However, we are now moving forward with the financing. I am very certain that with the financing from the World Bank, which has been pledged - and with the guidance of His Excellency, the President on pre- financing, we shall move forward to undertake this critical area, which supports our economy. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to release our Muslim brethren to go and break the Sawm. Let me thank the honourable members for the work done today. The House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.39 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 28 April 2021 at 2.00 p.m.) 


