PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTSECOND SESSION - THIRD MEETINGTHURSDAY , 6 APRIL 2023PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA7893Thursday, 6 April 2023However, I think we shall need to redefine “African Wear” because I have seen people coming here dressed up unbecomingly and they say, “It is a Kitenge;  it is African”. Even “African” must meet the standards of this House. Also, the ladies sometimes - You know how you dress. (Laughter) We will see how best we can review that.Honourable colleagues, I thank you for coming. Please, let us keep up the spirit of dedicating our House to the Lord. Hon. Obua was made an honorary Canon. (Laughter) He moves with “swag” around the House. Some other colleagues also - Let us support them. I committed, on your behalf, that we shall continue supporting each other. Honourable colleagues, I have also seen very disturbing pictures on social media of youth from Karamoja who were starving – according to media reports – within the cells in Acholi. The pictures are really disturbing. I shared them with the Prime Minister this morning and she can be reminded when she comes to handle issues during Prime Minister’s Time. It is one of the issues I would want her - whoever is responsible for making people reach that stage should be held accountable. The pictures I saw were unbelievable; human beings looking like skeletons due to starvation.I know how we treat our prisoners; they are fed. We appropriate money and prisons have the largest farms. They feed their people very well; so, it should not reach that level. If it necessitates a statement in future, it will be IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentSECOND SESSION - 24TH SITTING - THIRD MEETINGParliament met at 2.01 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable colleagues. I welcome you to today’s sitting. I want to appreciate you for coming in large numbers yesterday to welcome His Grace Stephen Kazimba Mugalu, the Archbishop of the Church of Uganda. I was really glad to see that we had a cosmopolitan attendance; not only the Anglicans but also the Muslims led by Hajji Iddi, as well as the Catholics. This is what Parliament is all about. However, we could do better next time.Honourable colleagues, if you know that you are not properly dressed, find your way out without the matter - You can just check yourself. (Laughter) I do not want points of order and procedure to be raised, you know yourselves. I have already scanned one or two. Please, do the necessary. Honourable member, do not be comfortable. Just move out and put on a tie. (Laughter) No, he has moved out. Honourable member, you are putting on a safari suit, which is allowed, only that your shirt is very open.7894 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.1 FOR FY 2022/2023 COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR [The Deputy Speaker]done. The Prime Minister will touch on that issue. I do not want to open it up for debate when I have just briefed her. She will say something about it when she comes. Once she says something, I can open it up a little for some comments. The issue was first sent to me by Hon. Faith Nakut; thank you for sharing.Honourable colleagues, I will handle all matters of national importance under Prime Minister’s Time because I want us to go to the substantive items on the Order Paper. When the Prime Minister comes, we shall handle matters of national importance. (Mr Ssewungu rose_) I hope you do not open up that issue. 2.07MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): No, Mr Speaker. I thank you for your communication but I am basing on the prayers we had yesterday with Archbishop Kazimba. There is a story making rounds, from Itojo – Itojo is in the constituency of one of the Members here - where a reverend went to have prayers -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Itojo is in Ntungamo.MR SSEWUNGU: It is in Ntungamo District. This reverend was praying for Gen. Museveni to meet the promises that he made to his people. Indeed, Mr Speaker, even in the other churches, we do the same. However, this person was arrested – and he has a church where people have to pray on Easter. We would like the Ministry of Internal Affairs to tell us when praying became criminal in this country. Fortunately, the Attorney-General is here. This reverend has been remanded and I do not want to get into sub judice but it is unfair. His church is not going to have a reverend. However, the Archbishop was here – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, anyone with such issues, I will give you a chance during the Prime Minister’s Time so that they are answered.2.09MR ABDALLAH KIWANUKA (NUP, Mukono County North, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I need to add my voice in thanking those who joined us in welcoming the Archbishop. Since I joined this House, even during the recent Bill that we passed, which is before the President, there are some religious leaders who have never appeared here. Even during the dinner that you prepared for us - they are always absent and these are the Muslim leaders both from Old Kampala and Kibuli.I call upon you, Mr Speaker, to take note of the Muslim leaders in this country. Why are they shying away from Parliament’s activities? (Laughter) Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Abdallah, you are raising a serious issue but as the leadership of Parliament, we do not mobilise religious leaders to come here. It is the different chaplaincies that arrange. We have the Imam of Parliament and you also have your association and arrangement. The day you bring the head of the Muslims, we shall be blessed to move and welcome him. We are looking forward to it. In fact, I should task you that I expect the Mufti to come here. I have assigned you and if you do not do it -(Laughter)Honourable colleagues, let us go to the substantive items. When Prime Minister’s Time comes, you will get time to handle all these issues. Leader of the Opposition, do you want to say something? I hope you are not reopening -2.11THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Mr Speaker, this is a quick reaction to your communication, especially regarding the harsh and life-threatening prison conditions that the citizenry 7895THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 6 APRIL 2023are going through and it is good that you have directed the Prime Minister to make a statement. However, in my view, there are many other forms of gross human rights violations that are going on. As you could be aware, mysterious disappearances still continue. Mr Speaker, I wish you could prevail over her to include it. For those that are arraigned before the Court Martial, the charges that were preferred on them keep changing from possession of military stores, firearms and ammunition to treachery. They are civilians and National Unity Platform (NUP) supporters.We need a comprehensive report on matters pertaining to gross human rights violations in Uganda, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, we have handled very many reports to do with the state of human rights and they have been discussed here. We had one on prisons but of course, they keep popping up day after day. However, because of your vigilance, colleagues, you are able to bring all these issues up. I would request that we continue the way we are doing. Where there is a specific matter, let us put the minister to task so that we do not again ask for a statement yet we recently discussed the report. Otherwise, we shall continue rotating around. Let us handle specific cases and put the minister to task to ensure that he or she responds.Colleagues, let us save time because Prime Minister’s Time will be very critical and we shall be handling many issues. We will handle item No.3 next week. Let us go to item No.4.MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGIES AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE ON THE UGANDA COMMUNICATIONS (FEES AND FINES) (AMENDMENT) REGULATIONS, 2023 PURSUANT TO SECTION 93(3) OF THE UGANDA COMMUNICATIONS ACT, 2013THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson of the committee. The chairperson is not yet in? Let us go to the next item.LAYING OF PAPERS PURSUANT TO RULE 33 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURETHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Opio.2.14MR SAMUEL OPIO (Independent, Kole North County, Kole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before I lay, I just want to make a small correction on the Order Paper. It is the 42nd Session of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly and not the 40th Session. Mr Speaker, I hereby beg to lay on the Table the report of the delegation from Parliament of Uganda to the 64th ACP Parliamentary Assembly and the 42nd Session of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly held in Maputo, Mozambique, October to November 2022. I beg to lay.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.MR OPIO: Mr Speaker, I request to give a brief summary of the highlights of the key resolutions, especially on the East African Crude Oil Pipeline; there were key discussions on that. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, can you use three minutes?MR OPIO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. There are three key resolutions that were made in this ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly. The first resolution was on global climate change challenges. In this resolution, you all recall 7896 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.1 FOR FY 2022/2023that the EU Parliament had earlier on come up with a unilateral resolution to ban further exploration of new fossil fuels for petroleum. In this resolution that was presented, there was a proposal to have this banned. However, through engagements with the different countries by the Ugandan delegation, we were able to have this amended from a ban to a transition from fossil fuels to renewable energy in a phased manner. The basis of this was that Uganda and other developing countries still suffer from energy poverty and, therefore, they need to invest in the fossil fuels in order to enable renewable energy arrangements. The second resolution was on increasing access by ACP countries to the EU for different commodities. You all know that Uganda is one of the major coffee exporters to the EU and there have been challenges in terms of compliance due to technical arrangements. Again, in this resolution, we called upon the EU to support and strengthen the technical capacities of producers, exporters and national authorities as far as accessing the new market requirements in the EU. Lastly, we have what is known as the Post-Cotonou Agreement. I need to bring to the attention of Parliament that this is an agreement on which the basis for creation of the ACP, which is the African, Caribbean and Pacific states and the European Parliament, is hinged and it will be valid for the next 20 years. However, as Uganda, we noticed that there were several provisions that support LGBTQ rights. There were also several provisions that were calling for the promotion of LGBTQ rights within our education curriculum. Uganda, as a country, stood firm and you all recall the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker, in that video that went viral, stood firm and said we cannot exchange our values for European aid. I request that we appreciate that. (Applause)We made it very clear that African values are not for sale, whether at factory price, wholesale price, retail price, or even in barter trade. (Laughter) As a result, we disagreed fundamentally on the signing of the post-Cotonou Agreement because of those provisions that are promoting homosexuality.Finally, the last lesson that we need to learn - This is an agreement that we found had already been initialled and we request the Executive that before any document is initialled by any Government official, the Attorney-General should review it to ensure that it complies with our laws and legislation. We found provisions talking about teaching homosexuality to children of five years; you can imagine - that there are traditional families of a man and a woman and non-traditional families of a man and a man. There were references in that document itself, which we had initialled. I appeal, as a recommendation, that the Office of the Attorney-General should ensure that these documents are reviewed. We also ask that the President should not proceed and sign this document. I beg to submit. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. [Member rose_] Procedure? MS OPENDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank you and the delegation that travelled to Maputo to represent Uganda. However, Mr Speaker, this ACP-EU Agreement was originally a trade agreement between the African, Caribbean and Pacific countries with the EU as well as a vehicle for promoting democracy. How they are now smuggling in human rights issues is a subject of discussion.We have just concluded the first Inter-Parliamentary Conference attended by Members of Parliament and delegates from 23 countries. This conference discussed the ACP-EU Agreement and the delegates met His Excellency the President. Our call to the President was not to sign because the speed at which this ACP-EU Agreement was moving was terrific. The ministers initialled it and what was coming through is that we had no role. [Mr Opio]COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR7897THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 6 APRIL 2023One of the calls is that leaving this to the Executive is not enough. In the Inter-Parliamentary Conference that just ended, we requested that the document be laid before Parliament and Members of Parliament, as representatives of the people, review that document before the Executive can finally sign it. I want to thank His Excellency the President because he committed before the delegates and thanked us for alerting him. He said he will not sign this agreement. I would like to inform the Attorney-General and the Minister of Foreign Affairs that it is important that, that document is brought here so that the representatives of the people can review it. The procedural issue is, other than this report that we have received, would it not be proce-durally right to ask the Minister of Foreign Af-fairs, who is our representative and sits in those ministerial councils, to lay before this House that draft document in the form in which he ini-tialled it? He should lay it here so that we can review it. Mr Speaker, may be what has not come from Hon. Acuti is that in that agreement, the Euro-pean Union is dividing Africa, the Caribbean and the Pacific into different protocols so they can have meetings with them differently. You all know we have been working together as Af-rican, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) as one bloc against the European Union. Now we are being divided. That is also an issue because when we are divided, we are weakened. Thank you for this opportunity.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon-ourable colleagues, when I went to Maputo, what I discovered really shocked me because some of these international organisations we belong to have a way they conduct business that makes it formal to do everything in a re-clusive manner. They have rules of procedure where you can-not question anything until they force you to come out with a lot of vigour, the way we did with the whole team. I had Hon. Samuel Opio, Hon. Kibalya Maurice, Hon. Ssekikubo, Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, Hon. Bashir Kazibwe and Hon. Elijah Okupa. We put up a spirited fight and what we discovered was that they appoint a small group, which goes and negotiates on behalf of the rest and whatever that group has agreed to, no country can question it because it is in their rules. Good enough most of the proposals, which were made, were aimed at changing our do-mestic laws. We said, “If you are saying Parlia -ments do not have a role or the ministers have initialled, who will amend the laws?” Honourable members, it would be unfair for me to open - I know rule 33(3) says I may al-low a debate on the matter not exceeding 45 minutes but we have just received the report. Good enough, it does not say when. It says the presiding officer shall appoint a time when we can debate this. Therefore, let the minister lay on the Table the post-Cotonou Agreement he initialled that has all these details.Honourable members, for your information, I raised this issue with the President. I held a meeting with the President and the Attor -ney-General on some issues. I raised it with him and he was shocked when I gave him the details we found. Moreover, the Attorney-Gen-eral had not looked at this document we had committed in our country due to the processes which are set in Brussels. The President has also agreed that no interna -tional agreement should be signed - I hope he will give a very clear directive - without clear -ance of the President because the President will consult with the Attorney-General. The Minis-ter of Foreign Affairs cannot go and commit Uganda on an agreement. (Applause) If the Attorney-General comes and says, “I never looked at this”? What do you do? Let the minister bring the agreement here. Once it comes, I will give you two to three days - we shall share it. If he does not have a copy, I will share what I have because I demanded for it, as the head of the delegation. 7898 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.1 FOR FY 2022/2023 [Ms Opendi]We shall ensure you receive it and it is laid on the Table. We shall share with you and thereaf -ter, I will appoint a time for debate when you have read the report and the agreement. Other -wise, for now, the few people who have the in-formation are the ones who will debate. Others will be mere spectators. (A Member rose_) Un-der what rule do you rise, honourable member?MR OSHABE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity given to me. You have highlighted something and we thank God for -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Honourable colleague, rule 78(4) says when you interrupt debate on a point of procedure, before any-thing, state the rule. So, under what rule are you moving? Start with the rule and then pro-ceed.MR OSHABE: I will state the rule, Mr Speak-er. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No.MR OSHABE: Please allow me. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We thank God for the vigilance of the team that went for that confer -ence. For quite long, we have been here talking about our commitments to these international protocols, agreements and the rest. Now that you have required the minister to come up with that specific one, can you require the minister to also come and brief the House about the status of all other international com-mitments and agreements we have signed or committed to? Probably, it will help this House to know what to expect. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is the Chairperson or Vice Chairperson of the Com-mittee on Foreign Affairs here? We had giv-en an assignment that all international agree -ments, which Uganda is party to and those that are not yet ratified needed to be here so they are ratified. This will help us know whether we are party or not. Otherwise, when you attend these international conferences and meetings, they say, you are a party yet we have not yet ratified them here in Parliament.2.29THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Ms Norah Bigirwa): Mr Speaker, as a committee, we have written to the ministry and we are expecting that report.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When?MS BIGIRWA: We are waiting for them to respond. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I have those copies laid here on Wednesday next week? The documents must first be laid here and then re-ferred to your committee.MS BIGIRWA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.2.29MR LAWRENCE SONGA (NRM, Ora County, Zombo): On that point, I know the decisions that the Council of Europe, espe-cially the ministers, made on various issues. I would like to point out that the involvement of the Committee on Foreign Affairs is still limit -ed in this House. There are many international treaties, conventions and protocols that require that the Committee on Foreign Affairs should be involved. Mr Speaker, the Minister of Foreign Affairs will come and make a statement here but some-time back, we mentioned that as a country, we need to review all these international protocols, conventions and treaties so that we see the ones that are relevant to Uganda since they have subscription and cost implications. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that is extremely right. Rule 40(3) of the Rules of Procedure is very clear. It says, “The minister shall, at least twice a year, give the House…” - Honourable member, are you not hearing me?I am saying, rule 40(3) of our Rules of Proce-dure says that at least twice a year, the Minister of Foreign Affairs will be updating the House on the implementation of all international trea -ties that the country has entered into so that we know.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR7899THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 6 APRIL 2023Colleagues, in other countries, parliamentary diplomacy is very critical. It supplements state diplomacy. When we meet as Parliaments, all these donor monies that the Minister of Fi-nance, Planning and Economic Development travels to look for, are approved by the Parlia -ments of those countries. Therefore, when we have that friendship - and that is why we, as Parliament, value our international obligations and international associations, because parliamentary diplomacy is very critical as far as supplementing state diplomacy is concerned. I want to see the Minister of Foreign Affairs engaging Parliament more; the major reason being that we always send MPs abroad to represent the country. I appreciate you, colleagues, because whenever you go out, you are the ambassadors of Uganda; you do not bring our domestic issues into international meetings. Of course, we have a few who sneak them in but that is always expected. Government Chief Whip, kindly coordinate with the Minister of Foreign Affairs so that he comes and updates this House. Honourable colleagues, let us go to the - Honourable chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, would you like to give guidance?2.32MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba West County, Gomba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to agree with you and say that under the Constitution, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is the depository for all treaties and agreements, which are signed by this country. The various ministries, for example, the Ministry of Gender, deals with treaties to do with children and women like CEDAW and CPC and I know they go to New York to give country positions on those. There are also some under ILO - For example, the Minister of Agriculture would handle those to do with coffee. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs should be tasked to tell us which particular ministries have conventions so that we know because they are the depository. However, it is not only them because it falls under all ministries, depending on the subject matter. It is also annoying to see that although, under the Constitution, the Attorney-General is supposed to sign agreements on behalf of Government, other people go ahead to do it. That is not acceptable. It is a constitutional duty that the Attorney-General is the Chief Legal Advisor of Government and, therefore, should do that. Additionally, sometimes the officers that go out do not do their duty. When we go out, many times Members defend Government, depending on the subject matter. They can pick you up at the airport, give you drinks and when you go to your hotel and you get food poisoning, you will not even go for those meetings and when the signing comes up, you are not there. They can even give you money for shopping and you do not appear. So, if somebody goes and they are not patriotic enough, they will get diverted; we have seen that happening. When I was in the Ministry of Justice, we were very cautious. You would see people on delegations saying, they came for us at the airport and offered this and that. We need to be careful.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. That is good advice to the Executive. As Parliament, we do not sign anything; so, to the Executive, Hon. Rwakoojo has a very good experience because of her previous position in Government. However, regarding the one of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs telling us who has what, that would be micromanagement on our side. For us, we have our Minister of Foreign Affairs. They can go and manage themselves as the Executive. The minister can always delegate any other minister because we hope Government is integrated; it does not work in silos. 7900 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.1 FOR FY 2022/2023Colleagues, let us quickly go to - Point of order.MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, yesterday, you raised the issue of ministers appearing and I am happy that they are here. We know that the front row is meant for ministers but the honourable Member from Busoga is sitting and squeezing the ministers. I do not know whether he has forgotten the rules of this House. I have not seen him in the Committee on Appointments; so, is it in order for him to take up the ministers’ seats; squeezing the honourable Member from Karamoja? (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I do not see any Member - Which Member? I only see ministers on the Frontbench. Is there one we doubt? I did not see that, I wish I had. Let us go back to item No.4.MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION, COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE ON THE UGANDA COMMUNICATIONS FEES AND FINES AMENDMENT REGULATIONS, 223 PURSUANT TO SECTION 93(3) OF THE UGANDA COMMUNICATIONS ACT, 2013THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Chairperson of the ICT Committee, you have 10 minutes.2.37THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION, COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Mr Nathan Igeme): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I present the report from the Committee on ICT. The Minister of Information, Communications Technology and National Guidance laid before Parliament the Uganda Communications (Fees and Fines) (Amendment) Regulations Special Instrument No. 24/2023 on 22 March 2023, in accordance with Section 93(3) of the Uganda Communications Act.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, can we have order in the House? Honourable colleague, try to be as audible as possible.MR IGEME: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The House accordingly referred these regulations to the Committee on Information, Communications Technology and National Guidance for scrutiny. Mr Speaker, the committee, acting under rule 159(F) of the Rules of Procedure scrutinised the regulations and particularly examined whether the legal requirements prescribed in Section 93 of the Uganda Communications Act, 2013, were complied with as far as enactment of this statutory instrument is concerned, examined the legality, rationality and appropriateness of the provisions contained in the statutory instrument. The committee hereby reports under Section 6(1) of the Uganda Communications Act, 2013: “The Uganda Communications Commission may, in the exercise of its functions, charge fees for services provided by the commission, institute a levy on the gross annual revenue of operators and impose a fine on a person who unlawfully possesses, installs, connects or operates any communications equipment or apparatus, or unlawfully provides or performs any communication services, among others.”Section 93(1) (ii) (a) of the Uganda Communications Act empowers the minister responsible for information and communications technology, after consulting with the commission, to make regulations, by statutory instrument, relating to fees payable upon the grant or renewal of a licence for better carrying into effect the provisions of the Uganda Communications Act. The minister is required, under Section 93(3) of the Uganda Communications Commission Act, to lay on the Table these regulations. Section 93 of the Uganda Communications Act -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, just go to your analysis of the provisions of the statutory instrument. By the time it comes here, we know why you must come. [The Deputy Speaker] SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT7901THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 6 APRIL 2023MR IGEME: Thank you. Mr Speaker, we go to the findings. Objectives of the Uganda Communications Fees and amendment regulations No.24/2023 were:1.  To amend the spectrum fees chargeable for bands to provide for the formula of computation of fees for e-band and the formula for fees for the licensed portion of the five gigahertz band. 2. To provide the computation of the spectrum fees chargeable for national and regional licences. Mr Speaker, schedule one of the paragraph (C) of the Uganda communications fees regulatory instruments No.94/2019 was amended, as summarised hereunder, creating two parts, one being the spectrum fees for access bands, and part two being spectrum fees for national and regional licences, providing that the fees are paid per annum in the column for the fees attached here, specifying pairing for the respective bands. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you go to page 6? MR IGEME: Pardon?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Page 6 is where your findings are; the rest is just history.MR IGEME: I will go to page 6. Mr Speaker, the regulations No. 3 of the amendment statutory instrument number 194/20 - Mr Speaker, the regulations are good for the country for:1.  Spectrum utilisation that is efficient, economical, rational and optimal; 2.  They cover the direct and indirect costs indicated with managing and regulating radio frequencies; 3.  Foster well-functioning, innovative and competitive markets;4.  Foster achievement of national economic and social development goals, including the digital transformation programme;5.  Promote the use of ICT in the entire econ-omy and society;6.  Promote improvement of national mobile broadband coverage, and;7.  Facilitate the realisation of the social and economic benefits associated with mobile broadband. Mr Speaker, the committee observes that the Uganda Communications (Fees and Fines) (Amendment) Regulations, 2023 were issued by the Minister of ICT and National Guidance in accordance with the Uganda Communica -tions Act and do not contravene the Constitu-tion or any other law in any way. The regulations were made in consultation with the Uganda Communications Commis-sion, as provided for under Section 93(1) of the Uganda Communications Act, 2013. In conclusion, Mr Speaker, the committee finds the Uganda Communications (Fees and Fines) (Amendment) Regulations, 2023 legally per -missible, good and appropriate for the country. The committee recommends that these regula-tions be adopted by Parliament. Mr Speaker, attached is the band category and the pricing. I beg to lay this on the Table.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon-ourable colleagues, I read through this report and the committee did not find any single fault with any regulation. If one of you has an issue, this is the time to raise it, or hold your peace forever. 2.42MS BETTY NALUYIMA  (NUP, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, be-fore we can approve the committee’s report, I think the Ministry of ICT and National Guid-ance should get on the Floor and explain why Ugandans should continuously be deprived of 7902 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.1 FOR FY 2022/2023 [Ms Naluyima]access to Facebook up to this day. Why should we see some Government officials using Face-book through other means? I beg to be guided.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are making my work difficult. We are discussing a report of a committee, not matters of national importance. The debate and discussion must be limited to the report. If the committee had raised it - You can raise that, at any time, to the minister but not when we are debating the report. Honourable colleagues, if you do not have any contribution on the issue – Hon. Roland?2.44MR ROLAND NDYOMUGYENYI  (Inde-pendent, Rukiga County, Rukiga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have had the opportunity to peruse the report but I think the committee did not do a proper analysis, especially when it comes to costs that they are recommending for the Government to increase at any one time. I would request the committee– maybe in liai -son with the Minister for ICT –to look at the chronology and history of those costs before we recommend anything. There is even a pos-sibility of future increments; so, we need to do a proper analysis. We need to look at the histo-ry of the costing and the trend with a view of ensuring that Ugandans are not exploited. Mr Speaker, Uganda has the highest cost of In-ternet and telecom airtime. This baffles some of us. What is the basis of all this? When you go to telecom companies, you buy data and pay Shs 20,000, for example, and it expires. Why should data expire? If I load airtime of Shs 20,000, even after two months, it will still be there if I am not using it. Why should data be allowed to expire and then I am charged more money? These things need to come out clearly in the report so that, as Parliament, we come up with resolutions that protect our people. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable col-league, these are regulations. With regulations, the debate would be: is there a missing gap? All that you are talking about is provided for under the powers given to UCC. What should be happening now is you would say, okay, we have received the regulations but next is the monitoring of their implementation. Are they being implemented fully or are the UCC and ministry not implementing them? That is where the debate is. Or, it would be that there is a gap in the regulations. MR IGEME: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We did a comparative analysis for the region while look-ing at the regulations. If you look at East Afri-ca, for example, Kenya charges US$ 125,000 for the same band but Uganda is proposing to charge US$ 60,000. Tanzania charges US$ 74,600 for the same. So, actually, Uganda’s is much lower because we are looking at attract -ing more investors to the sector. We wanted to make sure that Uganda’s was lower than all the East African countries.  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable col-leagues, I now put the question on the motion for adoption of the report of the Committee on Information, Communications Technology and National Guidance on the Uganda Communi -cations (Fees and Fines) (Amendment) Regu-lations, 2023, pursuant to Section 93(3) of the Uganda Communications Act, 2013.(Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.MOTION THAT THE HOUSE RESOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY TO CONSIDER THE SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.1 FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2022/2023, PURSUANT TO ARTICLE 156(2) OF THE CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA, SECTION 25 OF THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT ACT, 2015 AND RULE 153 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURETHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable col-leagues, this motion was moved and the report was tabled. We were on debate; so, let us re-sume the debate. I will start with honourable 7903THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 6 APRIL 2023colleagues who were picked yesterday. Each one of you will take two minutes.2.49MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke East County, Otuke): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your good memory and vision – for your eyes that have met mine today. (Laughter)As you said yesterday, Mr Speaker, you have been in this Parliament for seven years. I have also been here for seven years. I want to, first of all, thank the committee for the supplemen -tary report. I also thank the minority for their wonderful report. Can you imagine that ever since the creation of the world, some students are still studying un-der trees? You wonder why each year we have a supplementary report yet we do not see the product. One of the things we should do is find a way of restoring education in this country. Secondly, in the health sector, most of the health centres are not well-equipped with med-ication or staff. In my district, as I speak, there are some villages where mothers still give birth at home because they cannot afford to go to the health centre. Therefore, I request the Govern-ment to make sure that they work on that.In this country, some villages have no access roads. There are also people who have never seen vehicles coming to their villages just because there are no roads. We should find how to place these – (Member timed out.) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, conclude because it is two minutes each. MR ACON: Lastly, Mr Speaker, the salaries of our civil servants are usually not paid on time; for example, that of teachers, health staff and health workers. Therefore, I urge the Government to ensure they pay our civil servants in this country. Thank you. 2.52DR TIMOTHY BATUWA (FDC, Jinja South Division West, Jinja City):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to comment on this supplementary budget, as the shadow Minister of Health. First and foremost, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has programmed our brains to think that there is no money.There are activities that we needed to supply money to like Karamoja subregion having one dental chair in its regional referral hospital, and yet it has five medical personnel. It has a principal dental surgeon, a senior dental surgeon, a dental surgeon and a principal public health dental officer. It has five people who should do dental procedures using that chair. They need five chairs but they have one. That renders others redundant. We asked for small items like that and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development did not have the money. We asked for big items like regional blood banks for Busoga subregion and the Ministry of Finance did not have money. We appropriated Shs 20 billion to transform health centres II to health centres III but they did not have money. Now for them to come up with a supplementary budget requiring us to give them money for parking space makes us question the priorities in Government. (Applause) How does the Government pick their priorities? How do they arrive at them? Basically, Mr Speaker, for this particular item, I am in support of the minority report and I urge the Ministry of Finance to ensure that the business they bring to us is sober. When we are discussing here, we are not discussing alone. Ugandans are watching us on TV . How do they see us giving –(Member timed out.)2.54MR YUSUF MUTEMBULI (NRM, Bunyole East County, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank the committee for their report. For us to determine whether we should approve the supplementary budget 7904 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.1 FOR FY 2022/2023or not, we must be guided by Article 156(2)(b) and Section 25(6) of the Public Finance Management Act. This is because the three tests are there: i) Whether the particular item is unavoidable;ii) Whether it was unforeseeable; and I have forgotten the third one but look at the sections, it is there. In order for us to be in position to allow or approve any item, the three tests must be looked at. When I look at Shs 2.7 billion that has been allocated for supervision of the specialised hospital at Lubowa, which has issues - supervision only costs Shs 2.7 billion. I thank the committee that this was rejected and that was reasonable. Mr Speaker, when I look at what was allocated to Busolwe Hospital - Shs 3.6 billion - I think it passes the test; it is unavoidable because we signed a contract with the company that is doing the on-going work and we were supposed to have paid them by February. Up to now, we have not yet paid them. That means it is necessary and very urgent that this particular amount is allocated. We had an interaction with the Law Development Centre –(Member timed out.) 2.56MR ROLAND NDYOMUGYENYI (Independent, Rukiga County, Rukiga):  Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate your comment yesterday about not just looking at the figures but also looking at the principles of budgeting. Mr Speaker, I beg that you give me only four minutes – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, please. All our brains work in the same way. MR NDYOMUGYENYI: Last year, when we were approving the loan for the “Electricity Access Scale-up Project”, we thought by now we would have power in our areas. I do not know how many Members of Parliament here have had the opportunity to have some poles erected in their areas, but ever since the Rural Electrification Agency (REA) was hounded into the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, electricity access has become a problem.The Ministry of Energy is in fights; the permanent secretary is in fights with the minister regarding recruitment for this particular project. The World Bank is actually almost cancelling that loan because of the fights in the Ministry of Energy. I suggest that we do not give any money to the Ministry of Energy until they come here and explain to us the fights on this Electricity Access Scale-up Project, which are stalling the project. Secondly, I saw a supplementary budget for KCCA. Concerning the roads under KCCA - I do not know how many of you stay around – I heard that some people do not stay in the city but for those who stay in the city, you can attest to the fact that the roads are impassable. There is a – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, it becomes difficult when I start judging that some of you are cleverer than others. That is not what a Member wants. However, when I start weighing you and say that someone speaks more sense than the other so they should have more time - When we say two minutes, let us allocate everyone two minutes. When it is three minutes, let us all speak for three minutes so that we have equality. Nonetheless, if an honourable colleague has done extensive research on the matter, they can reach me in my Chambers and we arrange quietly, not on the microphone. We cannot arrange on the microphone. I can even justify it and say that I assigned a particular Member to extensively research on this matter. Hon. Roland visited me, but he did not tell me about his research. 2.59MS FLA VIA NABAGABE (NUP, Woman Representative, Kassanda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have a concern with adding more money - Shs 26 billion - to [Mr Mutembuli]7905THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 6 APRIL 2023the Uganda Police Force for the acquisition of CCTV cameras and maintenance of that equipment. The Uganda Police is one of the leading human rights violators in this country, according to various human rights reports. First of all, they have not yet fully accounted for the very first batch of money given to them. We have fears, as the Opposition, that if we add them money to purchase more CCTV cameras, they are going to use this money to spy on key Opposition figures and our supporters. They will use them to arrest some of our supporters. More so, I also have a fear that they use these cameras selectively. We lost a young lady; Rita Nabukenya, at Nakawa. She was knocked down by a Uganda Police vehicle. There were CCTV cameras there and we requested for that footage indicating the police vehicle number but they refused to give it. They said that there were no cameras there. My biggest fear is that when we add them more money, they are going to continue violating the human rights of Ugandans so we should not give them any money. Thank you very much. 3.00 MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Someone once said, “I hunted my animal and after hunting my animal, I must enjoy it.” When you look at this supplementary, someone is enjoying his or her animal. The issue of classified expenditure is a white elephant. Members, let us beseech the Presi-dent, after all, we have a week at home. Let us save the money for classified expenditure and use it for our districts and see what will come out. Why do we look at the UPDF senior officers separately from the juniors? Senior officers, even here in Parliament, still use Government vehicles yet private people and the police are not catered for. Mr Speaker, this is selective ap-plication on different leaders. On the issue of buying judges’ vehicles with cameras, let us give them helicopters instead. Otherwise, they have lead cars and everything. What are these vehicles for? I am a Member of Parliament but I move without security. You are giving vehicles to judges moreover within a supplementary.Mr Speaker, Shs 43 billion for study materials is irregular. I said yesterday that teachers are not in the schools. You have refused to give them appointments yet you are procuring study materials to be used by children without teach -ers to teach them how to use them. Is this the kind of Government we are running? Lastly, on the issue of Kiira Motors, who is go-ing to buy these vehicles? One time, I saw a Kiira vehicle being taken to Kyankwanzi on a carrier. Why couldn’t it be driven by a driver to Kyankwanzi? It was displayed in Kyankwanzi on a car carrier yet it is a manufactured vehicle - (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable colleague, some vehicles come to Uganda by air. Do you want vehicles to carry themselves like the iron sheets which carried themselves to people’s compounds? (Laughter)3.03MR MARTIN MUZAALE (NRM, Buzaaya County, Kamuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to agree with the minority report on the issue of the 3 per cent legal limit. For the years I have been here, I have always seen money go-ing to Atiak Sugar but not channelled through the mainstream budgeting. It always comes through the backdoors of the 3 per cent limit.Mr Speaker, I do not know the value of this project as we speak. I have never seen a prod-uct from Atiak Sugar on the market. I even do not know the importance of investing money in Atiak Sugar. Mr Speaker, Busoga, as a region, only asked for US$ 37 million for a sugar factory. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development promised this money but up to 7906 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.1 FOR FY 2022/2023now, we have not seen any coin going to Bu-soga. I also saw Abubaker Technical Services being allocated Shs 26 billion. Many construction firms are in this business but have not benefited from this. We do not know the basis of giving this money to Abubaker Technical Services. Of course, we know that Abubaker has been get-ting so many contracts even beyond what they can afford. Now we realise that there is a “Ma-fia” behind this company.Mr Speaker, I think this is –(Member timed out.)3.05MR JOSEPH KOLUO (Independent, Toro-ma County, Katakwi): Thank you, Mr Speak-er and I want to thank the committee for the two reports. On the issue of Atiak, I would be very happy if this money was directed to the compensation of the people of Teso, Acholi and Lango who lost their cows during the in-surgency (Applause). The President has been preaching - and people even opened accounts and they were validated but there is totally nothing. For sure, there is no information we can give to our people. The second issue is the new administrative centres. In my constituency, there are two. To be honest, I am the one paying rent for admin -istrative units in the subcounties of Angodin-god and Angisa. I am very sure other Members are facing the same problem. (Interjections)  Why can’t money be directed to this?Lastly, I have a letter here; a notification let -ter of a teacher who was appointed. Teachers have been coming to Kampala to get appoint-ment letters and they cannot seek employment elsewhere so where will they go now? I beg to lay this document to show that these people are suffering. They are paying a lot of money as transport costs from their villages to Kampala – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, an appointment letter cannot be ev-idence of suffering. Therefore, if you lay it on the Table, it does not serve any purpose. At least that shows hope.Colleagues, I allowed enough people on this side yesterday. I started with this side to bal-ance. I have seen colleagues who were not here yesterday and they are the ones - I know some who were here and are asking - the likes of Hon. Isaac. However, colleagues, we have to handle business and finish it. At exactly 4.00 p.m., I have the Prime Minister’s Time and you have a lot of issues for the Prime Minister. Thank you.3.08THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FI-NANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Mr Speak-er. Arising from the motion I moved yesterday, the following are the responses I would like to present to the House:On whether the 3 per cent is still necessary, our response is yes, in order to allow for flexibili -ty to handle the emerging requirements during budget implementation.On whether suppression of the budget is still provided for in the law, our response is, no; this is not provided for in the law. However, it is done for purposes of managing a cash budget. It normally occurs when available resources are not sufficient to meet the priority require -ments and as a result, we distribute the avail -able resources to meet the needs as we deem necessary. An example I would like to give here is that in this financial year, under the Ministry of De-fence, there was a requirement for Shs 339 bil-lion for salaries, which was not available. We had to do consultations with the stakeholders and the decision was taken to suppress the de-velopment budget with the same amount.Mr Speaker, reallocations are normally provid-ed for in the law through what we call vire-ment, where the minister is allowed to vire up to 10 per cent and for anything above 10 per cent, we normally do so with the authorisation of Parliament.[Mr Muzaale]7907THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 6 APRIL 2023On the one-stop centre land in Kololo, we are procuring the land and we are aware that one of the titles is still encumbered. In the process of procurement, by the time we get to the final payment, we definitely cannot pay when the title still has encumbrances. The accounting officer is properly managing this process.On delayed re-voting of the monies under UgIFT and USMID, since the financial year started in July, we started the process of requiring accounting officers to submit to us the monies which have not been spent in line with the two items. We concluded by receiving this information by November and on 22 December, we submitted our supplementary request to this House for consideration. I pray that today, we consider this supplementary so that the respective V otes are able to use this money. From the debate, there is a Member who asked whether these V otes will be able to utilise the money, considering the time remaining. Mr Speaker, we are informed that some accounting officers already have pending certificates waiting for this approval so that they can be able to pay the certificates. In other cases, the procurement process has been done and is awaiting confirmation that this money is available. They will then sign with the contractors and work will be able to begin. On Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), I, first of all, wish to inform the House that the Government of Uganda’s contribution to Munyonyo Commonwealth Resort is for construction of a convention centre in preparation for hosting the Non-Aligned Movement conference that Uganda is scheduled to host this year. However, there is no conference facility that can accommodate the over 3,000 delegates expected from the 120 member states and the 17 observer countries. Accordingly, Uganda entered a joint venture agreement with Meera Investments Limited, as a feasible option for constructing and operating the convention centre for hosting the Non-Aligned Movement, G-77 and China summits. Honourable colleagues, we take note of Parliament’s concern on the need to carry out valuation to determine Government’s equity contribution in Munyonyo Commonwealth Resort. Accordingly, we will task UDC, which is Government’s investment arm, to take stock of all Government’s equity in Munyonyo Commonwealth Resort and all other Government ventures and provide a report to both the Cabinet and Parliament. However, in order not to derail preparations for hosting the NAM conference that will result in diplomatic and economic benefits, this supplementary has been authorised for expenditure and I beg for Parliament’s approval. Mr Speaker, while considering the supplementary on NAM, the committee raised an issue on the agreement. The committee said we had not entered into a shareholder’s agreement between Uganda Development Corporation as a lender and Speke Resort Convention Centre Uganda Limited as a borrower. Mr Speaker, I wish to inform the House that we have an agreement that was entered into on 14 March 2023. I beg to lay on the Table, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please lay. MR MUSASIZI: Mr Speaker. There was also an issue raised by the committee that we had borrowed this money without authorisation of Parliament. I wish to inform the House that this is a dealing -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That you had lent -MR MUSASIZI:  Yes. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Not borrowed.MR MUSASIZI: They said, we had -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which money exactly?7908 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.1 FOR FY 2022/2023MR MUSASIZI:  This US$ 17.2 million. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For Munyonyo?MR MUSASIZI: Yes. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The committee was saying that you lent it to Munyonyo.MR MUSASIZI:  Yes. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Without authorisation, not borrowing.MR MUSASIZI:  Yes, that we lent this money without authorisation. I wish to inform the House that this is a dealing between UDC and Munyonyo Convention Centre and it does not require approval of Parliament. Yes, this is a fact.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.MR MUSASIZI:  Mr Speaker. I -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, just a minute. You need to explain this very well because when we use the language of dealing and all that - I read the report, I called for a meeting and we discussed this issue. Colleagues, UDC is an independent company in which the Government of Uganda holds 100 per cent shares. What the Government of Uganda does is to capitalise UDC as a shareholder. UDC, as a company, has its own bylaws that allow it to borrow and to lend. When you are a company and a shareholder, as a shareholder, you can give what we call a shareholder loan. It is like the money we allocate to Uganda Development Bank. It is the same money for UDC but you cannot say that for anyone that Uganda Development Bank is going to give money, you must come to Parliament for approval because the Government of Uganda owns 100 per cent shares in Uganda Development Bank. If UDC is coming here to borrow money to go and invest, then it must be approved by Parliament. For example, UDB always borrows money to go and invest via lending. It comes here for that money. When you get your own money and you capitalise a company, that company is going to do business. What we need to do is ensure that the Auditor-General audits to know whether this money was used for the stated purpose or used well. Secondly, we, as COSASE - which is under Parliament - will ask; “Is it using it well?”  “Has the Auditor-General raised issues?” Hon. Kivumbi touched my concern very well yesterday; on our powers of appropriation. This is where the difficult question is; you authorise someone to spend 3 per cent then you come back for us to approve retrospectively. You have not given an implication of that person spending in a way you do not like. A very good example is, we have previously rejected expenditure here under the 3 per cent. Have you ever called anyone to return that money? You legally gave away your powers to that person to go and spend. Tell me any person you will allow to go and spend Shs 2 trillion, under 3 per cent, and you come here and we refuse. Will you say to that person: “Sell your goods and return the money?” You authorised me to spend. If you did not trust me, why did you allow me to spend? It is very simple. In short, honourable colleagues, we gave away our powers to someone to go and behave in a certain manner. I want a very good example of where you refused to approve the money spent under the 3 per cent. I do not want us to sit here and make decisions which are not implementable. Hon. Nambeshe, please. We shall make a statement that you rejected. What happened?3.21MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NUP, Manjiya County, Bududa):  Mr, Speaker, on the 3 per cent legal limit -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: My proposal is that we need to find a way of controlling where that money can be spent, by law. The moment you give a blank cheque – You give your child COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR7909THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 6 APRIL 2023money and say, go to the market and the child goes and buys sweets. Will you come and say, you are no longer my son, you cannot inherit - Return the money? Where did he get it from? Help us on how we can get a solution; and Hon. Kivumbi made some proposals here.MR NAMBESHE: Mr Speaker, I am happy that we share similar concerns. What is at stake is that this House –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, let us listen and I want us to be honest on these issues. MR NAMBESHE: Mr Speaker, our hands are tied by Section 25 of the Public Finance Management Act. Indeed, the way this 3 per cent is being spent erodes the powers of appropriation of this House. Therefore, this is the right time, Mr Speaker, to implore and seek your indulgence that this House amends Section 25 of the Public Finance Management Act.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Bring a proposal. (Applause) Hon. Kivumbi, did you want to say something? Otherwise, the way it is, we gave away our powers to someone to spend.3.23MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (NUP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, I rise on two issues. If this Parliament can allow me to give notice right here, in a week or two, I can table an amendment to this House to amend Section 25 of the Public Finance Management Act to protect the powers of Parliament to do appropriation. I will do the needful. (Applause)Secondly, Mr Speaker, on the question of Munyonyo, we have an issue because this money has not gone to UDC. It has gone to a special-purpose vehicle, which has been registered as an entity straightaway. When you look at the money for Atiak and other monies where UDC is involved, we give money straight to UDC and UDC can go and invest on behalf of –(Interruption)MR WAMAKUYU: Hon. Kivumbi, the information I want to give you is that the money for Munyonyo is under UDC – V ote 015: Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, let Hon. Kivumbi finish. MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, when we give money to - First of all, the money has already been dispatched and that is a fact.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The money has already been given under the three per cent. MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Yes, under the 3 per cent but even the attempt here – The honourable member knows that when we give money to UDC to invest, like in Atiak or equity sharing elsewhere – This time there is a special-purpose vehicle that has already been registered. There is a slight difference; I would not be so naive to question it. This money has been given to an investment between Meera Investments and the Government of Uganda. Where we have a problem with this is that Meera is a subsidiary of Munyonyo Resort. The Government is already an investor in Munyonyo Resort. What is happening is that within the precincts of Munyonyo Resort, Meera has carved out land and said it is the one that is going to be leased to this new company. That is our money and the valuation has issues.The other issue is that the main report says we allow equity sharing but we refuse money for construction. You cannot have it both ways; you either have it or not. So, the majority report is shy on the truth and that is why for us –(Member rose_) Information?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us conclude; I need to yield the Floor back to the minister.MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. Mr Speaker, the information I would like to give is that the Munyonyo issue with UDC has never brought any single profit to the Government. 7910 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.1 FOR FY 2022/2023We have never seen any dividend for all these years. I happen to sit on the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry and even the minister, who is supposed to supervise, was not aware of the transactions. Mr Speaker, we have a problem in Uganda. Even the committees that are supposed to supervise, like the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry, are sometimes frustrated. We made a report not to appropriate money to Atiak but money was channelled through these ministries. Mr Speaker, I do not see any reason - much as money is going to UDC - We have been appropriating money to the banana something, which comes from my district. (Laughter) If it were to be profitable, I would be saying let us give them the money. I do not know if we are planning for this country; that there is tomorrow and we have another generation to come or we are eating as if we are dying today.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Kivumbi, conclude.MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: As I conclude, Mr Speaker, my take on Munyonyo is that Parliament has a very big decision to make. We shall need to be bold in amending the recommendation of the majority report. We either reject it in totality or we give in, in totally. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: For me, the money should specifically go to UDC. My bone of contention is that we are going to give money to Munyonyo even when the Auditor-General has deliberately refused to give books of accounts for auditing and we are going to invest more money. I beg to rest my case.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. You do not access a microphone without my permission, honourable colleague. Please take your seat. I want us to use very clear language. You do not say: “We are not going to give money to this.” You have already given it. Money, under the 3 per cent, is the problem, honourable colleagues, and I am not happy about it.The money, which we still have serious control over, is money which is not under the 3 per cent. We have to come back, as a House, and address the issue the way Hon. Kivumbi has said. However, a post-mortem does not help, honourable colleagues. I want to be as honest as possible. What is so strange is that every financial year, we have this debate with the same cries. Can we get a cure, as the House, this time? Hon. Musasizi, conclude.MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the 3 per cent, the regulations provide that we spend it on items which are unforeseen and unavoidable. I am confident - and I analysed these expenditures line by line - that whatever expenditure we consider under 3 per cent meets the test of being unforeseen. Where it was not unforeseen, it was unavoidable. I have three clarifications to make and I beg for your protection -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, allow the honourable minister to make clarifications on the issues which you raised.MR MUSASIZI:  Mr Speaker – (Interruption)MR BYARUGABA:  Mr Speaker, I rarely want to disturb or disorganise a colleague. Fortunately, the honourable minister made clarified that some of these issues come only when they are unexpected. You even made your case worse. Do you want to tell me, honourable minister, that the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) is an issue you learnt of two or three months ago? Was the issue of Atiak unforeseen? Hold on -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, let us be quick. If I wanted to be strict, I would ask you to indicate under which rule you are submitting your point of procedure [Mr Mbwatekamwa]7911THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 6 APRIL 2023because that is what you should start with but I have waived that. Conclude.MR BYARUGABA: I would like to thank you so much for guiding this House fantastically.  We are being told about the Munyonyo issue. For those of you who were not here, Munyonyo consumed a lot of money for the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM).To date, if you asked me how much money we have there after all these years I have been here, I would not tell you. There are no books; we are not even allowed to see them; not even auditing and yet we invested a lot of money. Part of Munyonyo supposedly belongs to you, me and other Ugandans. Is that what it is today? Mr Speaker, it has been a habit of Government, especially those on the Frontbench to stampede Government and make those deliberate mistakes, like we had in CHOGM.Wait after NAM, some heads will fall because of this habit of stampeding. I think it is high time we followed the Speaker’s guidance to start on the issue of amending that law. (Applause)Previously, we used to have what they call a vote on account; we would go into budgeting, then three months after the budget day, Government would be allowed to spend. But remember in those days, we had good people. ; We sold ourselves out - we sort of compromised and said; instead of stopping Government from doing work, let us start work directly by giving them 3 per cent. However, they have misused the 3 per cent by confusing the House that these are unforeseen issues.Really, the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) and Atiak; are those unforeseen issues? Are we procedurally right? Thank you very much.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we are moving very well, that is why you were able to raise these issues. Now, this goes to our accountability committees: let us listen to each other. In any company where Government has shares - we have shareholders and directors.As shareholders in any company, we have rights; if you refuse to give me information, I can get it through court because I am a shareholder. They hold a shareholders’ annual general meeting. Why isn’t the Government exercising its rights as a shareholder in companies where it is holding shares? If we are talking of Government broadly, then we can include representatives of Government on that board. We can go for them as individuals because they are Government officials and we continue to give them power - why aren’t they performing their duties as required? And these are the hard questions we should start asking. You cannot say that we had shares in Munyonyo, but when we asked our fellow shareholders to give us information, they refused; how? Number two, if the shares are not performing, liquidate them if the investment is bad. Sometimes Government does business - but you can liquidate your shares; cash out and go and invest in other areas. Honourable minister, conclude on this matter.MR MUSASIZI: Thank you very much, and I want to thank my elder brother, Hon. Alex, for his concerns. I wish to inform him and the House that NAM was foreseen at the time of budgeting, but the money was not provided. Therefore, this became unavoidable in this financial year and that is why we funded it under the 3 per cent. The committee is declining approval of Shs 20 billion for Kiira Motors and I wish to respond as follows:Colleagues, the budget for Kiira Motors for the Financial Year 2022/ 2023 is Shs 12.5 billion and not Shs 77 billion as noted by the committee. Indeed, the supplementary has only provided for Shs 20 billion due to resource constraints. 7912 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.1 FOR FY 2022/2023Furthermore, I authorised this supplementary under the 3 per cent legal limit and already released the funds to Kiira Motors. I, therefore, request that the House approves this supplementary and in line with the recommendation by Parliament. The ministry will task the Auditor-General to carry out a comprehensive audit of the funds released to Kiira Motors over the last five years. On -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, please. When a Member presents his or her opinion, you cannot subject it to a point of order. It is my opinion, you can disagree with it. You have your own opinion. You may feel misled, but it cannot be a point of order. A point of order is about conduct in the House and not submissions on the Floor. Hon. Kivumbi, you -have you allowed him?MR MUSASIZI: No, I beg to be allowed to finish.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Please, I want behaviour in the House. It is a Member’s right to accept information or clarification. If he doesn’t, you do not have the right to just say, “Allow.” That is not how we run Parliament.MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. On the Shs 274.11 billion to Uganda Development Corporation for purchase of Government of Uganda shares in Atiak Sugar Factory, this intervention is in line with the Government’s industrialisation policy –(Interjections)–  and commitment to balance regional and equitable development. Mr Speaker, there are sugar factories in the central, eastern and western regions. Atiak Sugar Factory is the only sugar factory in Northern Uganda. The factory will support the sugarcane out growers as well as tap into the DRC and South Sudan markets. This provision was also made under the 3 per cent legal requirement. We beg Parliament for retrospective approval. Mr Speaker, with this submission - [Member rose_]THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, when you ask for space twice and the minister does not accept, just take your seat.MR MUSASIZI:  Mr Speaker, with this submission, I wish to invite the House to support the motion. I beg that we pass it as I have moved it. [HON. MEMBERS: “No”]THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, you are doing post mortem on the 3 per cent. (Laughter) I have asked one of you to tell me the implication - when we rejected, what happened? Who refunded? You delegated your powers. The solution lies within what Hon. Kivumbi has said, to ensure this does not happen next year. Colleagues, we are going to the Committee of Supply. I put the question that the House resolves itself into a Committee of Supply to consider the Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No. 1 for the Financial Year 2022/2023.(Question put and agreed to.)COMMITTEE OF SUPPLYSUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE SCHEDULE NO. 1 FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2022/2023THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon-ourable colleagues, I think some of you are shouting without understanding what we are handling. Why? You still have a chance at the Committee of Supply to reject what you do not want. This is a committee. In short, you are saying you do not want the committee to sit. MR NAMBESHE: Mr Chairperson, we do respect your ruling and it is common knowledge in this House that you are the custodian of the rules. Just as you ruled, if you were keenly observant, quite a number of Members on both sides of the aisle remained standing and it required your indulgence to establish or ascertain the numbers because they were even more than 40. (Applause) [Mr Musasizi]7913THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 6 APRIL 2023THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Colleagues, we have not approved any supplementary. That is why you are surprising me. You can still vote “Yes” or “No”. Listen. During the voting, you will consider the two reports. Where you agree, that is it and where you disagree, that is it. At this stage, both reports are still valid. We have not voted on any and this is what we are handling now. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal?3.36MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Chairperson, you guided properly that every year, we go through the same challenge and we seem to be going through it again. It looks like this time, the House is prepared to disagree with the Executive. There was a time the House asked the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to apologise on the Floor of Parliament. This time round, we have accepted the report without an apology. This means, from now, the ministers will know that we have agreed to all the processes because we have agreed to adopt the report and approve. Mr Chairperson, I want to draw the attention of Members to a constitutional provision under Article 164(2). If we approve the Budget and should it arise that the country will lose money, Chairperson Speaker, you, the entire House, the officials and the bureaucrats involved will be required to refund that money. It is a constitutional requirement. (Applause)I would like to read it so that when we approve, we are mindful of what the law requires. I am not disagreeing on the processes of the Budget because I know the Government cannot do without the budget and Parliament cannot do without the budget. We have to budget. But we have to ensure that the Executive, who help us with our budgeting processes, is doing it in accordance with the law. That is where we disagree, Mr Speaker. When you look at Article 159 of the Constitution, we are definitely carrying out an illegal process. We have agreed every year that it should be done, but at an appropriate time, the ministers must change. Mr Speaker, can you agree with us that this will be the last year – [HON. MEMBERS: “No”] - I want to read for you so that we do it -THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Cecilia, just clarify to me the illegality. Colleagues, I do not want it to go on the Hansard that we are doing something illegal and a Member cautioned us but we continued doing something, which is illegal. Read for me the part which shows we are doing something illegal.MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Chairperson, Article 164(2) of the Constitution - Can I read it? I am not a lawyer but I am learning -THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Please, read it, honourable member. MS CECILIA OGWAL: Since the Deputy Attorney-General is a lawyer, he will help me to catch up. Article 164(2) reads: “Any person holding a political or public office who directs or concurs in the use of public funds contrary to existing instructions shall be accountable for any loss arising from that use and shall be required to make good the loss even if he or she has ceased to hold that office .” My conscience tells me that if I approve what the Committee on Budget - and also the minority report agreed on the approval of the budget or the money required - I shall be held responsible for the loss of money. The people of Dokolo will hold me responsible because they are innocent; they have sent to me to legislate on their behalf. I want to put this clear to the House. Mr Chairperson, you have a team of lawyers; let Parliament be cleared of this. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, I just want to give you comfort. Section 25 of the PFMA – 7914 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.1 FOR FY 2022/2023“(1)  The total supplementary expenditure that requires additional resources over and above what is approved by Parliament shall not exceed 3 per cent of the total approved budget for that financial year, without approval of Parliament.(2)  Where funds are expended under subsection (1), supplementary estimates showing the sums spent shall be laid before Parliament within four months after the money is spent.” What is very clear, honourable minister – MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Chairperson, I thank you –THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, do not access the microphone. You can ask and I give it. This is the law you made to operationalise Article 156 of the Constitution. That is why I was telling you, honourable colleagues, that you cannot blame a minister. Blame yourselves who made the law. Hon. Okiror, did you want to say something?MR OKIROR: Yes, Mr Chairperson. I want to certainly agree with the interpretation which has been given by the Speaker. We are at crossroads; we have an Act of Parliament that clearly has given us the provisions of the law – 3 per cent. We shot ourselves down. It even gives you leeway to go and spend. What we are doing here is now a post-mortem. We are duty-bound – (Interjection)  – Listen. This is an error. Actually, we are sitting here, money has been spent and it has been authorised by the law. Thank you.MR KWIZERA: Mr Chairperson, the procedural matter I am seeking is whereby the honourable member from Dokolo has made reference to articles of the Constitution and the Constitution is supreme. As the chairperson, you are making reference to an Act of Parliament. I suggest that the Attorney-General comes in to interpret. Otherwise, I think we are doing something wrong because you are reading an Act of Parliament, while the Member has raised a legality in the Constitution. THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honour -able colleagues, order! Let us listen to one an-other. I will allow you to speak. Honourable colleague, the Constitution is operationalised by statutes of Parliament. Otherwise, we can throw away all laws. That is why if you have any issue with a statute conflicting with the Constitution, you can challenge it in court and it will be struck off. However, as long as it is not yet challenged, it is standing and will be implemented. Attorney-General, I need you – honourable colleagues, I have an issue with the Attorney-General here. I want to give him chance but I want to remind you that when it is a matter of procedure, it is the Speaker who gives a response. Where the Speaker feels he needs the help of the Attorney-General or any other person, I will call on him.Honourable Deputy Attorney-General, it is not that I am stopping you from speaking. These are straightforward matters where, as the Speaker, I have to give a ruling. Do not take it in bad faith, my brother. Honourable colleagues, the Deputy Attorney-General wanted to say something to supplement; let me give him an opportunity. MR KAFUUZI: Thank you, Mr Chairperson – (Interjections) – the reason I wanted to speak –THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honour -able colleagues, allow the Attorney-General to speak.MR KAFUUZI: Mama Cecilia has given the impression that by Parliament doing its job, we are creating an illegality. She has cited Article 164(2) that if we pass and approve this appropriation, we shall be held accountable. Allow me state this: the Article referred to refers to other members that hold public [The Deputy Chairperson]7915THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 6 APRIL 2023office. For Members of Parliament, their role is to appropriate and “appropriation” means approving expenditure, like we are doing. Any other person that authorises expenditure outside the rules set by this Parliament is what Article 164(2) is referring to –(Interjections) – I am begging you, read that Article and confirm for yourselves. THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honour -able colleagues, I have spoken to the leadership on both sides; I am going to suspend the House for 15 minutes so that they talk to each other and thereafter come and update us. House is suspended for the leadership of both sides to talk -Honourable colleagues, it will be a mistake - I have been guided – I have not yet suspended the House. I want to follow clear procedure. It will be a mistake for any side to celebrate against the other, yet this is a bi-partisan matter. What I am going to do is to first resume my seat and then suspend the House. Can the minister move the motion? MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME4.01THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Mr Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. (Question put and agreed to.)(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, we have not done any work at committee stage, so, there is nothing to report. I have consulted the leaders on both sides, and the Dean of the Independents, indeed – and we have agreed. I should join them.  Government Chief Whip, you know the team that you want to go with. Leader of the Opposition, you also know the team that you want to go with. I am going to give you my own lounge so that you can be able to meet. In 20 minutes, we shall resume. The House is suspended for 20 minutes. (The House was suspended at 4.02 p.m.) (On resumption at 4.41 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, the House has resumed - because we have done more than 20 minutes, if they have agreed, the better; if they have not, they can come and I will do my role of a referee. I have tried my best – Hon. Peter Ogwang, can you help me call them in, otherwise we might move without them.Colleagues, when the Conclave is going on, always wait for the white smoke but it seems some of you want the black smoke –(Laughter)- if they have not reached an agreement, let them come; they cannot hold us here, we can have that item for another day. Hon. Akol, whip them.Honourable colleagues, the House is going on. Hon. Mbwatekamwa, do you want to say anything, but without referring to what we are expecting, as you know.4.45MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I am rising under Rule 101(b) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament - (Interjection) – if they are old, he can cite them and see if I am wrong.I read, “…the Speaker has announced the results of the voice voting and immediately 40 or more Members stand in their places signifying their disapproval of the outcome of the vote.”7916 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.1 FOR FY 2022/2023Mr Speaker, I am referring to before you became a chairperson, when more than 40 Members stood up disproving that the voice voting was not actually the right one – maybe the polite term should be that it was not representative of our voices. Mr Speaker, in that regard, using your guidance and discretion, you could read and see what follows, because most of us were not contented with the ruling. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mbwatekamwa, let me just help you; when you want to challenge the decision of the Speaker, you refer to Rule 87, not Rule 101. Let us get the report. Kindly, read the rules properly, do not teach the Speaker the rules.4.47THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker and Members, I chaired the meeting involving the side of the Government, the Opposition and the Independents and we agreed that what we are handling needs some more time. (Applause)Mr Speaker, we all agreed that this country is for all of us. Therefore, we request that you give us more time. Tuesday, next week we will shall have - I beg to submit. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Kivumbi.  4.48MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA-KIVUM-BI (NUP, Butambala County Butambala): Mr Speaker, I know the Prime Minister - I agree with the overall discussion. However, the honourable colleagues need to know why we are asking for an adjournment.Our side thinks because this is a popular bipartisan line on this matter; there is no division between the Opposition and the Independents - colours do not work here, it is about the public purse, public money and service delivery. We have requested the Government to try to separate the two issues; the 3 per cent and the one that requires prior approval. All the contentious issues are in the 3 per cent. And that one can stay for some time and Parliament satisfies itself. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But Hon. Kivumbi, now you are giving the views you expressed – Hon. Prime Minister, please hold on. Hon. Kivumbi, what you are doing is to present your proposals, which this side has not agreed upon, and that is why you need more time. Either they buy your proposal or not. So, I think what is most important is for you to have agreed that you need more time and let us give you more time. When you are ready, I shall return this item on the Order Paper. Next item - and I request each side to go back and consult your members on this. Clerk, next item.STATEMENT BY THE RT HON. PRIME MINISTER ON GOVERNMENT BUSINESS FOR THE SUCCEEDING WEEK, 11 TO 13 APRIL 2023 PURSUANT TO RULE 28 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE4.51THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, I move under Rule 28 of our Rules of Procedure that requires me to present to this House business for next week.i. The Foreign Exchange (Amendment) Bill, 2022ii. The Occupational Safety and Health (Amendment) Bill.Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Next item[Mr Mbwatekamwa] PRIME MINISTER’S TIME7917THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 6 APRIL 2023PRIME MINISTER’S TIMETHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister -4.51THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker and colleagues, Hon. Kamugo Pamela Nasiyo, Budaka District says that there was an eviction of farmers from wetlands in the country in Bukedi and Namatala wetlands, which is a source of livelihood for her people. Her prayer is that I update this House on how the Government is going to handle evictions on a case by case basis to introduce alternative activity as a source of income and compensate the farmers before eviction.My responseIn respect to the management of wetlands in Bukedi, Busoga and Kigezi subregions, a technical paper was prepared under the coordination of the Office of the President with support from a technical team composed of officials from the Ministry of Water and Environment, the Solicitor-General, the Ministry Lands, Housing and Urban Development and the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) to provide guidance on wetlands ownership in three regions. The paper provides guidance on the eligibility of compensation, the need to promote only regulated activities in the wetlands and the promotion of economically viable livelihood options like skilling of our youth, men, women and the vulnerable people for sustainable livelihoods. The paper was presented to a subcommittee of Cabinet involving ministers for approval. We are going to present it to Cabinet for further guidance.Mr Speaker, interventions have been made to address the issue of alternatives to crop farming in wetland areas and these are being promoted in Eastern and South-western regions of Uganda. Specific actions for promotion of alternative livelihoods have been promoted in Bukedi subregion in the districts of Pallisa along Limoto and Papayo wetlands and Kibuku along Ssala wetland. The interventions include the following:i) Mini irrigation for high-value crops such as tomatoes, onions, cabbages, watermelons in the catchment areas near the wetlands not in the wetlands;ii) Fish farming along wetland edges;iii) Provision of livestock like turkeys, goats, heifers, pigs to households that have voluntarily left the wetlands based on the household’s preferences;iv) Promotion of soil and water conservation practices to rehabilitate degraded catchment areas;v) Improving skills for promoting different income generating activities such as carpentry and tailoring. This has been done for 2,000 youth, men, women and vulnerable people. Mr Speaker, restoration of wetlands would increase water storage and its availability to communities through micro and mini irrigation. Adding necessary nutrients to the soil increases productivity and enterprises that add monetary value and livelihoods to the communities and this reduce the pressure to encroach on wetlands. The honourable Leader of the Opposition, Hon. Mathias Mpuuga, said that on 8 February 2023, NEMA instituted express penalties in respect to various environmental breaches ranging between Shs 3,000,000 and Shs 100,000,000. He stated that the fines are not only unrealistic but also inequitable and therefore, should be clarified at least for the benefit of the Ugandans. His prayer is that while we take cognisance of the negative impact of improper waste management of the ecosystem, we need to 7918 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.1 FOR FY 2022/2023observe that the express penalty scheme was drafted in haste. Parliament should be briefed on what informed the figures in the fines in order for the Members of Parliament to explain the fines to their electorates.Mr Speaker, I would like to, first of all, express gratitude to my brother, the Leader of the Opposition because this is his first question to ask. In the same vein, I would like to thank the Leader of the Opposition for confirming that the Opposition agrees with the Government that there is urgent need to address waste disposal in Uganda. I would like to clarify that these fines were not newly drafted nor legislated by the Executive as secondary subsidiaries legislation. These fines are derived directly from the provisions of the existing laws promulgated by this august House. Section 172(1) of the National Environment Act, (No. 5) 2019 provides, “Where the Authority, an authorised officer or environmental inspector has reasonable grounds to believe that a person has contravened the provisions of this Act, the Authority, authorised officer or environmental inspector may impose an administrative fine and serve a notice on that person ”.Section 172(2) of the said Act provides thus, “The Authority may require the person served with a notice under subsection (1) to pay the administrative fine within a time prescribed in the notice ”. Mr Speaker, the notice shall, therefore:a) specify the date and nature of the alleged contravention;b) contain a summary of the facts which the Authority or authorised officer alleges;c) be endorsed with a statement setting out the provisions of the law contravened;d) specify the penalty payable; ande) state the bank details of the bank account of the Authority in which the payment is to be made.Mr Speaker, from the above provisions of the Act, a fine can only be levied for a committed offense. As such, the figures published by NEMA as maximum chargeable fines for environmental breaches are derived from the National Environmental Act, 2019, and since they are administrative fines, they are in all cases below the maximum stated in the law and in most cases, as low as 50 per cent of the maximum prescribed in the Act.Mr Speaker, the fines are voluntary and are made to avoid congesting the judicial systems with the prosecutions of common offences and indeed congesting our prisons. However, should the person who has committed the offence prefer not to pay the fine, they are free to choose the option of being prosecuted for the offence committed, which would, in any case, result in higher penalties, including financial and custodial sentences. It should be noted that these fines are not a licence for breach of the environment. They are a penalty for the offence committed and are charged in addition to other orders, including restoration of the damaged environment.Mr Speaker, I have highlighted below, a detailed example of the common offences and the fines under the NEMA Act, 2019. I think Members will read for themselves. The administrative fines prescribed are within the law and the figures prescribed are maximum fines. The actual fines, as is required by the law, shall be issued taking into account the gravity and circumstances of the actual offence committed. In any case, the fines must be aimed at deterring future non-compliance, eliminating any financial gain or benefit from non-compliance, ensuring proportionality to the nature of the offence and the harm caused.Mr Speaker, I call upon honourable Members to support NEMA and the Government, that is, the Ministry of Water and Environment to ensure that the Administrative Fine Schemes for the environment breaches is implemented successfully. The scheme is one of the innovative [Ms Nabbanja] PRIME MINISTER’S TIME7919THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 6 APRIL 2023tools to deter environmental degradation under the “polluter pays” principle.Question No.3, Hon. Samuel Opio, Member of Parliament, Kole North says that more than 16 villages in Erute and Kole North have been negatively affected by the stone quarry work activities at Aler Rock at the Lira-Kole border. More than 30 buildings developed cracks because of the blasts from the quarry. The community water points were contaminated and the project-affected persons have not been compensated, and NEMA has failed to carry out environmental audit and investigations. His prayer is that the Ministry of Water and Environment should visit the affected areas and take the necessary action and update the House.Mr Speaker and colleagues, on 18 January 2023, environmental inspectors from the National Environment Management Authority, Lira District Local Government, Members of Parliament from Lira and the representative for the Member of Parliament, Kole North, undertook a field inspection of the said stone quarry crusher-plant site and operations. Non-compliance was observed at the facility. This was in breach of the National Environment Act (No.5), 2019 and the Certificate Conditions of Approval (No. NEMA/EIA/15449) issued to the developer for operating a stone quarry, and the crusher in Acanakwo Village, Aler Parish, Agur Subcounty in Lira District. NEMA consequently issued a Stop Notice to the developer, requiring them to stop all the operations with immediate effect until all the non-compliances were fully addressed and a clearance given by the ministry and the Authority to resume operations. Question No.4, Hon. Christine Sendawula Bukenya, the Woman MP, Kyankwanzi. She said that on 21 January 2023, there was an invasion by the staff of National Forest Authority (NFA) in Kyamutete, Kyankwanzi District, that left Bosco Kasonko dead and plantations destroyed. Her prayer is that I update the country on the presidential directive to evict people from national forest reserves. My response is that the incident raised by Hon. Sendawula Christine happened in Taala Central Forest Reserve in the village of Kyamutete in Kyankwazi District. The boundaries of the forest reserve were recently reopened and marked with concrete pillars with the involvement of the district authorities and leadership and the neighbouring community. During the process of boundary opening, it was noticed that some members of the community had encroached on the forest land, and therefore, were doing cultivation of crops.Mr Speaker, efforts were made to sensitise these encroachers not to open more land or plant crops on the onset of the rainy season. The community were given a grace period of six months to harvest their crops and vacate the forest reserve. Some of them complied and voluntarily vacated the forest reserve while those who refused to vacate the forest reserve are the ones causing trouble to forest managers.In order to facilitate quick restoration of the forest, the NFA licensed the private sector tree farmers to plant trees in the parts of Taala Central Forest Reserve. The tree farmers embarked on land preparation for this season’s planting and continued with the nurturing of the trees planted last season. Unfortunately, the private tree farmers have met resistance in some areas where encroachers stop them from planting trees. Where they have planted, the encroachers have uprooted all the planted trees. This has led to scuffles between the community members and the workers employed by the tree farmers to tend to their plantations.Four cases of assault and malicious damage of properties have been reported to Ntwete Police Post by the private tree farmers and some suspects were arrested. The police continue to investigate these cases.7920 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.1 FOR FY 2022/2023On the tragic death of Bosco Kasonko by gunshot, NFA staff…  NFA staff are not armed and, hence, could not have killed Bosco by gunshot. This death is being investigated by the police and, once investigations are complete, the perpetrators will be brought to book.Mr Speaker, the encroachers have since filed a suit against two NFA staff and court has granted a temporary injunction, stopping NFA from carrying out any activity in the parts of the forest reserve in Kyamutete Village, Kitwala Parish, Ntwetwe Town Council. This has led to wanton destruction of over 50 acres (over 120 acres) of the planted trees. Since 2015, the country has witnessed an increase in the forest cover from 10 per cent (2,119,309 hectares) to 13 per cent, which is 2,707,266 hectares in 2019. This is attributed, mainly, to increased forest cover in Government-owned protected areas due to presidential directives, improved management, natural regeneration and the commercial plantations established in central forest reserves by NFA and the private sector.Mr Speaker, we should continue supporting efforts aimed at consolidating the increase in forest cover and resist temptations to frustrate sustainable forest management activities such as boundary re-opening and marking. As the country grapples -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just hold on, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Honourable colleagues, read rule 41. During Prime Minister’s Time, only the Leader of the Opposition has a right of response. You cannot give information or seek clarification. Those are your rules. Please, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, resume. Let us listen to her. When she completes, we will open up.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I am about to conclude. As the country grapples with the impact of climate change, continuous afforestation programmes and smart agriculture practices are the preferred options to mitigate these impacts.I, therefore, call upon honourable colleagues to support the Ministry of Water and Environment and the National Forestry Authority’s efforts to restore these forests. Hon. Andrew Ojok Oulanyah, Member of Parliament for Omoro, raised a concern that Moroto Road (Gulu-Opit-Rackoko-Patongo-Abim-Moroto), which is the backbone of Omoro District and many other districts in Acholi, Lango and Karamoja sub-regions is currently non-motorable.His prayer was: what are the Government’s plan to;(i) Maintain Moroto Road?(ii) Upgrade Moroto Road to acceptable standards as envisaged in the NRM Manifesto? My response is that the Gulu-Opit-Rackoko-Patongo-Abim-Moroto Road is a national road, under the management of the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA), and the road is currently under maintenance.Although the road was not listed in National Development Plan III, it is a priority road as stated by His Excellency the President in his pledges. As such, the road has been identified for development.Design for the upgrading of this road is scheduled to commence in Financial Year 2023/2024. I wish to inform the honourable members that the Gulu-Opit-Rackoko-Patongo-Abim-Moroto Road is a priority road and it is the plan of the Government to upgrade it to acceptable standards.Hon. Geoffrey Macho, MP Busia Municipality, was concerned about regular load shedding, which had adversely affected service delivery in Busia Municipality. [Ms Nabbanja] PRIME MINISTER’S TIME7921THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 6 APRIL 2023His prayer was: what are the necessary measures that the Government is undertaking to ensure consistent power supply in Busia Municipal Council?Mr Speaker, in July last year, Umeme Limited commenced refurbishment works on the Busia 33KV feeder, which feeds both Busia Municipality and Samia Bugwe Central, to improve the performance of the feeder.The scope of works included poles replacement, conductor upgrades, installation of line switches and isolation devices as well as re-installation and the fitting of transformers.As this was being done, outages were planned and communicated to happen three times in a week, from 8.00 a.m. to 5.00 p.m. to have works completed over the shortest practical time. The works were completed in January this year and the power supply is now normal in Busia. Hon. Asinansi Nyakato, the Woman Representative, Hoima City, raised a concern about regular load shedding, which she said had adversely affected service delivery in Hoima City. Her prayer was: what are the necessary measures that the Government is undertaking to ensure consistent power supply in Hoima City? Mr Speaker, my response is that in Hoima City, a feeder fault analysis had been undertaken that showed two faults on the Hoima Town 11KV line that caused an electricity blackout, lasting a combined 1.5 hours. One was due to a broken jumper/wire and the other was a brief variation in electricity voltage caused by tree branches touching the wire. However, power supply has been restored and the people of Hoima are enjoying the power supply constantly. Hon. Teddy Nambooze, the Woman Representative, Mpigi, raised the issue of unpleasant working conditions and low pay – that is, poor welfare – of journalists in Uganda. Her prayer was: can the Government inform the House about the strategies in place to improve the working conditions and salary/wages of journalists in Uganda?Mr Speaker, I wish to acknowledge the concerns raised by the honourable member regarding the conditions under which our media personnel work. Indeed, the Government is equally concerned that most members of the fourth estate, who play a critical role in informing, educating and entertaining the public continue to work in unpleasant conditions.As Members are aware, the regulation of journalists in Uganda is partly through the Press and Journalist Act, Cap. 105 while issues of remuneration for all Ugandans are under the Employment Act, 2006.Under the current legal framework, neither the Government nor the regulators namely, the Uganda Media Council, and the Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) can legally force media owners to give journalists a specified amount of salary. Journalists, like other workers in the country, independently negotiate with their employers to ensure that they are paid reasonable salaries to support their well-being.Mr Speaker, the Press and Journalist Act, Cap. 105, under Part Six, empowers the Media Council to regulate media practice through the regulation of journalists and issuance of practising certificates among other interventions. Section 8 of the same Act further mandates the Uganda Media Council to exercise disciplinary control over the media: arbitrate disputes between the public and the media for public viewing. In that regard, the Council developed a media regulation strategy in 2016 to place all media practices and practitioners under effective control of the law. Through that strategy, the Government would know the quality and quantity of players in the sector, including issues of the welfare of journalists and how to address them. 7922 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.1 FOR FY 2022/2023However, in 2020, the Editors’ Guild and another filed a miscellaneous application against the Attorney-General in the High Court, which nullified the Media Council’s registration of journalists, save for the registration of editors under Section 5 of the Press and Journalist Act. As a result, the Government could not address these issues conclusively.Mr Speaker and colleagues, I should inform the House that on 16 March 2022, media players from both state and non-state media signed a memorandum of understanding to establish the Uganda Media Sector Working Group. The objectives of the working group include enhancing the credibility and integrity of the media through the promotion of compliance with ethical standards. It will also provide a platform for discussions on mutual relations among the media stakeholders for the development of the media industry in the country. Under these frameworks, various issues, including journalists’ remuneration should be addressed. However, as noted earlier, Section 25 of the Employment Act, 2006 provides that a contract of service may either be oral or written, but does not impose any statutory obligation on employers to pay employees specific sums of money. This legal loophole is partly the source of the challenges being faced by media employees and other employees in the Government. I am aware that UCC has taken this seriously and has often engaged media owners through their umbrella associations; the National Association of Broadcasters and the Rural Broadcasters Association to improve the welfare of their employees. However, under the current legal regime, they all know that the regulator cannot legally force operations to address management issues like salaries. Mr Speaker and colleagues, it is important to note that the broadcasting industry is facing revenue and financial difficulties due to challenges or changes in the advertising space. With the popularity of new media and technology development, advertisers are increasingly using other platforms such as social media. This, unfortunately, coincided with tough economic conditions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and other global events. This has caused significant sustainability challenges for media houses, which depend largely on advertising revenues. Indeed, some have since closed or sold off their businesses. The good news is that Parliament is currently processing the Employment (Amendment) Bill, No.31 of 2022, which I believe can be improved to impose specific obligations on employers, including media owners, to improve their employees’ welfare.Lastly, I appeal to you to pay keen interest in the process of amending the Employment Act such that together as Parliament, we can improve the law to address all concerns surrounding employment. This will arm the Government and regulators like the UCC to effectively hold media owners accountable with respect to their staff welfare. I beg to submit. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Colleagues, I will start with colleagues who registered their matters of national importance with me because I had promised them and I will read your name, do not mind. I will start with Hon. Nsamba, followed by Hon. Faith Nakut.5.28MR PATRICK OSHABE (NUP, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in the previous session, we sat here as Parliament and we requested the Government to support the coffee farmers with seedlings. And the Minister of Finance was here and he promised that they were going to give the nursery operators an opportunity to supply coffee. Nursery operators supplied the coffee at that time, but up to now, only Shs 255 million has been given to UCDA for coffee seedlings. Mr Speaker, you know how -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you know, we use one minute for these questions. Be very sharp so that we give others a chance.[Ms Nabbanja] PRIME MINISTER’S TIME7923THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 6 APRIL 2023MR OSHABE: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker and Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you know how important coffee is, I want to ask you, is the Government ready to support coffee farmers this season because the rains are already underway. Secondly, is the Government ready to pay the nursery operators that supply the coffee? Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Clerk, set one minute; let us do sharp questions with sharp answers the way we have been doing it, so that we accommodate many. MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker and colleagues, you will agree with me that this House pressured the Government and said that we needed to help our farmers since the PDM money was not forthcoming then because remember, our policy is that our farmers will use the PDM money.I remember informing you, honourable members, that are informing the Government. I informed the President who agreed with our proposal but he gave a condition that we shall pay these nursery operators in two financial years. This financial year is currently on and the next financial year. So, I do not think the Government has breached the agreement in any way. (Member rose_)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On these matters, the rules do not allow.MS NABBANJA: The other question you asked was whether the Government is going to buy it this financial year? Now that PDM money has started trickling down to farmers, we request that they use that money to buy coffee seedlings. (Laughter)5.31MS FAITH NAKUT  (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the matter is about the 21 boys who were released from Gulu Remand Home last week and had been starved. They are now in Kotido being taken care of by the Church of Uganda Health Centre II. One of the boys died and was buried. They were starved in a remand home. What are you going to do to help Kotido Health Centre II to restore the lives of those boys? Secondly, to the family that lost their dear one - because they were deliberately starved - are you going to do something to compensate or comfort the family? Thirdly, the remand homes in Uganda are many - and I am aware that they have no resources to take care of the juveniles. What are you doing about this?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, these are the same boys we talked about this morning.MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, unfortunately, today I have been very busy. You are aware we had a Commission meeting. Also, today morning is when I presented my statement to the Committee on Presidential Affairs, and now, I am here. I want to promise my colleague that we shall investigate and come back here and inform the House what went wrong.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I am happy with that. Please give us a comprehensive answer on Thursday. MS NABBANJA: On health centres II, I will instruct the Ministry of Health to ensure they are upgraded to health centres III because that is the policy.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, the Leader of Government Business has staff here. They capture all these issues very well. So, on Thursday, that is going to be part of the answer she will give, and that has been captured on the Hansard. [Members rose_]Honourable members, you do not need to lobby me. I will start with those whose names I recorded. Some who have never smiled at me are now smiling. (Laughter) You see, this is the 7924 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.1 FOR FY 2022/2023only time – now see another is lobbying again. Hon. Fadil Twalla, what is wrong?5.33MR KARIM MASABA  (Independent, Industrial Division, Mbale City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is a matter of national importance in regard to the new evaluation laws and the property rates being charged right now in Mbale City. I got a petition from the Mbale taxable property owners regarding the evaluation report, which was submitted to the Ministry of Local Government, for endorsement and enforcement in regard to collection of property tax in the city. Right now, the new rate that has been set - and people are not okay with it - is 8 per cent, which they believe is quite high. That is why they petitioned, given that Kampala, which is the capital city, is charging 6 per cent. So, increasing this rate from 2 to 8 per cent, they believe, is quite abnormal –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Question?MR MASABA: My prayer is that the Ministry of Local Government intervenes and stops the implementation of the new evaluation laws; and I further pray that the minister stops Mbale City authorities from closing people’s property.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, we are supposed to use a minute. MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, he has already answered that question because my response was that when different cities came into being, they did their own evaluations. Anyhow, we shall see how best to harmonise with the Ministry of Local Government. Otherwise, that is the reason for the variation.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you can sit nearby. Or do you want to do more exercise?5.36MR BUMALI MPINDI (Independent, PWD Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On 25 October 2022, Salaama School for the Blind burned and 12 children with visual impairment died. However, up to now, the report about that incident has not come out. The First Lady lobbied MTN to construct a dormitory and today, during the ground-breaking ceremony to reconstruct the dormitory that was burnt, the RDC of Mukono, Ms Fatuma Ndibasa wanted to arrest the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of MTN. I want to know from the Prime Minister when the report is coming out.Two, Mr Speaker –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is always one question. Honourable colleagues, we have the whole of this House. When we move out, some of you start accusing me, “What did I do to you, Rt Hon. Speaker?” Yet, you are the ones asking for more time? Where do I buy time? We shall use one minute so that I can give each of you an opportunity. Yes, Prime Minister.MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Internal Affairs is hereby directed to go to Mukono. The RDC is equally directed, through the Presidency ministry, to allow this Samaritan to do the needful and help our people. 5.38MS PASKA ACIRO (Independent, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. A week ago, heavy wind blew off the roof for Ludel Primary School and right now, our pupils are learning under a very unconducive environment. My prayer is that the Office of the Prime Minister, through the disaster preparedness ministry, immediately attends to this by providing the roofing materials and ensuring the school is rehabilitated. Thank you. MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, we still have some iron sheets - (Laughter) – under different dockets. The disaster preparedness ministry still has 1,408 iron sheets and so, I direct the minister in charge to give you iron sheets and [The Deputy Speaker] PRIME MINISTER’S TIME7925THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 6 APRIL 2023support to ensure that the school is rebuilt. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, we are in Prime Minister’s Time. This is not matters of national importance. That is why I am not calling on the respective ministers to respond; it is the Prime Minister to do this, as per the rules. Secondly, frame your prayers into questions. Say, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I have this disaster. When are you coming? What are you doing about it? Very quick!5.40MR ALLAN MAYANJA  (NUP, Nakaseke Central County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in Nakaseke District, almost 800 Government employed scientists have not been paid salaries for February and March. Why did the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development send wage funds to Nakaseke District with a shortfall of Shs 2.6 billion?MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, what the honourable is talking about is true because I have a sister who works in Nakaseke Hospital. She told me the same story and I called the Chief Administrative Officer and advised her to write to the ministry - and it is good that the minister, my senior brother, is here. Please come and explain why you are not paying the scientists in Nakaseke District. (Laughter)5.41THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Wilson Muruli-Mukasa): Mr Speaker, it is unfortunate. Yes, our good workers of Nakaseke have not been paid but you recall that when we were concluding the budget, there was a shortfall. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development promised that this shortfall would actually be covered. However, it has taken a bit of time to cover it and it has caused this kind of anguish to the workers.We had some interactions with the Minister of Finance and he gave me comfort that when they write, they will do what it takes to make sure this shortfall is covered and our workers are paid. 5.43MS FLA VIA KABAHENDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the people of Kyegegwa have waited for long on the Government assurance to construct for them a road from Kazo, through Kyegegwa to Muzizi - the oil road. We have waited for 10 years but Government only keeps assuring us. The people of Kyegegwa are watching us on television right now; can you assure them when that road will be done? MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, the road from Kazo to Bulemba up to Hapuyo and Muzizi is a priority road and the President gave a directive. I assure the people of Kyegegwa, who are watching us on television, that that road will be upgraded to bitumen – (Interactions) - you are the people who appropriate; so, the moment you give us the funds, we will work on that road. 5.44MR FADIL TWALLA (NRM, Tingey County, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Last year in June, the President visited Sebei and met Members of Parliament from Bugisu and Sebei Subregions, and the issue of the boundary between Sebei and Bugisu was raised. The President promised to send the Prime Minister. So, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, how far have you gone with that? MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, the honourable member is aware that I have been to Sebei and Mbale. We are doing all it takes with the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and that of Local Government to make sure this is done; we are only doing due diligence so that we do not harm any side. 5.45MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to find out 7926 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.1 FOR FY 2022/2023whether you are aware that the cotton industry is going down. I am asking this because as I speak, the few indigenous ginners in Uganda - not only in Northern Uganda - are stuck with bales of lint, which they cannot export. I would like to know whether you are also considering these indigenous ginners with the kind of bail-outs that are given to other industrialists in and around Uganda. I do not know whether it is being done selectively, but I thought that as a villager who has been educated by the proceeds from cotton growing - and I know that cotton is very important to this economy – I seek to know whether you are considering helping these local ginners because of the bad prices.MS NABBANJA : Cotton is one of the crops in this country that help us in the economy. You are aware that the small-scale farmers were advised to do otherwise. Therefore, we now only have big farmers. I want to inform my sister that I will cause a meeting where I will invite you, together with officials from the Cotton Development Organisation, so that we can look for solutions together - as Government and you.5.47MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju West County, Buhweju): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Buhweju is an area endowed with minerals, especially gold. Unfortunately, the vehicles and the machinery deployed to mine gold destroy the very poor existing roads on the ground. My prayers are: 1. Can Government go to the ground and assess the situation with the view of expeditiously working on these roads? 2. Can Government think of sharing the revenues from the minerals with the district to help it restore the roads to a motorable situation? Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, can I request that you stop writing to me to pick you? (Laughter) I told you that I have been suspending many issues of national importance. I must first exhaust that list because I told them that I will first handle them; they laboured to come to my office. MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, since I became the Prime Minister, I have been to Buhweju four times. I want to give a scenario: one day, it rained and all the roads got blocked; we suffered. So, when I came back, I wrote to the President. The President, in his wisdom and powers, directed the Ministry of Works and Transport to prioritise roads in Buhweju. I want to assure my brother that your roads are a priority line and they are going to be worked upon in the next financial year. 5.48MR MAURICE KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Mulago National Referral Hospital has not had water for more than three months. The lifts in the hospital are also not working. The CT scan in Mulago is down and the patients are now being refereed to private units. The MRI in Mulago is also down.We need to know from you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, if Government surrendered Mulago and decided to promote private institutions. Which plans do you have for Mulago National Referral Hospital? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, the whole of Mulago is down? MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, Mulago National Referral Hospital benefitted from renovation. As you are aware, ROKO Construction Company was contracted to renovate and upgrade that hospital up to 2018. You know the issues that forced ROKO not to work - because I remember we handled matters pertaining to ROKO Construction Company here. Mr Speaker, the CT scan, the MRI, the Mammogram and many other machines at Mulago have not been functional recently because they were badly installed in the rooms by the engineers. [Ms Ogwal] PRIME MINISTER’S TIME7927THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 6 APRIL 2023Recently, I had a meeting in Mulago and we agreed that once ROKO starts on the renovation - they are supposed to go back and start from where they had stopped. Therefore, they are going to start with those sections and we shall have the MRI, the CT scan, the Mammogram and many other testing equipment functional again. Thank you. On the issue of water, I want to make it clear that it is not true that all the sections in Mulago do not have water. There are just a few sections. We were told –(Interjection)–  let me give you bwiino because I usually go to Mulago; that is my hospital - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, help us to translate “bwiino” so that the Hansard can –(Laughter) MS NABBANJA: “Bwiino” is ink - black and white. Mr Speaker, the fact is that there is something being done about the water issue, as we speak.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Joyce Acan? 5.52MS JOYCE ACAN (NRM, PWD Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Last year, around July, Hon. Alex Ndeezi raised a matter concerning the School of the Deaf in Mbale. It was about a wrangle in the school between the hearing and the non-hearing students as well as the teachers. Mr Speaker, the wrangle has not been resolved to date. When Hon. Alex Ndeezi raised the issue here, the House was told that the Minister of Education and Sports was going to follow up the matter. Last week, I saw it under the “Business to follow” yet the report has not come to the Floor of Parliament. These students are about to kill each other. What is the Prime Minister telling us? Has the Minister of Education and Sports tabled the report on that investigation to the Prime Minister’s office? I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. She has assigned the minister - you see, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when you assign a minister, for purposes of having a record on the Hansard, we want to know whom you have assigned because it is your time.MS NABBANJA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that wise guidance. Let me ask the minister for education to respond to this question.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister -?5.54THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true we are aware of the wrangle in the School of the Deaf in Mbale. At the ministry, the commissioner in charge of special needs education, with a team of technical people, are getting on the ground to ascertain the actual problem. I will bring the report to this august House –(Interjections)–  when? The House begins on Tuesday -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  On Wednesday, I will give you space.MR OGWANG: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. 5.55MR MBWATEKAMWA GAFFA (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, my concern is about the cement that is being sold in this country – I am looking at both quality and quantity.When you look at the houses that our grandparents used to construct, you realise that up to now, the floors are still intact. However, currently, when you buy cement - different brands - and even if you use the ratio of 1:1 – the following day, you will find a crack. I think this could be one of the reasons why some buildings are collapsing. 7928 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.1 FOR FY 2022/2023Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what is the Government doing about this fake cement that is being sold?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Angura says you should buy Tororo Cement, from his constituency. (Laughter)MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I received a directive from the President - I think he had already got wind of this. We had a meeting with – because after the earthquake that occurred in Turkey, the President got concerned and many of you were asking him whether we were safe in case of any catastrophe, like the one that took place in Turkey and Syria. Therefore, he directed me, with the Ministry of Works and Transport, the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and the Uganda Building Control Board - we have had a number of meetings. Mr Speaker, the quality of cement in this country is okay, according to the governing bodies. Mr Speaker, Ugandans must take note that the masons we employ to build our structures also matter. You must have people who know what to do. The way they mix the sand and cement has a lot – the quality of sand also matters - you may have sand that is mixed with clay. Therefore, we are doing something and I promise that I will come here and give details of the outcomes of our meetings. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The committee on trade, where Hon. Mbwatekamwa falls, should also interest itself in the matter, working with the Prime Minister. 5.58MR ALOYSIUS MUKASA (NUP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, my dissatisfaction is with a company called Seven Hills, which for three years, has subjected over 7,000 women to hard labour without pay. I am inquiring about the legal and contractual relationship between Seven Hills and the city authority. Thank you very much. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What does it do? You need to tell that to the Prime Minister. Do they collect garbage? MR ALOYSIUS MUKASA: They do desilting and cleaning the city.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, last month, I received complaints from a number of people who were working in Kampala without pay. They told me they were working under Seven Hills. It is an organisation that is helping KCCA to keep Kampala Capital City clean. I was told some of their people were not paying those women and the young children who help to clean the city.We had one meeting, which was not conclusive because the owners of that company did not come. I promise that together with the minister for Kampala, I will come back and report. 6.00MR ROLAND NDYOMUGYENYI (Independent, Rukiga County, Rukiga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Government built a very nice seed school - Rwamucucu Seed School – in Rukiga. It has a very good laboratory and computer lab, but there is no electricity. For one-and-a-half years, the computer laboratory has not worked. My woman MP raised this issue before and you said you were going to follow it up. When will you give us an alternative source of power? If the Ministry of Energy cannot extend power to that school, can’t you at least give us a solar system that can help the students in Rukiga District to enjoy the services of the Government?MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, this is an inter-ministerial issue comprising the Ministry of Education and that of energy. I think I need to cause a meeting. It is not an isolated case because I have also got a similar case in Busunju. We need to sit – the Minister of Education and Sports is here. I do not know whether he has something different to say.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we do not want dismissive answers.[Mr Mbwatekamwa] PRIME MINISTER’S TIME7929THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 6 APRIL 20236.02THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang):  Mr Speaker, I concur with the directive of the Prime Minister that we need an inter-ministerial committee. As you all know, our role is entirely to build seed secondary schools. It is the Ministry of Energy that is supposed to connect power. So, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we will wait for your directive. I thank you.6.02MR MOSES ALEPER (NRM, Chekwii County (Kadam), Nakapiripirit):  Thank you. Last Thursday, I raised a serious security concern concerning the corridors of Nakapiripirit and Amudat districts. This is a very serious and unprecedented security concern. I requested that a high-level delegation from the Ministries of Defense, Internal Affairs, and top UPDF leadership should actually visit the area and assess the situation. I was given some hope, but up to now, nothing has happened. Immediately - that very evening, someone was killed again and livestock was stolen. Just two days after that -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Can you repeat the area?MR MOSES ALEPER: The corridors between Amudat and Nakapiripirit districts. The situation is serious. There is a lot of anxiety, people are scared and wondering what this government is doing for them. They are asking one question, which I now extend to the Prime Minister: how many more people do you want to see dead before you take action? They want the quorum that you want.MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, I want to assure this country that we do not want to lose any life because every life matters. I have been in touch with my brother. I even organised for him a teleconference meeting where the army commander, the PS Ministry of Defence, the Minister of Defence, and I, were present and we made a number of recommendations, which I am told are being implemented. And they are:1. To add more troops to his area. On this, they told me Tuesday, and today is Thursday. I will find out why they have not sent more troops to Nakapiripirit; and2. We agreed to send a drone and an aeroplane to chase those rustlers using a chopper – (Interjections)  – yes! So, we are going to handle this squarely.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you.6.05MS MOURINE OSORU (NRM, Woman Representative, Arua City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, earlier last month, Pokiya and Komite wards in Arua City experienced a disaster of heavy rains and winds that blew off so many people’s roofs in more than 200 homes and many people are now stranded. Could you help my people in those two wards by providing them with relief items like blankets, food and iron sheets because they are really in bad state? Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I do not think all the Mabati will go to Hon. Pascal.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, the President is going to Arua next week. I am going to inform him before he goes to Arua so he can guide me on how to handle this but as I told you, Northern Uganda - and Arua falls under Northern Uganda - we can always look around and get iron sheets for you.6.06MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga North County, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I happened to be an old man and I requested your office to let ministers give copies of their policy statements for their sectors, to Members of Parliament.However, as of now, only sectoral committees have their policy statements. I want to know what happens in the Ministry of Water and the Ministry of Education and so on. When I was at the University - yesterday, you said you were 2001 (Interjections) -  1981. 7930 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.1 FOR FY 2022/2023THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, 1980. MR BYANYIMA: By then, I was almost leaving the university. When Idi Amin was the President, we used to get books from the university, which you happen not to have; we had a book allowance. And one time the Vice Chancellor said –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you know we use one minute but conclude.MR BYANYIMA: He said that only doctors should have books; others can go to the library. The big man came and said that even soldiers must have guns after training. We need this information to know what happens in the Prime Minister’s office like we used to; it is a simple cost. I want to know what is happening everywhere. I thank you.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, you are aware that we are now in a digital era. I am going to direct the ministers to upload their ministerial policy statements so that we can access this information on our iPads.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, as the leadership of the House, we want to start tracking our carbon footprints. You are going to reach a time, in the coming years - not far from now - where Hon. Songa’s experts - the rest of the world will be saying, “Before we allow Parliament to do this, tell us about your carbon footprint and what you are doing to reduce it.” One of the things is the distribution of paper because paper comes from timber and to process paper, one has to cut down trees. So, in a few years to come, we shall totally go digital, where even the Speaker will have any documents here. You better prepare yourself, and that is why we are giving you iPads. We are going to streamline our IT systems. However, you also travel; you keep going upcountry, and to many places. You should be able to access any of these documents from anywhere. That is why we are trying to be as digital as possible. For Members who will need support, I am going to talk to the Clerk and we see how best we can support you for you to benefit from this digital transformation.6.09MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Madam Prime Minister, my question is brief. On the day we met in Pallisa while commissioning the Tirinyi-Pallisa-Kumi Road, you clearly promised the people of Kumi Municipality that the tarmac for the roads would soon come. They have been waiting, and I think they are arranging to petition your office in Kampala. I only asked them to wait because I was going back with the right answer. (Laughter) Madam Prime Minister, what answer should I deliver to the people?MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, when we commissioned the roads of Pallisa-Kamonkoli and the one from Pallisa to Kumi, there are a number of kilometres of roads, and I think these are the ones we are talking about - Kumi was promised 12.5 kilometres while Pallisa was promised 7 kilometres. The challenge we had is that there was suppression in that financial year. However, this financial year, the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA), under the Ministry of Works and Transport has been given some money and the contractor; the Arab contractors have also been directed to go and work on your roads, and also, go and prepare - remember there was a problem around Bulangira; I do not know whether the Member of Parliament for that area is here. Bulangira is in Kibuku District. Due to the accidents that have been happening there, we are also going to widen that area. So, be patient. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Yes, Hon. Mapenduzi.6.12MR MARTIN OJARA MAPENDUZI (Independent, Bardege-Layibi Division, Gulu City): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Ministry of Local Government has been struggling to PRIME MINISTER’S TIME7931THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 6 APRIL 2023secure funding to the tune of about Shs 15 billion to help induct the newly-elected leaders, who from 2021, when they were elected, have never been inducted. Unfortunately, over 30 districts are currently involved in serious conflicts and services are almost paralyzed. Would it not be possible for you to consider supporting the Minister of Local Government expeditiously to build the capacity of these local governments so they can deliver services? Secondly, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, is the promise that Government made to support districts from where cities were created - the 10 districts –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, your one minute is up but conclude.MR MAPENDUZI:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. These districts were supposed to be given Shs 1 billion each to build offices in the due places they are supposed to relocate. In Gulu right now, the staff are being forced to relocate to a subcounty and while at the subcounty, they are being forced to sit under trees.Rt Hon. Prime Minister, would it not be fair to try and find the Shs 10 billion needed for the 10 districts so they can build the offices and can move and allow the cities to function well? Thank you.MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, yesterday, I was with the leaders from all the districts in the country - the LC V chairpersons - and they raised this matter. The LC V Chairperson and all the mayors of the 10 cities were also present. They brought up this issue.The fact is that when I was in Masaka, I noticed they are struggling. I was in Gulu and they are also complaining. I was in Hoima and they are equally complaining. So, the issue is:  since this Parliament is now in the budgeting process, we must handle this together. The Ministry of Local Government is currently meeting those leaders there. The solution is that all of us - the leaders in those cities, the Ministry of Local Government and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development - I think I will organise a meeting to agree on how to move forward.He is talking about inducting our leaders. Mr Speaker, the turnover of our local leaders this time round was a bit high. That is why there are wars in Busia. They want to impeach - almost every district chairperson has issues. So, I request that in that meeting, we talk about it and come up with a way forward. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, if know you brought a matter to my office, please stop harassing me. Be patient. I know some of you are rushing because you want to speak and go. Many I have allowed to speak have gone. So, be patient. I will give you chance. Yes, Hon. Noman Ochero?6.15MR NOMAN OCHERO (NRM, Labwor County, Abim): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have two brief questions. One, I have the most dilapidated hospital in this country called Abim Hospital. In 2002, they constructed a sewerage line but after five years, it broke down. In 2006, they fitted bulbs but after five years, all the bulbs collapsed. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, why do you renovate this hospital piecemeal yet most hospitals are renovated at once? They do it in parts. You put the bulbs but they all collapse. Secondly, I was with the Minister of Works and Transport – I must thank the Government that plans to tarmac the road from Lira to Kotido are underway. Mr Speaker, I was hopeful because we were told in April - maybe he will announce the same thing – (Member timed out.) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, why do you help Abim in instalments? (Laughter) He is the former LC V Chairperson of Abim District, and he is very concerned.7932 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.1 FOR FY 2022/2023MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I am equally concerned. I will request the Ministry of Health to give us a report why they are doing this because I have been to Abim with my sister, Hon. Okori Moe, and the situation of the road he has talked about - on the hospital, I will inquire. I will ask the Minister of Health, but Abim is one of our priority roads areas as I have already told you. 6.17MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bukimbiri County, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I have two very brief issues of national importance. In Uganda, we do not know who does manpower planning to the extent that the Government of Uganda recruits teachers for secondary schools. They go to the Ministry of Education and Sports, they are deployed. When they go to the district, they are told there is no corresponding wage bill. So, we need that harmonised. Mr Speaker, I want the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to tell this country when this problem of deploying teachers and being bounced will be resolved. The second is about tourism roads. It has become politics than economics or a reality. Can we not excite people that the roads are going to be made and just tell them when they are ready? Because the tourism roads in Bukimbiri are impassable yet we are entering a tourism season. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. That is Rubuguri Road; the road, which brings into the country, lots of money. MR KWIZERA: Mr Speaker, in my constituency, we have 36 tourism hotels and we collect Shs 250 million for Uganda Wildlife Authority every day, but the roads are impassable.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, the tourism roads in this country are a priority. We did not deceive the people of Bukimbiri, especially during his campaigns. He knows I was heading his campaigns on behalf of the Government, and that is why he is here –(Interjections)– yes, we went there and campaigned for him, and these roads, I promise will be worked upon by the Government. I just request him to be patient. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, I was in that area for Gorilla tracking – not for campaigns. But the experience I had was that there is no way - I do not think a tourist can travel that area and come back. If it wasn’t for gorillas - so, we are taking advantage of that.Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I know you have the commitment but kindly push harder because we are losing a lot of tourists to other countries. I have talked to some of the tourists and asked them how the roads are – I can use a helicopter to go there - I went there for gorilla tracking but it was extremely horrible. I know someone who was building a hotel here but two of his trucks that were carrying cement overturned and all of it was lost.That area is very critical - the money it brings. Prime Minister, I know you know the area very well; kindly take it up seriously. He also raised the issue of teachers.MS NABBANJA:  Let me request the Minister of State for Sports to respond.6.21THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang): First of all, I would like to begin by thanking Hon. Kwizera, for the question. It is true, the Education Service Commission recruits teachers. As the Ministry of Education and Sports, we normally plan to have money given to us for purposes of having the wage for these teachers taken care of. So, in the event that the planners at the Ministry of Finance do not release or give us the money, what do we do? I would like to confirm that those teachers exist and when money is available, they will be deployed. I thank you.[Ms Nabbanja] PRIME MINISTER’S TIME7933THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 6 APRIL 2023THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Please, we are in Prime Minister’s Time. So, you cannot compliment on any issue, no way. Read rule 41; it is very clear. I have many names here.MS NABBANJA: Do not go away; I want to see how to solve this problem. The honourable member says that the Ministry of Education and Sports has appointed teachers but that once they go to the districts, they are told that they do not have a wage. The minister did not give me or the members a satisfying answer. These teachers already have the appointment letters. They want to go to class and start working. And these schools do not have teachers.However, at the same time, the wage that we give districts is not enough for our teachers who have been recruited. That is why I want the minister in charge of that docket - to give us a way forward because we cannot continue like this?6.23THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Wilson Muruli Mukasa): Mr Speaker, what the Minister of State for Sports has told the House is true. The recruitment was done under the strong promise that a wage would be availed towards the beginning of this financial year. It had been agreed that there would be recruitment of teachers, at least a limited number, to handle the shortage of teachers in schools. However, when the Ministry of Finance went around adjusting a few things here and there, the money that had been earmarked could not go for the wage yet at the same time the Education Service Commission had recruited. The process went on well and had even given the successful applicants employment letters. Therefore, the teachers – (Mr Okupa rose_)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Not under Prime Minister’s Time, please, Hon. Okupa.MR MURULI MUKASA: Therefore, the schools cannot take them up because there is no reasonable wage, I think. We have been talking to the Ministry of Finance -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can we have a statement on this on Thursday, so that you have room for discussion as Government; you can even discuss it in Cabinet on Monday, get the solution, then Thursday is a good time. MR MURULI MUKASA:  Agreed.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.6.25MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you went to Malaba Border Post when there was a strike during the time we had a looming fuel crisis, and you directed that to decongest the border, empty trucks returning to Kenya be rerouted via Lwakhakha and other border exit posts but the border community gate that used to serve the people remained closed. When shall we get the border of Malaba exiting trucks since the strike ended? And when shall we have the border community gate opened for people to freely move within the border? Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there is someone who took a small key, I even talked to the deputy director, linking him with Hon. Opendi, over that same matter. It is a small gate that they closed and someone went with the key. You can go and cut the paddock. It is an issue to do with a small key.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, that small gate at Malaba – as I was told by the Ministry of Internal Affairs - was facilitating illegal trade. But I think we now have no alternative but to open it so that they can deploy to stop this illegal trade. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How about on exit of trucks via Lwakhakha?7934 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.1 FOR FY 2022/2023MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, in order to decongest Malaba Border Post, we had agreed that we use Lwakhakha but our traders are complaining that sometimes they are going to shorter distances yet that road leads them very far. So, we shall handle that as well.6.28MR WILLIAM CHEMONGES (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I only have two questions but one is very crucial. Since January, Sebei, particularly Kween District, has lost almost 30 people through cattle rustling. Only this week, over 400 cows were stolen by the cattle rustlers. As we speak, about 200 were taken last night and it seems even the UPDF has completely failed to manage the situation because yesterday, they followed 100 cows, which had been stolen up to a kraal, but the UPDF could not even attempt to open the kraal.Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I am aware you know about this. When are you going to listen to the people of Kween or Sebei and get a lasting solution to end cattle rustling?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Yes, Rt Hon. Prime Minister? MR CHEMONGES: And lastly -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you said only one is crucial.MS NABBANJA:  I already gave the answer; that we are going to employ a number of interventions, including drones and helicopters, and put more troops on the ground. Also, we are going to construct security roads so that our troops can ably move quickly to chase this enemy. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you will also need to meet representatives from Sebei, the way you have done for Karamoja so as to discuss this matter further.6.30MR DA VID SSERUKENYA (NUP, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, allow me to bring it to your attention that we do not have a rider’s licence in the country. Despite this, the police have gone ahead to arrest boda boda riders, impounding their motorbikes and making them pay fines. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, can you instruct the Ministry of Works and Transport to come up with a rider’s licence at a cheaper price of, say, Shs 200,000? Secondly, can you instruct the police to release all the motorcycles because they were illegally impounded? Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, Rt Hon. Prime Minister.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I want us to look at this matter objectively. Some boda boda riders are criminals; they have killed people. When those are arrested, they should be handled according to the law. There are those who are killing people and escaping using boda bodas – and everybody knows this. We shall handle those ones. Then, there are these boda boda cyclists who genuinely need support. We had a meeting with KCCA, the Ministry of Works and Transport and URA in January, and we came up with some figures. I request that the Minister of Works and Transport be allowed to come and give us the figures – and the figures are friendly. They are even less than the Shs 200,000 that you are proposing. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, on that issue, I experienced an incident the other day and came to know why some Ugandans have really given up on helping. I was coming from Matugga and a boda boda rider - I think he was riding at a very high speed and carrying two people - and my lead car was near. This man came from nowhere and knocked a taxi from behind and fell just next to my car. The taxi was full. My team said we should proceed, but I said, no. PRIME MINISTER’S TIME7935THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 6 APRIL 2023I see people injured here. So, please, stop the car. Use one of the cars to carry these people to hospital. However, to my surprise, as we were coming, a few followed us and – so, I received a call from NTV that “you have knocked someone and you have brought them to hospital, but you have not compensated them.” (Laughter) I said: “So, you mean I should have moved on!” You had an accident. I stopped and helped to take you to hospital, but now you want to use it against me because you can hold a press conference to say a Member of Parliament or the Deputy Speaker caused an accident? It disturbed my mind. I came to understand why some people do not even stop. I am told that if you stop, some of them lynch you or say you have to compensate them. So, I do not know where we are headed as a country. Otherwise, this is an issue you need to look into seriously, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Hon. Boniface Okot? 6.34MR BONIFACE OKOT (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Post-COVID-19, Uganda is confronted with a huge challenge of high unemployment and underemployment. Going by multiple testimonies, even joining the Civil Service is, unfortunately, characterised by corruption, nepotism and stringent requirements on the basis of experience. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, how do you intend to avert the bottlenecks in joining Civil Service for the young people? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we need affirmative action for the young people.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, the fact is that even yesterday, when I was with the LC V chairpersons from all over the country – they are in Kyankwanzi right now – we talked about this. I asked them what do we do? Corruption is happening in the subcounties, villages and everywhere. The people who pay the bribes only complain behind the curtains. They do not come out openly because they are intimidated. Mr Speaker, I request that you permit the minister for labour, who is here, to give us a way forward. (Laughter) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: She is in charge of labour, the youth and even NSSF affairs. (Laughter)6.35THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, we have a programme that trains and deploys the youth as interns for about one year in different entities to allow them gain experience. In some circumstances, those youth are actually taken up by those companies.It is a programme that we started as a pilot, but we are now expanding it and if we can expand and move it to most of the Government entities - because for most youth, the requirement for experience knocks them off at the beginning. However, that programme has proved that most of the youth that have done internships have remained in those entities. So, we will expand this programme. We can make a comprehensive statement on the Floor about it and see how to expand it. Otherwise, the broader issue of the strategy for youth unemployment will be included in that statement. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, you can also engage members of the Parliamentary Youth Forum, led by the youth MPs, on this matter. Let us have Hon. Isingoma and then Hon. Ssewungu. Honourable members, the Prime Minister and I are not robots.6.37MR PATRICK ISINGOMA (Independent, Hoima East Division, Hoima City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The people affected by the East African Crude Oil Pipeline – the Project-Affected Persons (PAPs) – in the districts of Hoima, Kikuube and Kakumiro have not 7936 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.1 FOR FY 2022/2023been compensated and an air of discomfort is beginning to rise in those areas.Rt Hon. Prime Minister, can you pick interest in this matter and ensure that these people are paid expeditiously? Thank you.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, the Cabinet, on Monday, discussed this matter. We agreed to look for money and pay those people. Yes, some were paid but others continue to complain. So, investigations are still ongoing, and the Chief Government Valuer is equally in the know. They have been to Kakumiro many times, even before I became the Prime Minister. The issue is now at the compensation stage. I promise that the Government will help our people.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, Hon. Ssewungu. 6.39MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have come down because I want to physically see the Prime Minister in her rosary. The issue I am raising is the very one I raised here before.Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Uganda is a secular country and we are allowed to practice our religion. As we speak, there are people who were arrested together with a reverend because they were praying in Itojo, Ntungamo District, to God to help the President of Uganda fulfill the promises he had made to them. Could we know from you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, whether praying is an offence in Uganda now and any church leader caught praying is taken as a criminal? Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I read the story in newspapers; they were praying over fulfilment of government pledges but I do not know the style of praying they were using. MR SSEWUNGU:  They were in the church praying with a reverend.MS NABBANJA:  Are you sure?MR SSEWUNGU:  I am very sure.MS NABBANJA: I know him as a very good Catholic but the fact is that they were not praying from Ntungamo; they were in Fort Portal. You know Nabbanja is always current. (Applause)Mr Speaker, since they have gone to seek redress in our courts of law, let us give them time to go through that court process.6.41MR DERRICK ORONE (NRM, Gogonyo County, Pallisa):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Kachango Primary School pupils are studying from out for the past three months because of the heavy rainfall that blew the iron sheets off their classroom block. I have put in a request but I have not been replied to. I need your help. Thank you. MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, the Minister for Relief and Disaster Preparedness will do the needful. I saw his request and referred it to the relevant people but these days, you know what has been going on with iron sheets. We had to halt all the processes so that investigations could be concluded. When they are done, we shall definitely - because there are so many sheets in the store.6.42MR JOHN-BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NUP, Manjiya County, Bududa):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, thank you for the responses you have made. I will want to make very few comments. Let me commence with the one of Hon. Pamela Kamugo, the Woman Member of Parliament for Budaka, about eviction of people from wetlands.Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Government should walk the talk. If Government has chosen to preach water, they should not be seen drinking wine because this selective application of the environmental laws will not help any matters. [Mr Isingoma] PRIME MINISTER’S TIME7937THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 6 APRIL 2023As you evict – for instance there is a serious case in Soroti – and the petition is coming to this House - where the RDC came with a grader and razed down even trees that had been planted as a mitigation measure for improving the environment. He cut down sugar canes, rice, greens and potatoes. Villages that are affected are Onyama, Abelet – that is a parish in Gweri Subcounty, which is within the county of Soroti. There is also Omalera Village, which is in Opuyo Ward. I do not know when RDCs constituted themselves into NEMA to enforce the NEMA law.We see in Kampala, for instance, wetlands being allocated to investors. If you are to enforce this law properly and set a serious deterrent, begin with these ‘big’ ones before you roll down to the small ones.I know NEMA’s mandate of is to take stock of all natural resources and their utilisation including conservation. However, this quarry you mentioned, which was in the question raised by Hon. Opio of Kole North, is the same challenge that the residents that - Hon. Fadil Twalla has gone out – but the residents in his constituency, which borders Bulambuli District, have a similar challenge. The quarry has polluted the area. People no longer serve food in the open because the dust enters even up to the bedrooms. There is serious noncompliance on the part of the so-called investors in these areas. Therefore, we would want to see NEMA take stock and enforcing the law rather than leaving it at the mercy of the people and even to the excited RDCs like the one of Soroti - I have forgotten his name; I should mention it here –(Interjections)– yes, Mr Komakech and his deputy even extort money from people who are using those wetlands. First of all, they extort money from them to allow them grow the rice. Then if they want more money, they come to destroy; threatening them to give money –(Interjections) – information, I have not allowed you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, rule 41 is very clear. This is not an item where you start sharing a microphone. The rule is very clear. You just have the right of response quickly, no information. So, do that and we finish.MR NAMBESHE: Thank you for shutting down this honourable minister who was coming to share the microphone. (Laughter) The question – I am concluding quickly - by Hon. Christine, the Woman Member of Kiboga about Kyankwanzi, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you did not dispense the justice that I anticipated to this question because a one Bosco Kasoko died. You were over defensive in your response. We have seen similar challenges around Mount Elgon National Park where these trigger-happy UWA authorities have killed people. Equally, the NFA could have armed themselves because they knew the encroachers would maybe turn violent. And if anyone was killed unlawfully, their survivors are entitled to compensation. You did not go that farther. The question by Hon. Mbwatekamwa - he had a very valid concern about cement. The fundamental question we should ask is: how much cement is in the cement that we use? I am saying so because the Uganda Bureau of Standards is sleeping on the job.  We should begin with trying to measure that cement. It is no longer the exact quantity.Even twisted bars, Mr Speaker, Y12, the standard length should be 40 feet - is it is an imperial system - in feet. However, it is much less. It is 38, 36 or 34. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So you even measure that? (Laughter)MR NAMBESHE: Yes, I have tried to do that to prove that the Uganda Bureau of Standards is not doing their job. For instance, there was 7938 MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.1 FOR FY 2022/2023a case in Tororo in the neighbourhood of my constituency - and I know Hon. Angura will bear me witness - where a gentleman called Richard Omwa was found selling adulterated cement. He was arrested by the police in Bendo B Zone - you know that fellow. Even in Mukono here, the same thing happened, and that was in July 2021. In Mukono, three people were arrested after the police burst a racket of fake cement manufacturers. So, fake cement is on the market. Speaker, as I conclude, serious issues regarding load shedding have been raised by two Members - the honourable member from Busia Municipality and the honourable member from Hoima City - and I would like to give you the statistics. As of December 2021, the Electricity Regulatory Authority (ERA) gave estimates that electricity capacity is 1,346 Megawatts and the demand is 800 Megawatts. Mr Speaker, we were with you in the same committee and so, you are very polished on these statistics - leaving a surplus of 546 Megawatts. With this surplus, why would Uganda be grappling with the challenge of load shedding, Madam Speaker? Sorry, Mr Speaker, I meant Madam Prime Minister; you know, you can never become a lady. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Remember, we are fighting homosexuality. (Laughter) You better behave. MR NAMBESHE: The question by Hon. Faith Nakut is very important, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. I want you to take it very seriously because the harsh life-threatening prison conditions that these young people were subjected to is a form of torture, which is unlawful in our laws. They should definitely be compensated, including according a decent burial to the other one who died. And the people behind this should be brought to book, Mr Speaker – sorry, Madam Prime Minister. (Laughter) I am taking long to finish but let me conclude. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you conclude because you might end up admiring me as a lady yet you know the law we passed here. (Laughter) Please conclude.MR NAMBESHE: Now let me conclude with the issue raised in regard to Abim Hospital by my former colleague, Hon. Noman Ochero. Abim Hospital is a serious issue, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. You know very well that the state of our health facilities in Uganda is deplorable, including Bududa and Kambuga hospitals. Kambuga is in Kanungu. You know what happened. Had the Member not been airlifted, he would be “RIP”. The last one is about the reverends that were arrested, arising from the question that was raised by Hon. Ssewungu. That question has not been given justice. You know that they are on remand and are not seeking any legal redress. They were tortured by the police. We have seen the video clips on electronic media. So, these are issues, which your docket is not – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Madam Nambeshe, please conclude. Oh, sorry! Hon. Nambeshe –(Laughter) No, honourable colleagues, I made the mistake.MR NAMBESHE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, but tit-for-tat is not a good game. (Laughter)  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, I am sorry I have not been able to accommodate all the questions. It is always painful when I see a colleague standing up and I do not give them an opportunity. However, when you come here in this seat and find that you have to move on, it becomes very difficult. Even after reducing the time to one minute, Members still had issues; I request for your indulgence. I do not mean any bad. Thank you. Honourable colleagues, we are going for Easter. I wish you a successful Easter holiday. I advise that when moving in the corridors, maybe [Mr Nambeshe] PRIME MINISTER’S TIME7939THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 6 APRIL 2023you can greet the Prime Minister, who leads Government. I am also targeting her around the corner. With that, I adjourn the House to Wednesday at 2.00 p.m.(The House rose at 6.54 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 12 April 2023 at 2.00 p.m.) 