Thursday, 28 April 2016

Parliament met at 2.07 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS   

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting and that welcome includes Prof. Kamuntu. (Laughter)

Honourable members, Sunday will be Labour Day; I will be altering the Order Paper to accommodate the statement from the minister to that effect. I have got indications that such a statement has been submitted to the Clerk’s Office. Therefore, as soon as the minister is ready, at the appropriate time, we will receive the statement.

The Committee on Budget is not ready. We should have supplied today and concluded this matter of the budget tomorrow as per our timelines that we had provided at the beginning of this process. However, we are not able to do so; the Budget Committee is actually still sitting and the main reason I have received from the chairperson is that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is submitting documents piecemeal and that is not helping the process. I would like to urge the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to avail all those matters that are required by the Committee on Budget so that the process is concluded and our timelines respected.

We have no choice but to extend the process of supplying these figures for this budget to next week and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should take note that some of the delays are being caused by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and its officials. Therefore, we will not be able to supply today or tomorrow. There are still requests being made for documents to be submitted and there are gaps that need to be filled but all the information is with the ministry of finance. 

Honourable minister, please help us so that we can finish this process not very far from the timelines we had agreed. So, that is the alteration I will make to the Order Paper to accommodate a statement from the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Affairs on the International Labour Day. At the appropriate time, that matter will be handled. Thank you. 

2.12
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. Gulu-Kitgum Road is cut off; Ogeng Bridge in Laguri subcounty along Gulu-Kitgum Road is broken down and from yesterday evening up to now as I speak, very many vehicles – both small ones and trucks – are stuck in the area.

Earlier on last year, Aswa Bridge in Puranga subcounty along Lira-Kitgum Road broke down and all vehicles going to Pader and Kitgum were relying on Gulu-Kitgum Road, which is now also cut off. This has caused a lot of problems to the people of Pader and the other districts that use this road and it might also lead to some loss of lives because, for example, in Pader we do not have a hospital and all serious cases of sickness are referred to Gulu. In case of emergencies, we might end up losing lives.

Therefore, I appeal to Government to take up this as a matter of urgency. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government, is there a statement to be made on this? Pader is completely cut off; two bridges have collapsed.

2.14
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, it is now becoming a trend that whenever we receive heavy rains, our infrastructure is affected.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, but the one between Lira and Pader broke down last year.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Then I will have to consult with the Ministry of Works and Transport. There must be something that is in the pipeline and I promise to get back to the House or my colleague on the progress made so far.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Hon. Lowila, please follow up with the Chief Whip on this matter. Thank you.

2.14
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Last week, I raised a matter of national importance in respect to Ugandan traders who lost their property in Kenya during the political violence. The Speaker then did direct the Minister Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to bring a statement on the status of the matter on Tuesday. However up to today, we have not heard from the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives  and the assets of these traders which had been placed in banks as securities are being threatened for foreclosure. 

We do not know what we can tell the traders on how far their matter has gone. I just would like to find out whether the minister of trade has done something so that we can update the traders who are in need of our help and protect their assets from being sold by the bank. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, please extract the minutes of the discussion we had on this issue last time and the matter raised today and then write a letter to the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives so that this matter can be handled next week, comprehensively. Give notice. Thank you. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

ADDITIONAL LIST OF ACCOUNTING OFFICERS

2.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table the additional list of the accounting officers for the Financial Year 2016/2017.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Let us hear the point of procedure.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I thank you very much. I would like to be guided; the Public Finance Management Act provides that those accounting officers that are adversely mentioned in the Auditor-General’s report should not have their tenures renewed.

Mr Speaker, we have presented reports here and the only way we would know what action has been taken would be when the honourable minister issues a Treasury Memorandum and it is audited by the Auditor-General. It seems to me that there is some disconnect between the work of the Auditor-General, the resolutions of this House and the process of renewing the work of accounting officers.

I would like to know whether it is okay for the honourable minister to keep bringing here lists of accounting officers without presenting to this House Treasury Memoranda that advise this House on the extent of action that he has taken. We have mentioned the names of some of these accounting officers and we have said that some of them should refund the money, be discontinued or disciplined but it is business as usual.

I would, therefore, like to be guided on whether it is okay for the finance minister to totally disregard the provisions.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are on procedure and you are receiving information? Had you finished?

MS ALASO: I have finished.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. These issues of clarification and the matters that you have just brought – clearly there were issues raised about some of the accounting officers and as the law has been properly cited, what steps have you taken to let this Parliament know that their concerns and the concerns of the Auditor-General have been addressed, honourable minister?  

2.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): I thank you, Mr Speaker.  

I would, first of all, like to inform hon. Alice Alaso that the Treasury Memorandum was laid on the Table one and a half weeks ago and is now on the record of Parliament. If you spare some time, you can actually look at it.

The second is that all these accounting officers have been appointed in accordance with the law. Anybody who had defaulted the rules has not been reappointed and all those who have satisfied the criteria as outlined in the law have been reappointed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you. Is that now clear to the honourable member from Serere? Next item.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO DEGAZETTE AND GAZETTE FOREST RESERVES

2.20
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to degazette and gazette forest reserves under Rule 47 of our Rules of Procedure:

“WHEREAS Article 39 of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda guarantees a person’s right to a clean and healthy environment;

AND WHEREAS Section 6 of the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, No. 8 of 2003 empowers the minister to, on the advice of the Board and after consultation with the local council and the local community in whose area the proposed forest reserve is to be located and with the approval of Parliament signified by its resolution, by statutory order, declare an area to be a central forest reserve;

AWARE THAT Section 8 of the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act empowers the minister to, with the approval of Parliament signified by resolution and upon carrying out an Environment Impact Assessment and complying with the requirements prescribed thereunder, de-gazette a forest reserve; 

FURTHER AWARE THAT the Minister, in compliance with sections 7 and 8 of the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act has, in preparation for de-gazetting the listed forest reserves, satisfied the requirements of Section 8 of the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, including acquisition of land in various parts of Uganda on which forest reserves are to be declared as well as carrying out environmental assessments as required;    

NOTING THAT various local and urban councils as well as other Government bodies have identified and allocated land to Government on which forest reserves can be gazetted and in accordance with the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, consultations, impact assessments and other legal requirements necessary for gazetting those areas as forest reserves have been complied with;   `
 
NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows:
    1. That the following forest reserves be de-gazetted; 
    (a) Part of Mbarara Central Forest Reserve (145 out of 194 hectares) situated in Mbarara Municipality Council, Mbarara District. 
    (b) Part of Lutoboka Central Forest Reserve 174 out of 403 hectares) situated in Kalangala Town Council in Kalangala District.
    (c) Part of Kitubulu Central Forest Reserve (27 out of 80 hectares) situated in Entebbe Municipal Council in Wakiso District. 
    (d) Ibanda Local Forest Reserve (13 hectares), situated in Ibanda Town Council in Ibanda District.
    (e) Nebbi Local Forest Reserve (10 hectares) situated in Nebbi Town Council in Nebbi District. 
    (f) Part of Fort Portal Central Forest Reserve (30 out of 65 hectares) situated in Fort Portal Municipal Council in Kabarole District. 
    (g) Part of Arua Central Forest Reserve (165 out of 236 hectares) situated in Arua Municipal Council in Arua District.
    (h) Part of Mbale Central Forest Reserve (430 out of 562 hectares) situated in Mbale Municipal Council in Mbale District. 
    (i) Part of Kimaka Central Forest  Reserve (27 out of 47 hectares) situated in Jinja District –“

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, for purposes of the record, you have to read what is in the text.

MR KWIZERA: Yes.
” 
    (j) Part of Gulu Central Forest Reserve (83 out of 93 hectares) situated in Gulu District. 
    (k) Namanve Central Forest Reserve (1200 Ha) situated in Kira Town Council in Wakiso District – (Interruption) 

MS NAMBOOZE: Order. Mr Speaker, I did not intend to interrupt the honourable colleague but I hear him read out forests in different areas. He has just said that Namanve Forest is in Wakiso District. 

I am the MP for Mukono Municipality in Mukono District and Namanve Forest is part of Mukono District. Is the Member in order to continue reading this motion which has false information, for example, that Namanve Forest is found in Wakiso District, whereas it is known that Namanve is part of Mukono District? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the whole of Namanve in Mukono District?

MR KWIZERA: Not the entire forest; only part of it is in Mukono District.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we receive it and then we see what to do with it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I do recall that in the Seventh Parliament, this issue was brought by the then minister in charge of lands, hon. Akaki Jovina. Mr Speaker, we are raising a huge thing that is about land and changing its use; I would be happier if the minister had brought this and then the committee looked at it. Why is it coming at the last minute? Why at this time? Why don’t we give it time? What is the problem with hon. Kwizera who is even leaving Parliament?

Mr Speaker, the procedure issue I am raising - (Interjection) - I know hon. Mudimi Wamakuyu is there but the issue is that this thing is supposed to be brought by the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. I would wish to know under what law a member is moving that he wants to de-gazette and gazette forests, on which basis is he doing this?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we receive this then see what to do with it? The minister is here; let us receive it and then see what to do with it.

MR KWIZERA: “1… Namankere Forest Reserve, 3898 hectares, situated in Kiryandongo District. 
Kibeka Forest Reserve, 9570 hectares situated in Kiryandongo District. 

Namwoya Central Forest Reserve, 1555 hectares situated in Ngoma division, Mukono Municipality.

2. Declare the following areas as forest reserves. Mbarara Municipality Council, land measuring 168 hectares located in Kiruhura District Nyabushozi County, Nyakisharara Sub-county Kakyera Parish, Rubarambira village.

B. Fort Portal Municipality Council, land measuring 66 hectares, located in Kyenjojo District, Mwenge County Kiruhura Sub County.

C. Arua Municipal Council, land measuring 665 hectares located in Arua District, Vurra County, Logiri Sub County, Iyivu Parish-“ (Interruption)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I am finding it very difficult to hear the honourable mover of the motion because of the hecklers, more especially the voices coming from where hon. Nambooze, hon. Nandala-Mafabi and hon. Geoffrey Ekanya are seated. I would like to follow the motion to its end so that at the end of it, this Parliament takes a decision. Is it in order for those Members that I have mentioned -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have said that let us receive this motion and then we see what to do with it.

MR KWIZERA: “.Mbale Municipal Council, land measuring 550 hectares located in Bulambuli District Bulambuli County, Bunamutye Sub County.

Kalangala Town Council, land measuring 194 hectares located-“ (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, “Mbale Municipal Council land measuring 550 hectares located in Bulambuli…” Bulambuli is not under Mbale Municipal Council. It is another district. Is it a typing error? We need to understand.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, honourable member, from my reading, the next list is where the land is for replacing the ones in the municipal council; he is just relating the two. The forest land for which the request to gazette is being made has to be replaced by land in the following. So they need to tie it up together. That is what I see him trying to do. Let him finish then we discuss it.

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Earlier, hon. Nandala-Mafabi on the record of this Parliament said that this motion was for Government. Today it is being moved by a back bencher. The procedural issue I am raising is whether Government can assign a back bencher to take over and move its motion or Government has since then lost interest and a private Member picked interest. I need guidance on that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is why I said that the minister responsible is here. I was hoping that we receive the motion then pose that question to the minister who is in the House, so that we now see how to handle it comprehensively instead of having it in the middle. The motion is not even yet presented. Can you please finish then we move to the next level.

MR KWIZERA: “…Entebbe Municipal Council, land measuring 80.1 hectares located in Buikwe District, Buikwe County, Ssi sub County Lukoba Parish.

H.	 Jinja Municipal Council, land measuring 27 hectares located in Kamuli District, Buzaya County.

    I. Ibanda town Council, land measuring 50 hectares, located in Ibanda District, Ibanda County.

J. 	Gulu Municipal Council, land measuring 161.4 hectares, located in Nwoya District Nwoya County, Purong Sub County.

K.	Government of Uganda Kibeka Central Forest Reserve, approximately 9793 hectares, being in 8th ranch in Bunyoro Ranch Scheme.

L. 	Government of Uganda, Nyamankere Forest Reserve, equal size of land as part of the ranch 16.

M. 	Government of Uganda, Namanve Forest Reserve equal size of land as part of Ranch No. 6.

N. 	Singo Ranch, No. 16, approximately 1,963 hectares, being a ranch in Singo Ranch Scheme, measuring 8 square kilometers.”Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the Member for Mbarara, Member for Mbale Municipality, Member for Ibanda South and Member for West Moyo, Nyabusozi, Padyere, Bulambuli and Kyankwanzi District. Would you like to speak to your motion?

MR KWIZERA: Mr Speaker, listening is a skill -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed with the motion.

MR KWIZERA: Mr Speaker, the Committee on Natural Resources in its wisdom found that we need to maintain the forest cover of this country, unlike what happened when Namanve Industrial Park was de-gazetted without a corresponding swapping of the forest.

Well aware that we need to preserve our environment, we found it important together with the National Forest Authority (NFA) and the ministry to do necessary consultations. I lay on the Table consultation reports, National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) reports from all these local governments.

Secondly, an environmental impact assessment was done, local government resolutions were made and they have availed equal or more size of land. The purpose of this motion is not to degazette, per se, or reduce on the forest cover. It is actually to maintain or even to acquire more land because a number of these municipalities have failed to plan for their cities as many local governments have been agitating for. You cannot have a city which is not planned. These urban forests are there in name but they are depleted. 

The cost of removing those encroachers is high and these local governments do not have the money to pay. Even the Central Government doesn’t have the money to pay and that is why Government found it necessary, although our committee has been recommending it since 2007. We do not want to leave it in our committee but we want to make sure that this matter is resolved on the Floor of the House and the Government can go ahead to implement the resolution. 

Where they find it is not possible, that is another matter. Where they find that the local governments may be gave wrong information, they will make adjustments. However, it is a requirement of the law that a resolution of Parliament be made. I do not know where Kwizera is wrong. I wish these Members had quoted the law that it is Government. However, when the law is silent and they say, “Parliament shall make a resolutions,” I am here and we are going to have a resolution. It is not said anywhere that “it is Government” because this does not require money. If there was requirement for funds, I would have gone for that.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, we are doing this in the interest of the country – (Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, the information supplied to this Parliament is that Government presented this motion. The information was not that it is against the law for a backbencher to present a motion of this nature. The fact is that Government brought this motion and maybe they did not conclude it. 

Is the honourable member, therefore, in order to impute bad motive that those of us who are reminding this House that this was a motion of Government are ignorant of the law, and that any Member can actually take over a Government motion as if Government has resigned?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that is exactly what he was responding to. The same words you used came from a Member of this House – that has Government now failed such that a private Member is taking it over? That is what he is dealing with.

MR KWIZERA: Mr Speaker, I am the Chairperson of the Committee on Natural Resources and we handled it ably. We consulted widely and we are satisfied that this motion complies with the law. I thank you, Mr Speaker, and beg that this motion be passed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Can I have the seconder of the motion before I propose the question? I will ask the minister to state something.

2.41
MR IGNATIUS WAMAKUYU MUDIMI (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the motion. I am a Member of the Committee on Natural Resources. This work was part of the work shelved from the last Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, some of these urban authorities such as Mbale acquired land for swapping in my constituency and they got it as far back as 2007. Therefore, since 2007, that land has been lying there and the only thing they have been waiting for was approval from Parliament. They acquired that land through a loan and the Members of Parliament from Mbale are aware. Mbale Municipal Council paid for that land. They acquired the loan in anticipation that they would de-gazette the area and use parts of the fees to service the loans. However, since they delayed, the council had to use other means to pay off the loan. 

Members from Mbale who are here have seen how Mbale town is congested. Therefore, we really need to support this motion. Part of the Mbale forest reserves have been allocated to our cultural institution by the President. You are aware of the President’s directives on parts of this land.

As Members of the Committee on Natural Resources, we have gone through and seen all these pieces of land for swapping. I do not see any problem with us moving to de-gazette and gazette those areas. I support the motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, before I propose the question for your debate, I would like to ask the minister to make a statement on this motion.

2.43
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you very much. You mentioned my name in your communication from the Chair and you welcomed me to the House. I apologise for being absent from Parliament. I was on the Prime Minister’s delegation to the United Nations Headquarters to sign the famous global Paris agreement on climate change. It was done and I am sure the Prime Minister will be reporting to the House.

Mr Speaker, I thought you were too busy to notice my absence but you seemed to have done so. You were very busy with matters of Parliament and outside – regarding the position of speakership. (Laughter) - It is a high position. I wish the position of Speaker would not be campaigned for. If someone campaigns against the Speaker and you become a speaker, how would he catch your eye? It is something very troubling? (Laughter)

However, let me respond to this question. You required me to make a statement on the motion for resolution of Parliament to de-gazette some of the gazetted forest reserves in urban areas. This matter, as already referred to, has been on the agenda since 2007. Actually, as a ministry responsible for these forests, we started work on degazettement and we advertised and did consultations in fulfilment of the requirements of the law.

As I talk to you right now, a Cabinet paper is ready for submission to Cabinet in its coming meeting next week. It is only that the law doesn’t stop Parliament from passing a motion on this matter. I would have absolutely no hang-ups on this motion being passed by Parliament but also bearing in mind that Cabinet itself was already preparing. As a ministry, I was already going to Cabinet to bring this matter and table it before Parliament.

Looking at the motion, it is consistent with the Cabinet paper, which I am submitting to Cabinet on Wednesday. (Applause) Therefore, Mr Speaker, it is under your guidance on how to proceed but that is the position. Thank you very much.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I am very surprised that the Member of Parliament for Bufumbira East was thinking like a Member of the Cabinet, because the minister said this motion is similar to the one of Cabinet. In this line of thought, did the minister have to use the MP to bring the document?

Wouldn’t it be procedurally right at this stage, since we have the first document from hon. Kwizera, that we bring the other one similar to the one of Cabinet so that we harmonise and confirm that there is intersection?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. You know, each time we raise this matter, we should also, ourselves, observe the rules because we could easily cross the line when we try to suggest that there is motive other than the proper one that is facilitating these processes. We will be violating the rules of this House. Therefore, my advice is that we avoid crossing those lines because they bring unnecessary tension. 

However, substantially, what has been said is there is a motion presented and that is why I asked the minister. If it was not something that he was going to support, he would have said so and stopped there. If he had said this matter was going to Cabinet and it should be stayed, we would not have gone ahead with it. He is saying it is consistent with what he is proposing back to the House. It is, therefore, up to the House to take a decision on it. Can I now propose the question for the debate? 

Honourable members, the motion before us is for a resolution of Parliament to de-gazette and gazette forest reserves. That is the motion before you for your debate. The details of the areas for the de-gazzetment and gazzetment are contained in the substantive motion. Debate starts now.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. Would it not be procedurally right for us to receive this motion and refer it to the Committee on Natural Resources? It is still a Private Member; it is not from the committee -(Interjection)- No, he has presented this as a private Member but he has the benefit of being the chairperson of that committee.

My understanding is that -(Interjections)- give me some benefit of doubt; at least I am a lawyer. (Laughter) Therefore, what we could do is to receive the motion and refer it to the Committee on Natural Resources so that, as hon. Nandala-Mafabi raised and as so many people have questions - On Nebbi, I do not have any question because I know the history and the record is clear.

However, to make us move at the same pace, we will then have, like the minister has said, he was also almost ready to bring something here. We are not debating in anticipation. He would have an opportunity to make a presentation in the Committee on Natural Resources. They would then bring a report here and we have a comprehensive debate including some of the forgotten forest reserves but also specifics on the measurements so that we compare and be sure the land is equal to the size of the forest reserve we are de-gazetting. You may have to guide. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, the minister has confirmed that actually, this motion is part of the work that was saved from the last Parliament. The procedural issue I raise in relation to what my colleague has raised is, at what stage was this work saved? Was it saved at a stage where a private Member had taken it up? Was it saved after a motion had been presented on the Floor or was it when it was still before the committee? It is because if it had gone through the committee and only presentation was remaining, then probably, we wouldn’t be asking the committee to redo the work.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, those are two procedural issues.

Honourable members, to ask the presiding officer at this time to find out what was saved from the last Parliament would not be something feasible for him to understand. He was not there when this matter was discussed in the Parliament before this one. The stage would not be clear to me; so I cannot procedurally guide you on what could have been done.

What I have heard together with you is that this matter came before this committee in the Eighth Parliament in 2007. It was discussed and this information has been given by the mover of the motion who is also the Chairperson of the Committee on Natural Resources. The seconder of the motion, who is also a Member of the same committee, has made a statement to this effect. I have asked the minister who has also confirmed that this matter started from 2007 and it is in the process of being handled. 

From his submission, since the law does not stop any person from bringing this motion to Parliament because the decision has got to be taken by Parliament, they concur that if Parliament deems it fit, they should handle this motion and finish it. That is the information we have received here and now. Therefore, the procedural point is; is it procedurally right for the member to bring this kind of motion at this time? 

The motion is properly before the House because it has followed the procedure. Notice was given and a slot was given for the Member to present this motion. It is up to this House, not the Speaker, to take a decision on the substance of the motion. It is up to the House to support the motion or not. It is because it is coming from the Committee on Natural Resources. That is what we have received. 

I am telling you because they asked me whether it is procedurally right and I am saying there is no violation of procedure up to this point. It is upon the wish of the Members, not the Speaker, to do whatever they desire with this motion. 

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance. It is not yet clear whether this is a motion of the committee or a private Member who also happens to be the chairperson of the committee. The Member has even laid documents on the Table, upon which, he bases this motion. However, as you see right now, we do not even have the opportunity to look at the documents.

Would it not be procedurally okay, as hon. Anywarach has proposed, that this matter be referred to the committee so that we also have an opportunity to look at the documents? I do not know on what basis we shall base, as Parliament, to debate this motion. 

When the Member was called upon to justify the motion, he instead stretched the fact that he has capacity to present the motion as a private Member but he never, at any one time, attempted to justify the motion.

Therefore, it is as if we are going to start debating from nowhere. You wouldn’t be prejudicial to refer this matter to the committee where we will have time and opportunity to look at these documents and make input. If the committee wants to present anything in Parliament, it should come in a way of a report to Parliament instead of a motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, when a committee takes a decision to proceed with some matters, it is headed by a private Member. When a committee decides to draft a Bill and bring it before the House, it is presented by a private Member. Under the rules, a committee cannot present a motion and a Bill. We have received Bills that have come from committees. If I can recollect, there was - 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, I recall when this matter was in the committee and it was being televised, I saw hon. Betty Nambooze giving her views in that committee - (Interruption.)

MR SSEMUJJU: What we are grappling with is a motion that was presented by Government and then saved by this Parliament. I do not know at what stage hon. Eddie Kwizera got it and from where. What is on the record of Parliament now is that a private Member has moved a motion. 

Hon. Betty Nambooze suggested that this motion should be referred to the committee. The Minister of Works and Transport is also telling this Parliament that this matter has been before the committee. Instead of presenting its report, the chairperson has actually stolen a matter before the committee and brought it here. 

Mr Speaker, is the Minister of Works and Transport in order to impute bad motive on the side of the chairman? He has actually stolen material presented to his committee instead of processing the material before bringing it to Parliament. He has brought the material himself and delayed the work of the committee. He is also pretending that this material before Parliament is of a private Member. Is the Minister of Works and Transport, therefore, in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what the Minister of Works and Transport was doing was giving information and the information did not impute any bad motive on the chairperson. That was my understanding. That is why I keep saying let us try to remain within the confines of the rules, even when we make interventions on these matters. Honourable, had you finished? Are we debating now, honourable members? I have proposed the question for debate. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, before we debate - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On what matter do you rise, honourable member? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I rise on a procedural issue. First of all, Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for the opportunity. The statement reads, “Motion for a resolution of Parliament to degazette and gazette forest reserves.” The moment it is a forest reserve, you cannot come here to gazette because it has been gazetted as a forest reserve unless you are going to get land where you are going to plant a forest. 

Mr Speaker – (Interjections) - then you must go and change it. If you want, it should read, “Motion for a resolution of Parliament to degazette forest reserves and get land to gazette it for forest reserves.” In this context as it stands, it clearly shows that these are forest reserves, where you want to degazette some and gazette others. 

Hon. Eddie Kwizera is the Chairman of the Natural Resources Committee; how do you steal committee material instead of putting it - no, this is a procedural issue - because we have just had a report of the Committee on Natural Resources. Why was this not put in the report of the committee so that it comes and the committee reports? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we have some order please? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Please, have order. Do not panic. Mr Speaker, this report was presented by the Chairman of the Committee on Natural Resources. The minister also says there is a Cabinet paper about to be presented so that Engineer Byabagambi, who is a Cabinet minister, can debate it so that it comes here as a Cabinet position harmonised with the Committee on Natural Resources. Thereafter, we can proceed properly. 

Wouldn’t it be procedurally proper, Mr Speaker, that the Cabinet minister in charge of forests goes ahead with his Cabinet paper? They should discuss the issue in Cabinet while the Chairperson of the Committee on Natural Resources uses the material from the cabinet to come here with a whole refined motion for the House to take a decision. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I need the information from the minister responsible for forests. I need you to help the House. Would you rather pursue the matter with Cabinet or Parliament proceeds with the motion as it is? 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, what I have stated before this House is correct. This matter has been pending for a very long time and I was preparing a Cabinet paper to bring the Cabinet position here. However, the mover of the motion- (Interjection) - no, do not put words in my mouth. 

The motion has been brought before Parliament for debate. I have looked at it as well as the Cabinet paper and I have stated that in principle, they are consistent. I am a sector minister and I have a Chief Whip here representing the Leader of Government Business; she will guide the House. As far as I am concerned, that is where I stand.

3.06
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, it is very evident that there are Members of Parliament, who have not yet internalised what is in the motion that has been read by hon. Eddie Kwizera and they want more information. 

There is a booklet of documents laid on the Table by hon. Eddie Kwizera, which Members of Parliament have not perused through. For example, some people are asking whether local governments were consulted and yet the mover of the motion said they were consulted. However, they have not read the evidence.

When somebody says we are now destroying forests, it is an indication that she has not internalised the motion because the motion is helping to preserve forests, which have been encroached on. We now want to acquire more land so that we plant trees. All this information has not trickled down to people’s minds.

Issues concerning land are always contentious. When you talk about land, the immediate response is that they are going to take our land. I, therefore, think that it is important that we give this House time, as the minister in charge of the sector also presents to Cabinet next Wednesday and then we move in harmony. I do not see any problem with that. That is my guidance, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, that is the position from the Government so that we do not end up imputing. That will be the way to go into circumstances. 

Honourable members, since there will be Cabinet on Wednesday, I suppose, can we then adjourn this motion to Thursday next week? We will then see which developments will have taken place and in the meantime, members can have access to the documents that have been presented from the committee and then see how we can proceed. If on that day we are unable to proceed, we will then take the necessary decision on how to proceed with it. (Mr Ekanya rose_) - Are you seeking for clarification from the Speaker? Who are you seeking clarification from?

MR EKANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The people of Soroti wish to have their land de-gazzetted and I wonder - in Soroti Municipality where Papa Emorimor was to build a palace for us. Actually Government gave us money. However, the ministry of gender refused the project to take off because it is forest land. We were assured by the ministers of lands and forestry that it would have been part of this. Why is it that that land is not part of it yet we want a palace for Papa Emorimor. 

The guidance I am seeking is, is it possible to amend the motion next week so that we can add that to it in order to have our palace? We need to build a palace; we already have money given by Government to build a palace for Papa Emorimor of Teso. Is it possible? I am seeking your guidance so that Thursday next week, it is added.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, a motion presented can be amended and the amended motion can be adopted. There is, therefore, no prohibition for amending motions.

MR EKANYA: In addition to that, Mr Speaker, I am one of the few Members of Parliament who has invested in tree planting. I am planting 70 hectares within Tororo Municipality; so some of these Members who are talking here should also demonstrate that they are doing tree-planting here. Some MPs are just saying yes or no but they have not engaged in tree-planting at all. In my constituency, I have given out over one million tree seedlings –(Interruption) 

MS BINTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The further guidance I am seeking from the minister is; I know that last year, Government reinstated certain properties to cultural institutions. Some of the forests were reinstated to them and Bunyoro was one of them. Bunyoro Kingdom wrote to the minister and the President gave them a go ahead that there are certain forest reserves which the kingdom now has to repossess. However, in this motion, I do not see anything to that effect. 

I am therefore seeking clarification from the minister and from you, Mr Speaker, on whether we could get this handled next week. We would like to handle the de-gazzation in its entirety. We do not want to leave any gaps open. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are those forests already gazzetted? 

MS BINTU: They are gazzetted as central forest reserves but when Government gave back ebyaitu to the kingdom, some of these forests were given back but we are still waiting for de-gazzation so that the kingdom re-owns them. I do not see this in the motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you want to take them back as forests or take them back as something else? 

MS BINTU:  No, not as forests; now giving the kingdom the land.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, that is something you need to consider when we come back on Thursday on this matter.  

On what matter do you rise, hon. Anywarach? Is it procedure or something else? 

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, it is procedure. I think instead of waiting for Thursday, with papers in our hands, allow me move a motion that we refer this matter to the committee so that by Thursday, they report here. That will open up avenues for unforeseen errors here so that we do not then push it again. 

If Bunyoro is supposed to repossess that land, they can repossess it as a forest reserve but if they want to put it to another use, good enough to them, it is still under the law that Parliament has to pronounce itself to degazzette. Therefore, if this matter went to the committee, we would comprehensively dispose of it. Of course making a motion now would be resolving to save the fact that we need de-gazzetment and re-gazzetment of land in compensation.

However, if we are to sit with this document and wait for Government position on Thursday, assuming that they will sit on Wednesday, we run the risk of getting locked along the way yet time is bad. I think it would be procedurally right for us to come up with the motion that this motion here be referred to the committee and by Thursday, they should be able to report here. After all, they are the custodians of information. They have the information already. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to understand the circumstances under which this Parliament is operating now. Right now, we are doing the budget. I am not sure whether any committee will have the capacity to handle this matter tomorrow and by Thursday they are ready with the report, given the nature of the business we are doing at the moment.

We referred the matter on Kasese to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs but they have not been able to come back to us because they had these budgetary issues to handle. Let us see how it happens. 

Let us take this matter to Thursday; let Members access whichever documents are available that have been laid before the House. When we come on Thursday, we will see. If we are unable to proceed, we do not proceed with it. It is still the same Members with the same issues going to discuss it; it is not the Speaker as it is being suggested by some honourable members. 

It is not the Speaker to take decisions on this matter. All I do is to guide so that we are facilitated and are given sufficient time. Members, documents have been laid before the House, please have access to them and then we see if we can comprehensively handle this matter on Thursday, based on the motion that is substantially before the House now.

A question has been proposed for debate and it has not been debated; so, let us resource ourselves and get more information on the subject and come back on Thursday afternoon and see how we can go forward with it so that the matter is rested. We have deferred this matter to Thursday, 2.00 p.m. 

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON BUDGET ON THE CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE FOR THE ANNUAL BUDGET FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2016/2017

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as we receive this motion, in the gallery this afternoon, we have students of International Relations from Cavendish University, Uganda. They are represented in Parliament by hon. John Ssimbwa and hon. Nabilah Sempala. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) 

3.17
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Mudimi Wamakuyu): Mr Speaker, Report of the Budget Committee on the Certificates of Compliance for the Annual Budget for Financial Year 2016/2017.   I beg to lay on the Table the minutes of the meetings.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes.

MR WAMAKUYU: By a way of introduction, the Public Finance and Management Act, 2015 introduced various financial reforms for the management of public finances. Among the key reforms is the alignment of the National Budget to National Development Plan (NDP) and Vision 2020. The law also requires that the national budget integrates gender and equity responsiveness. 

In particular, section 13(6) and 13(7), require the National Planning Authority (NPA) to issue a certificate of compliance of annual budgets of the previous financial year, consistence with the National Development Plan. In section 13(15)(g), the Act also stipulates that any policy statement will be accompanied by a certificate issued by Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in consultation with Equal Opportunities Commission -
    1. certifying that the policy statement is gender and equity responsive; 
    2. specifying measures taken to equalise opportunities for women, men, persons with disabilities and other marginalised groups.

The National Planning Authority and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in compliance with Public Finance and Management Act, 2015, issued the said certificate of compliance which accompanied a draft budget estimates for Financial Year 2016/2017, which was laid on the Table on 15 March 2016.

Assessment

Mr Speaker, the committee met and interacted with National Planning Authority and the Equal Opportunities Commission. The committee further also interacted with officials from Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) who performed poorly on gender and equity responsiveness. The committee also studied and internalised assessments reports for National Planning Authority(NPA) and Equal Opportunities Commission.

Methodology of Assessments and Scoring –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Chairperson, do you want to read the whole report?

MR WAMAKUYU: Mr Speaker, Let me highlight key issues.

Summary of Key Findings

The committee realised that some of the MDAS did not comply with the certificate of compliance, National Development Plan II (NDP) and also gender and equity responsiveness. Specific sectors like Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, the committee realised that once the specific sector issues with extension a limited budget allocation its poor performance will undermine the sectors attainment of NDP II. Therefore, there is a need to strike balance among key priority areas like institutional strengthening and infrastructural development.

Observations and Recommendations 

The committee realised that most of the sectors failed the test. This is outlined in the report. The committee recommends that the House adopts the following:
    1. Sessional committees will assess how well sectors have complied with the previous assessment. It will be mandatory for each vote to introduce a section in the policy statement that reports on the progress, and achievements towards the observations and recommendations of previous assessment.

Mr Speaker, we realised that we have been making recommendations year in year out but they are not taken into consideration by the Executive. 
    2. National Planning Authority to undertake assessment up to vote level. This will enable Parliament to enforce accountability and compliance in non-performing votes and also to reward votes which are doing well.
    3. Planning and budget instruments must be aligned both in terms of content and time frame such that allocation of financial resources is based on priorities in the NDP. Before any appropriation is done, it will be mandatory for each sector to lay on the Table in Parliament a sector development plan certified with compliance with NDP.

    4. National Planning Authority will prepare necessary assessment and guidelines for conformity by MDAs.

    5. Any vote whose score is reported to be less than 70 will be required to present a detailed explanation to the House. Otherwise, appropriation shall be withheld until necessary scores have been attained.

    6. Capacity gaps particularly in terms of manpower and funding at National Planning Authority be addressed to ensure production of high quality assessment plans.

    7. Budgeting through supplementary expenditure should be highly discouraged by Parliament to avoid unnecessary distortion in the planned budget allocation of different MDAs through arbitrary vote suppression and reallocations.

    8. A mid-term review of NDP II will be done as required by Planning Act to ensure that National Development Plan and our national aspirations and targets remain in tandem with reality. Luckily, the Budget Committee shall always ensure compliance with all provisions of Public Finance and Management Act, 2015 before the budget is passed.

Observations and Recommendations on the Certificate of Gender and Equity

The ones I have highlighted are for the compliance with NDP II. The ones below are now on gender and equity.

Equal Opportunities Commission carried out technical assessment of 124 ministerial policy statements out of expected 135. The relevant results were released to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 18 March 2016. Twenty three ministerial policy statements fell below the minimum pass mark of 40 while 11 of the entities did not submit their ministerial policy statements for assessment at that time.

The committee invited non-compliant institutions and brought to their attention the provision of the law. By the time of signing this report, all the non-complaint entities had met the requirements through the Equal Opportunities Commission. The committee wishes to recommend as follows:

    1. That the pass mark for any vote to be issued with Certificate of Gender and Equity compliance be raised from 40 to 50 with effect from next Financial Year 2017/2018.

    2. That no ministerial policy statement will be considered by Parliament without a Certificate on Gender and Equity compliance issued in accordance with the law. Any exemptions will be reported to the House as provided under Section 78(1) of Public Finance and Management Act, 2015.

    3.  Because of this extra mandate, the budget of Equal Opportunities Commission be raised by Shs 5 billion in Financial Year 2016/2017. Equal Opportunities Commission had requested for Shs 10 billion. 


    4. A more comprehensive assessment criterion be agreed upon and clearly communicated to ministries, departments and agencies in time by the Equal Opportunities Commission for them to comply.

Mr Speaker, we recommend that the House adopts the report of the Budget Committee. Attached is a summary of the assessment levels. The report is uploaded on the iPads, Members can read through. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairman. Honourable members, this is a report presented in compliance with the Public Finance Management Act which we passed the other year but was gazetted last year 2015. It makes such requirements and the committee has submitted a report in compliance with the provisions of the law, and this House is required to adopt it, if it deems fit.

I propose the question for your debate to this motion for adoption of the report of the Budget Committee on the certificates of compliance for the annual budget for Financial Year 2016/2017. That is the motion for your debate and debate starts now; each Member taking five minutes.

Honourable members, the report being very satisfactory, requiring no debate I now put the question for adoption of this report. I put the question that the report of the budget committee on the certificates of compliance for the annual budget for financial year 2016/2017 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are not ready to proceed with item No.6 go to the next one.  

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S REPORT FOR FINANCIAL YEARS 2008/2009 AND 2009/2010 ON LOCAL GOVERNMENTS UNDER KAMPALA AUDIT REGION

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this report was already presented and deferred for debate. I proposed the question for debate. Debate starts now each Member taking five minutes. If there are no debates, can I put the question for adoption of this report? 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to the motion that the report of the Local Government Accounts Committee on the Auditor-General’s Report for financial years 2008/2009 and 2009/2010 on local governments under Kampala audit region be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE VALUE   FOR MONEY AUDIT REPORTS OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON REHABILITATION AND MAINTENANCE  OF FEEDER ROADS IN UGANDA: A CASE STUDY OF HOIMA, KUMI AND MASINDI

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this particular report was presented and the question for its debate was proposed but debate was deferred; so debate starts now, each Member taking five minutes.


If there is no debate on this particular motion can I put the question? Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Local Government Accounts Committee on the value for money audit report of the Auditor-General on rehabilitation and maintenance of feeder roads in Uganda: a case study of Hoima, Kumi and Masindi be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE VALUE FOR MONEY AUDIT REPORTS OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL FOR:

I) NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL AND ADVISORY SERVICES PROGRAMMES (ADVISORY AND INFORMATION SERVICES COMPONENT)
II) MANAGEMENT OF NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL AND ADVISORY SERVICES (IN KABAROLE, KASESE, LIRA AND MUBENDE)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this report was presented and the question for the debate proposed and the debate was deferred to today and debate starts now, each Member taking five minutes. 

3.34
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Looking at the nature of business we have, the value for money audit is very important. But also taking into consideration of the requirements in the Public Finance and Accountability Act, that every financial year the accounting officers must show how much money has been recovered as a result of the report of the Auditor-General.

In some countries like Tanzania, once the report of the Auditor-General is submitted to the Speaker, the accounting officers take appropriate action in line with the law. Therefore, I beg to move that the question be put and the necessary accountable action be taken in conformity with the law.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question for the adoption of this report. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE PETITION BY THE FORMER PRISONS OFFICERS OF KASESE DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that this particular report was also presented and should have actually been disposed of that day. But Members insisted that there should be some debate on this matter.

Hoverer, this petition was examined by the relevant Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs and they found out that this petition had no merit and should not be considered. And, therefore, was disregarded by the committee and the report was presented here and we deferred it to today for debate. 

If there are any debates it starts now if there are no debates, I now put the question for the adoption of the report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the petition by the former prisons officers of Kasese District Local Government.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT MOVED UNDER ARTICLE 123(1) OF THE CONSTITUTION AND SECTION 2(B) (I) OF THE RATIFICATION OF TREATIES ACT, CAP. 204 FOR THE RATIFICATION OF THE AGREEMENT FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE EASTERN AFRICA STANDBY FORCE (EASF)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this motion is to be presented by the minister responsible for the sector. To my knowledge, it has not yet been presented. Is it going to be presented or has it ever been presented?

The motion has not yet been presented; if the minister is not ready or not available to present this motion, can we defer the two motions because I do not see the Minister of Defence - does the Government Chief Whip have anything to say? The Leader of Government Business would you like to proceed with this motion?

3.37
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): The Minister of State for Defence emeritus is not in position to present this report, and I suggest that I go ahead and contact the minister. The senior minister is indisposed and the ministry has only one minister. I will try to reach out to Ndugu Jeje Odongo and probably next week –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It was the senior Minister of Defence who approached the Speaker’s Office that this matter should be brought forward and finalised. However, the motion has not been moved; if it had been moved, we would have approved. Items No.12 and 13 are deferred. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE TIER 4 MICROFINANCE INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2015

3.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICROFINANCE) (Ms Caroline Amali): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Tier 4 Microfinance Institutions Bill, 2015” be read for the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by honourable Minister of State for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, honourable member for Koboko District and the Leader of Government Business. Would you like to speak to your motion? 

MS AMALI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. During the Financial Year 2013/2014 my ministry presented to Cabinet the memorandum of treaty 2013, introducing the comprehensive principles for the regulations and supervision of the Tier 4 of the Microfinance Institutions. 

They included savings and credit cooperatives in SACCOs, moneylenders, non-deposit taking financial institutions and other financial service providers in Uganda that are currently not under the regulations of Bank of Uganda. 

Cabinet approved the principles and directed that the Ministry of Finance issues drafting instructions to the First Parliamentary Counsel to prepare the Tier 4 Microfinance Institutions Bill, basing on the approved principles.


The justification, over time, the microfinance industry has grown; however, fewer financial institutions have graduated into the microfinance deposit taking institutions at the Tier 3 level than it was anticipated.

This is partly due to the loopholes in the existing regulatory framework that have enabled many of the targeted financial institutions to continue operating without the effective laws.

These financial institutions have been operating generally under two legal frameworks: the Cooperative Societies Act and the Moneylenders Act. While the Cooperative Societies Act in place, it is an omnibus la for all cooperatives, including production, housing, transport, marketing and other forms of cooperatives.

Government appreciates that while SACCOs are cooperatives, they defer in many significant respects from other cooperatives in their primary businesses because they facilitate financial intermediation of deposits and savings. 

Therefore, they are for all intents and purposes fundamentally similar to financial institution yet the legal regime under which they are currently operating is different from that of other financial institutions.

Mr Speaker, this creates a loophole for proper scrutiny and supervision of financial operations of SAACOs and as result, there has been some loss of trust by the masses in the SACCO module due to rampant fraud and mismanagement.

Savings have been lost due to the collapse of several SACCOs; it has been a subject to a lot of discussions to the public causing negative publicity for the whole of microfinance industry.

Most companies limited by shares or guarantee are non-governmental organisations that deal in microfinance registered under the Moneylenders Act cap 273 and this Act is currently ignored in practice.

Moneylenders seldom apply for license; they consistently exceed the interest rate sealing and rarely keep any records on what they are doing. Most loans are not guaranteed through a contract, but a sale’s agreement for the goods offered and guaranteed.

The objectives of the Bill, is to ensure that the microfinance industry promotes social and economic development and to ensure legitimacy and confidence building of members, customers and investors in the industry. Furthermore, it will provide standards to microfinance institutions in order to safeguard the depositor’s funds and to ensure stability of the financial system.

We also intend to apply non-prudential standards to the Tier 4 Microfinance Institutions by establishing limitations on foreign capital, defining sources of capital and establishing default protection mechanisms.  It will further provide guidelines on tax identification, ensuring compliance with international accounting policies and instituting mechanisms for prevention of fraud and financial crimes. 

Mr Speaker, we would like to ensure customer protection by designing appropriate products, avoidance of over indebtedness and promoting transparency in pricing and ensuring responsible pricing, eliminating unethical behaviour in debt collection and ensuring confidentiality in clients’ data and putting in place complain handling systems.

We have consulted widely for a period spanning 10 years and a team comprising officials from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, Bank of Uganda, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and Uganda Law Reform Commission, the NGO board, Association of Microfinance institutions in Uganda, the Uganda Cooperative Alliance, Uganda Cooperative Savings and Credit Union, Uganda Bankers’ Association, Uganda Cooperative College (Kigumba) and the Uganda Registration Services Bureau - all the above were consulted widely and, Mr Speaker, perhaps that is why it took us a lot of time to come up with this very wanting Bill which would have been here yesterday.

In addition, a technical level of meeting to harmonise the Tier 4 Microfinance Bill and the Cooperative Societies (Amendment) Bill, was held at the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives last year in August. A consensus was reached on the contentious issues particularly the proposed SACCO thresholds. 

The Financial Implications 

The implementation of the provisions of the Bill shall include, among others, the establishment of the Uganda Microfinance Regulatory Authority, UNRA, which will require a budget of Shs 10.034 billion annually for the wages, operational expenses and others.

This is an additional funding requirement on the Government of Uganda and it shall be provided for the medium term through the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

The expected benefits are big and we anticipate that Government will realise revenue directly through the collection of licence fees and fines from the implementation of this law. On the other hand, increased investment of microfinance industry to increased consumer and investor confidence will also result into more employment opportunities for Ugandans and increased household income, which will indirectly but positively impact on Government revenue.

In conclusion, I request that the Tier 4 Microfinance Institutions Bill, 2015 be discussed and passed. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Tier 4 Microfinance Institutions Bill, 2015” be read the second time. That is the motion before us and that is the motion I now propose for your debate.

And when this Bill was read for the first time, it was referred to the Committee on Finance and I am advised that the committee is ready to report. Chairperson, you have 10 minutes.

3.49
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Robert Kasule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on The Tier 4 Microfinance Institutions Bill, 2015.

I beg to lay the minutes and memoranda presented to us by the different stakeholders.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR KASULE: Mr Speaker, as it has been justified by the minister, I will not read the justification; I will go to committee observations on page 2.

Observations and Recommendations
The Committee observed that:

Purpose of the Act 
The committee observed that the purpose of the Act is to regulate tier 4 microfinance institutions by facilitating the microfinance industry to promote social and economic development.

Membership of the Board

The committee observed that the board of the authority will be chaired by Bank of Uganda which is another regulating authority for banks. Also, the board is proposed to have a representative of the Uganda Bankers Association. However, moneylenders who are going to be regulated by this authority are not represented. There is need to have moneylenders represented on the board, and a person from the private sector to chair the board to avoid conflict of interest by Bank of Uganda.  

Classification of Moneylenders as Microfinance Institutions

Clause 4 of the Bill provides that tier 4 microfinance institutions include SACCOs, non-deposit-taking microfinance institutions, self-help groups, commodity-based microfinance institutions and moneylenders. The committee has examined this classification and makes the following observations: 

    (i) Clause 5 defines “microfinance activities” as extending micro-loans, accepting savings and providing other financial services. The committee notes that this definition does not technically include moneylenders as they do not accept savings. 
    (ii) Tier 4 microfinance institutions differ from moneylenders in terms of financing, business and nature of operations. 
    (iii) Clause 8(n) empowers the authority to set minimum capital requirement for Tier 4 institutions which include moneylenders. Whereas this is applicable for SACCOs, it is not practical to set the minimum capital requirement for a moneylender.
    (iv) Clause 9 and Clause 81 give the authority powers to investigate or inquire into the operations of Tier 4 microfinance institutions; inspect and examine books of accounts, records, returns and any other document of the tier 4 microfinance institutions; and other similar powers. While this may be necessary for a SACCO, it is not necessary for the authority to inspect and examine books of accounts for moneylenders and returns because this is a private business and returns are filed with Uganda Revenue Authority. Rather, the authority may conduct inspection and examination of records or documents relevant to moneylending business.
    (v) Clause 33 allows the authority to take over the management of Tier 4 microfinance institutions. This will cause conflict with the shareholders who have a say in the management of the microfinance especially as regards to the costs of management. 
    (vi) Clause 82 requires that a person intending to engage in moneylending business must be a company. While the committee acknowledges the legality of a single member company, the committee notes that the provision does not allow partnerships and individuals to operate as moneylenders. The same is re-echoed in clause 84, where the authority shall not issue a license if it is satisfied that the management of the company is not fit and proper. 
    (vii) Clause 94 empowers the minister to prescribe a maximum interest rate which a moneylender shall charge. The committee notes that Government cannot control interest rates in a liberalised economy.

Recommendation 

The committee recommends that clauses 2, 3, 4, 8, 33, 81, 82 and 94 be reviewed to clearly distinguish between microfinance institutions and moneylending. 

Categorisation of SACCOs

Clause 36 seeks to categorise SACCOs into categories A and B.
    (1) Category A is a SACCO with a voluntary savings volume of at least Shs 300 million but less than Shs 1.5 billion; and a minimum paid up capital of at least Shs 100 million but less than Shs 500 million. While category B SACCO is one with voluntary savings and paid up capital of less than Shs 300 million, it is important to note that the House considers this clause together with clause 114 which provides for the amendment of the Microfinance Deposit Taking Institutions Act, 2003.

    (2) The effect of the two clauses read together is that SACCOs with voluntary savings volume of at least Shs 300 million but less than Shs 1.5 billion; and a minimum paid up capital of at least Shs 100 million but less than Shs 500 million – (Member timed out­.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please proceed and wind up.

MR KASULE: These will be regulated by the Bank of Uganda under the Microfinance Deposit-Taking Institutions Act, 2003. 
(3)	The proposed Uganda Microfinance Regulatory Authority shall only license and regulate Category B SACCOs.
(4)	The committee finds merit in the categorisation and licensing regime. SACCOs with huge volumes should be licensed and regulated by the Bank of Uganda, which has the capacity to regulate Micro Deposit-Taking Institutions.

Mr Speaker, maybe I will read part V only; I think the Members have this information.
 
Establishment of a SACCO Stabilisation Fund

Clause 55 establishes a SACCO Stabilisation Fund to which every SACCO must subscribe. The fund is intended to have the listed roles.

However, the committee notes that the Stabilisation Fund is likely to promote mismanagement of SACCO business. Further, in clause 57 the requirement of SACCOS making an annual contribution of one per cent of their assets towards the Stabilisation Fund amounts to a tax or levy that would substantially reduce the assets of SACCO over a period of time.

The committee recommends that clauses 55, 56 and 57 be deleted and an amendment will be moved to that effect. 

Self Help Groups and Commodity-based Microfinance

Parts (vi) and (vii) of the Bill, provides for self-help groups and commodity-based microfinance respectively. However, the committee notes that self-help groups and commodity-based microfinance are subsets of community savings and credit groups.

The committee recommends that self-help groups and commodity-based microfinance should be replaced with community savings and credit groups. This is due to the similarity in their set up and operations focused on community economic empowerment.

In conclusion, the committee recommends that the Tier 4 Microfinance Institutions Bill, 2015, be passed into law subject to the proposed amendments. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, committee chairperson and members for this elaborate work that you have done on the Bill.

Honourable members, a question has been proposed for this debate on the motion for second reading of the Bill, which relates to the principles of the Bill and debate starts now.

We shall start with the Member for Tororo County. But, honourable member, aren’t you a member of the committee? If you are a member of the committee, you know the rules.

3.57
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I am a member of the committee but I am also holding two titles; I am a shadow minister and also acting Leader of the Opposition. So these are many titles and with your permission, I beg that you allow me to inquire into - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you a Member of Parliament?

MR EKANYA: I am a Member of Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you a member of the committee?

MR EKANYA: I am a member of the committee but would like to request you to allow me invoke the other title.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Proceed.

MR EKANYA: I thank you very much. This Bill is overdue and I would like to thank the minister in charge of microfinance institutions for ensuring that this Bill is brought while she is still in office.

There are several gaps that I hope we shall consider during the committee stage. For example, the Bill amalgamates Tier 4 microfinances, which should have had a separate law. 

Tier 4 microfinances are small groups of people engaged in saving and lending and they have challenges of fraud throughout the country.  The second provision in the Bill that should have had its separate law is on moneylenders. Moneylending has had its own Act, which fixes the interest rate to not more than two per cent. 

This Bill and the chairperson propose that we should not have interest rates fixed in a liberalised economy, which proposal I find wrong. 

There is no economy that is totally liberalised in the world and that is why Bank of Uganda keeps intervening in the market. If the exchange rate increases, it affects the consumers and Bank of Uganda intervenes to ensure that this is balanced. 

Therefore, the concept of liberalisation is not there in its own terms as we understand it in simple English - (Interjections) - yes, it is not absolute.

It is very important that we do not allow money lenders to operate like commercial banks. If money lenders want to operate commercial banks, then they should apply for a licence to do so.

Secondly, money lending should be a short term activity. The current problem is that we have companies that have moved here from other countries with restrictions. There is no regulation here and so civil servants like teachers and medicals some of whom I know, have borrowed from money lenders until their retirement age. This is criminal and that is why you see civil servants are not in office, teachers are not in school and nurses are absent. 

We need to regulate this so that money lending is for short term problem solving. Somebody who wants long term borrowing should go to a bank.

The other aspect that is very important – I have seen a provision here that we should allow money lenders to operate without necessarily being a registered company yet we are talking about formalising our economy. If we want to do business, let us be formal so that we have taxes.

I have seen in the report that we have brought in cooperatives and SACCOs. There is a proposal for Bank of Uganda to licence SACCOs of a given capital volume automatically. I think that this is improper. 

We should allow people to operate as SACCOs even if they have a trillion shillings of capital. This is the practice in Kenya and Tanzania. We should not be conditioned.

The SACCO should apply to Bank of Uganda instead of being conditioned based on capital threshold so that we do not weaken the authority. Let us strengthen this authority so that if somebody robs my people in Asinge, Merikit Sub-County in Tororo, the authority has money to handle it. In Kenya, we have SACCOs that have a financial capacity bigger than some commercial banks like the SACCO owned by taxi operators association in Kenya, which has very huge investments. Such SACCOs are spread around the country.

I know of a SACCO in western Uganda that has a capital base that is bigger than some of these commercial banks here. Our SACCO here in Parliament is very big and so to condition us to automatically fall under Bank of Uganda is to lose the meaning of a SACCO.

These are some of the things I hope that during the committee stage, we shall be able to push for and ensure sanity. I would like to thank the minister and I thank you, Mr Speaker. May God bless you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you very much. Honourable members, if there is no further debate on the principles of the Bill, I will put the question on the motion for second reading.

There being no Members expressing interest to speak on the motion for second reading, I put the question that the Bill entitled, “The Tier 4 Microfinance Institutions Bill, 2015” be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE TIER 4 MICROFINANCE INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2015

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 1 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.
Clause 2

3.55
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Robert Kasule): The committee proposes to amend subclause (1) to read as follows:
This Act shall apply to;-
    (a) Tier 4 Microfinance Institutions and
    (b) Money lenders 

The justification is that Tier 4 Microfinance Institutions differ from money lenders in terms of financing business and nature of operations. The amendment makes the Bill clearer.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is the amendment proposed by the committee.

MR EKANYA: Where do we leave the SACCO in your amendment? There is Tier 4 microfinance and then –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3
MR KASULE: The committee proposes to amend under the head note “Purpose of Act”
    (1) Number the clause as subclause (1) 
    (2) Insert a new sub clause (2) as follows; 
“(2) and to provide a regulatory framework for the management and control of money lending business.”

The justification is for clarity as to the purpose of the Bill with regard to moneylenders. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The amendment is that there should be a new subclause (2) which reads, “(2) and to provide a regulatory framework for the management and control of money lending business.” That is the amendment. I now put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR NSUBUGA: Mr Chairperson, I am sorry for taking you back to clause 1. When you look at clause 1, on commencement, the report says that the minister shall issue a statutory instrument. However, I am saying that if the minister was not ready after the President has assented to the Bill, why shouldn’t it start functioning?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, we have dealt with that clause. It went to the committee and the committee saw that there was need for it to be commenced this way. That is why at the time it was called, there was no intervention and it was passed that way.

MR NSUBUGA: Mr Chairperson, I did not have my Bill, so I had to go and get it. That is why I am kindly asking you to allow me -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What is your justification for this?

MR NSUBUGA: The justification is that if the President has already assented to the Bill it means the Government was ready to operationalise the Bill. How can they not agree on the commencement date after the President has assented to it?  Why would they have brought the Bill?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, there are commencement provisions in Bills. There are Bills that are commenced upon gazetting, others in parts; some parts can start and some are delayed. Then there are Bills that are commenced when preparations are made for implementation because preparation cannot commence before the Bill is in place. This is one such Bill.

Therefore, the proposal which we have passed is not out of the normal legislative processes and it is not new.

MR NSUBUGA: However, Mr Chairman, unless the minister gives reasons - you do not just bring a Bill and say, as you have mentioned, that there are those that commence midway. There are reasons sometimes that are advanced not to allow the Bill to start immediately. Can the minister tell us why this Bill cannot commence immediately?

MS AMALI: Mr Chairperson, I would like to take my honourable colleague to the regulations. The provisions are all stipulated - they will be implemented in parts as you have just said. If he goes through the regulations, he will understand most of the issues he is talking about.

MR KASULE: We were informed by hon. Bahati in the committee that since this Bill is in parts, they have the part of money lenders, that of community groups and SACCOs and that they will need to implement them in phases.

However, if it is the decision of this House that the Bill commences as soon as it is assented to by the President, then that is okay? Otherwise, that is the reason the minister gave us.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You see, if it is going to come into force separately, then the drafting should not have been like this. There should have been a provision to the extent that the Act shall come into force on a date appointed by the minister by statutory instrument provided that different parts can come in at different times so that we know. Otherwise, the way it is now, it means that the whole Bill will come into force on one instrument.

Therefore if that is the intention, then it is okay; but if it is not the intention, then you cannot bring it here. What is the intention? Is it for it to come at once or in parts at different times?

MR KASULE: The intention is that it should be coming in parts.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Will different parts be coming into force at different times?

MR KASULE: Yes.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairperson, that is very dangerous. We did the Road Safety Act here and we put such a provision. Hon. Nasasira then would only allow certain provisions that he was comfortable with. The whole law became almost non practicable to implement. Therefore, with your vast experience in legislative practice, Mr Chairperson, you need to guide the House that the modern trend is really to -


THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In other words, honourable members, the proposal in this law that we have passed is that preparations should be finalised completely under one instrument and the whole Bill kicks in? That is what we have passed.  Is that clear honourable member for Bukoto? Okay, let us proceed.

Clause 4

MR KASULE: The committee under the head note of “Classification of Tier 4 microfinance institutions”, we propose to delete paragraph (c)

Justification: money lending is not a Tier 4 microfinance institution and cannot therefore be classified as such.

Two, delete paragraphs (d) and (e) and replace them, with “community savings and credit groups.”

Justification: self-help groups and commodity based microfinances are subsets of community savings and credit groups.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to the amendment by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, clause 5 is about interpretations; we would like to deal with this once we have seen what is in the rest of the Bill. So we defer clause 5.

Clause 5, stood over.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8 

MR KASULE: Mr Chairperson, in clause 8, under the functions of the authority in subclause (1), insert the word “and money lenders” after the words, “Tier 4 microfinance institutions”

Justification: to provide a regulatory framework for money lenders.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay, honourable members? I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12

MR KASULE: 1. In clause 12, under the composition of the board, in subclause 1 (a) delete the following words, “who shall be the chairperson.”
Justification: to provide for the appointment of the chairperson to chair the board and ensure transparency.

2. 	Delete (d) and replace it with the following “(f), A person with experience in money lending business”

Justification: to ensure that the business of money lenders is represented on the board without affecting its composition.

3. 	In sub clause (1) (e) replace the word “three” with “two”.

4. 	Insert a new subclause (5), “The minister shall appoint among the board members a person to act as the chairperson of the board.”

Justification: this would enable Bank of Uganda to provide technical guidance on regulatory and supervisory issues in the Tier 4 microfinance sector.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, you are deleting sub-clause (d) and replacing it with sub-clause (f). What happens to sub-clause (f)? What happens to sub-clause (e)? Are you renumbering?

MR KASULE: I think that is renumbering. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The sub-clause you are deleting is (d), but what you are providing for is sub-clause (f) yet there is sub-clause (f), which you have not deleted.

MR KASULE: Mr Chairperson, we shall delete sub-clause (d) and say “A person with experience in money lending” to include somebody from the money lending profession.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are you saying sub-clause (f) is wrong?

MR KASULE: I think we don’t mention sub-clause (f). Sub-clause (f) is, “The executive director of the Authority who shall be an ex-officio”.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I wonder where experience for moneylending is acquired. The committee chairperson is insisting that we need to include someone from the profession of moneylending –(Interjections)- there is no experience in money lending anywhere. Instead, we should maybe say “someone with experience in finance and banking”, but not “someone from the money lending profession”. This is the first time I am hearing of this.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: I am just adding to what hon. Musasizi raised on experience. Normally, when we propose an experience, we put things such as three or four years’ experience. However, what the committee chairperson stated is just hanging.

Secondly, you were asking him whether he is removing sub-clause (f), but what I understood from his proposal was that sub-clause (d) would remain, but he read – “A person with experience”. Therefore, sub-clause (d) remains and, probably, (f) also remains. However, I do not support his amendment on an open-ended experience. I do not know what yardstick he will use to determine experience.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, what is proposed in the Bill in sub-clause (d) is a “representative of the Uganda Bankers Association”. That is what the chairperson is proposing to be deleted and replaced with “somebody with experience in money lending”.

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, if we had a recognised association of moneylenders, then his proposal would be ideal. However, since we do not have a recognised association of money lenders, it will not apply. I would go with –(Interruption)

MR NSUBUGA: The information I would like to give you is that the moneylenders have a recognised association. They even appeared before our committee.

MR MUSASIZI: Then we take “representatives from the moneylenders association”, Mr Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, would you like to be on record?

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Chairperson-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Or you would like to start by declaring your interest?

MR BYABAGAMBI: Well, I have declared my interest. I am not in the business, but I am associated with the people who are in that business. These moneylenders now have a recognised association. It is already registered with Uganda Registration Services Bureau, meaning it is recognised by law. Therefore, I propose that we put “a representative from the moneylenders association”.

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, something has come into my mind. Recognised associations and groups are established by an Act of Parliament. Therefore, I would like to know whether the association that met the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development – the association the Minister of Works and Transport is emphasising – was created by an Act of Parliament such that it gets recognised by this House.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. Here in Parliament, we know what moneylenders are – good or bad. However, if you go to the Parliamentary Commission, there is information which has come to Members of Parliament that Parliament does not want to deal with moneylenders. If a Member of Parliament wants to borrow money from a moneylender and he goes to the Parliamentary Commissions’ Department of Finance, they say “We do not deal with moneylenders”. This is the same Parliament. However, here we want to legitimise what we have rejected. Mr Chairperson, I need some clarification here.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairperson, this Bill is about Tier 4 microfinance institutions – Savings and Credit Co-operative Organisations (SACCOs) as well as community microfinance institutions – and hon. Kasule has not proposed for them to be on the board. He has not even proposed for the consumers to be on the board, but moneylenders’ interests are being taken care of. The objective of this Bill was for the microfinance in the villages – community-based – that have suffered and are the engines of growth of this economy.

Therefore, it is very important that we provide for the association to be here. We should provide for the SACCOs and the consumers of these services to be on the board so that when their rights are being violated, they have representatives and a voice.

Mr Chairperson, I would like to declare my interest. I have a registered money lending company, which is on suspension. I know the good things about money lending and the ills about it. There is no way you can do away with money lending. When we reach there, we shall see how to regulate it. 

However, in terms of the composition of the board – for the interest of this economy – we really need to have the consumers under the Uganda Consumers Protection Association, which we passed here as an Act of Parliament. The SACCOs and other Tier 4 microfinance institutions should also be represented through the association of microfinance institutions of Uganda.

It is unfortunate that this Bill may need an amendment immediately after passing. In 2014, we passed the Chattels Securities Act. Chattels are the movable property which the moneylenders, microfinances and SACCOs will need as security. As a committee, we have not done justice; we needed to link this Act with this Bill, but there is totally no clause where we have put any linkage. I would like to propose that we delete the representation of moneylenders on the board. (Applause)

MR KASULE: To make it simpler, we should say that on the board, we shall have Bank of Uganda, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Ministry of Trade and Industry, the bankers association –(Interjections)- you said if the association is not legislated by Parliament it cannot qualify. Can we go by the three persons with experience in microfinance and lastly, the executive director of the authority who is an ex-officio member of the board?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are you withdrawing your amendment? You should state that you would like to withdraw your amendment.

MR KASULE: Mr Chairperson, according to the debate that has ensued, I concur that we go with the amendment as has been debated by the Members and we delete “money lenders”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, we have not adopted “money lenders” so there is nothing to delete. What you are doing is withdrawing your amendment.

MR KASULE: Much obliged, Mr Chairperson. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What are you doing?

MR KASULE: I do withdraw the proposal that money lenders are on the board of the authority.

MS BBUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. I have a problem with including Bank of Uganda and Uganda Bankers Association on the board. This is a repetition. Bank of Uganda represents the interests of the bankers association because it regulates them. I understand their inclusion because they are going to regulate this. I would, therefore, propose that the representative of Uganda Bankers Association be deleted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, do you agree with deleting the representative of Uganda Bankers Association?

MS AMALI: I concede, Mr Chairperson.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairperson, I am raising a procedural issue. The copy of that report is not downloading on the iPads. All of us here are really at pain. These iPads were supposed to be written off after three years; some of them are not even working. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Does that mean that we will not be able to do any work because the iPads were supposed to be written off and they were not?

MR ANYWARACH: We have the hard copy option and I am seeing some Members looking through them. Mr Chairperson, it is painful when you sit in oblivion in this House following what others are saying.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do you have the Bill - because the proposals are being read?

MR ANYWARACH: We do not have copies of the Bill right now but they should have been on our iPads.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we will proceed because I do not have the disadvantage you have. I have my Bill and the report.

Can we reproduce hard copies for honourable members as we proceed? There is a group that does not have anything. Let us proceed.

The amendment, which was proposed by the committee, has been withdrawn. However, there is an amendment that has come from hon. Bbumba for the deletion of Uganda Bankers Association. 

The proposal is seconded by hon. Byabagambi, hon. Ekanya and hon. Musasizi. I now put the question to the amendment proposed by hon. Bbumba.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21, agreed to.

Clause 22
MR EKANYA: On clause 22, I remember we agreed that all the laws we pass here should be in conformity with the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. Therefore, this institution does not need to engage in business and retain any money because I see “funds of the authority”.

22(b) says, “ …money that accrues to the authority in discharge of this function that is in conflict with the principle of Government grants, gifts, donations, money from any other source approved by the minister, any revenue derived from the sale of property….” I think we just need (a). Let us delete (b), (c), (d) and (e). 

It should be, “…the funds of the authority shall be monies appropriated by Parliament” because the Public Finance Management Act Section 13(11) requires us to do appropriation-in-aid to include parastatals and authorities.

Therefore, all the revenues of any organisation created by an Act of Parliament or a limited liability company where Government has an interest must go to the Consolidated Fund. They should bring a plan to Parliament, it goes through the relevant committees of Parliament and then we do appropriation.

MR KASULE: Mr Chairperson, I think it is not wrong to mention that money is appropriated by Parliament. However, if you stop grants coming to this authority, they will not find money from donors. The law says that even grants are appropriated by Parliament but let them access the grants. Once they bring their papers here, they will mention the donations or grants and their sources. However, donations and grants are part of their finances and it is mentioned here.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think the solution was anticipated by the person who drafted this law. You can see that there is sub-clause (1) and there is no sub-clause (2). My reading of the Bill would suggest that there was supposed to be sub-clause (2), which would read something like, “All funds obtained under (b), (c), (d) and (e) will be handled in accordance with the Public Finance Management Act, 2015.” That would take care of the whole situation. Therefore, can somebody propose a new sub-clause (2) so that we move on? 

This is specific to the finances of the authority due to Bill compliance. Can somebody propose it please?

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I propose a new sub-clause to be inserted immediately after sub-clause (1)(a) to read as follows -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, after sub-clause (1).

MR MUSASIZI: Immediately after sub-clause (1) to read as follows: “All monies obtained under (b), (c), (d) and (e) shall be treated in accordance with the provisions of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, as amended.” I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Has it been amended? 

MR MUSASIZI: Yes. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, just say “2015”. 

MR MUSASIZI: The Public Finance Management Act, 2015. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay, Members? I hope that takes care of your concern, hon. Ekanya? I put the question to that amendment? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 23

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I have no major correction but I feel that this should read as follows: “The board shall open or maintain a bank account to receive or spend public money with the written authority of the Accountant-General.” It would give more legal meaning. Therefore, I propose that we delete “not” and “without” and replace it with “with”. It would therefore read, “The board shall open or maintain a bank account to receive or spend public money with the written authority of the Accountant-General.” I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The intention of the drafting was to prohibit because it is obvious that they will open accounts. 

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairperson, my second look at it gives me the impression that we were saving space. At first sight, my understanding was that we must give them permission to open and maintain an account. We can now proceed to tell them that such operations of account opening and maintenance will be with the permission of the Accountant-General so that it is clear.

Therefore, I propose that clause 23 should read, “The board shall open and maintain a bank account.” Sub-clause (2) should read, “Such an account opened to receive or spend public money will only be with the permission or with the authority of the Accountant-General.” Thank you very much.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Chairperson, I am not a lawyer but I have dealt with a lot of laws and I am a senior legislator. This statement, as it is, captures what we are proposing. 

If I say, “The board shall not open or maintain a bank account to receive or spend public money”, already the permission is given but it is restricted. It prohibits him from operating without the Accountant-General’s authority. I think it is all inclusive. This is better than what you are proposing. 

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairperson, I am not surprised that the honourable minister is in the age group of the likes of hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi. They speak a lot of literature but this is not literature, this is the law. If I reason with you, I would say that we can open any other private account or any account where we are managing other monies other than public funds and we would not be stopped. 

That is why we are saying that we should make it crystal clear. Do we want this board to open and maintain an account? Yes. Are we then preconditioning the opening, maintenance and operation of the account? Yes. That would be the second thing. That is my understanding.

MR KABAJO: Mr Chairperson, I have a proposal, which will handle both sides. It reads, “The board shall open or maintain a bank account to receive or spend public money only with the written authority of the Accountant-General.” I have added the words, “Only with the written authority of the Accountant-General.” 

I suppose that would handle what he wanted to say and it is still fairly summarised. Therefore, it would be both prohibitive and positive in the way it is. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. If we begin by saying, “The board shall” then we are saying it is mandatory for the board to open an account. Suppose they do not want to open one? I think that the way it is here is much better than imposing on the board to open an account. That is my thinking - (Interjections)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, you cannot say stop wasting time on commas. Do you know that there was a hole in Kenya because they misplaced one comma? It took a whole constitutional amendment process to remove that comma. Therefore, a comma can be critical. For example, if you say, “No man is an island” and then put a comma after “no”, the meaning is reversed. If you go to Google, you will see that there are landmark cases that have been very controversial based on a comma in the wrong place. 

Therefore, in drafting, all those things are critical. Can we move forward on this matter please? Is there any big problem with the way it is drafted?

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairperson, my brother’s concern is that this provision stops the authority or the board from opening accounts for fixed deposits. However, I think it is very clear and better drafted so we should pass it. 

In the past, we used to have boards and authorities opening many accounts and it created audit queries and lots of money got lost. That is why Parliament put a restriction that no account shall be operated without the clearance of the Accountant-General. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the operating words here are, “receive or spend public money.” Therefore, if you have some other private money to deal with, you can open your account as you want. However, for a board of this nature to have private money would be almost impossible. Can I put the question to clause 23 as it is? 

I now put the question that clause 23 stands part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24

MR EKANYA: Clause 24 is about borrowing. I would like to make a slight amendment that, “The board may, with the approval of the Minister responsible for Finance, borrow money from any source as may be required for meeting its obligations….” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think the “minister” is defined already. 

MR EKANYA: Okay. “…for meeting its obligations or discharge of its function of the authority under this Act as per Article 159 of the Constitution.” 

The point I would like to make is that the report of the Auditor-General shows that many Government departments are now involved in financial mediation without the approval of Parliament. That creates contingent liability, if you look at the report of the Auditor-General. When we leave it like this, it is very dangerous. That is why I would like to introduce this amendment as provided for in Article 159 of the Constitution, which lays down the procedures for borrowing money.

The Public Finance Management Act has a bit of a lacuna because we allowed Government to borrow money for financing fiscal deficits by issuing bonds and treasury bills. Therefore, if you say, “… as provided for in the Public Finance Management Act”, you find that such an authority dealing with funds trading in stocks and shares will then say that the Public Finance Management Act allows this but the Constitution restricts them coming to Parliament if they are going to borrow. This will help in avoiding contingent liability.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Chairperson, I thought that we were creating these authorities to be efficient and business-like. Now it seems that we are bringing them back here to be public servants and this will curtail their operations and the way they are supposed to work.

I also think that the framers of the Public Finance Management Act saw that they should leave it as it is and not curtail the operations of these authorities down as if they are in the Public Service.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The amount may be so insignificant that –

MR KASULE: Mr Chairperson, supposing the authority wants an advance, that would mean that we have tied it down not to have even an overdraft because that is borrowing in the real sense.

If we refer to public finance, that will be okay but referring to a Constitution is rather challenging. Mr Chairperson, the mover has allowed me to move that we put a rider under this Act and add “as per the Public Finance Management Act” at the end.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What if you look at clause 30? Does it cover it? Does it amount to borrowing also? Can it read as management of finance? 

MR EKANYA: Honourable Chairperson, clause 30 covers it. I withdraw my amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I now put the question to clause 24? I put the question that clause 24 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 24, agreed to.

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26, agreed to.

Clause 27, agreed to.

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30 

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairperson, my amendment is to retrospectively do away with what we had inserted in clause 22 because if clause 30 applies to all the clauses under “finances of the authority” from clauses 22 to 30, it is repetitive to insert what we had proposed as sub-clause (2) in clause 22.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think clause 22 is clearer the way we have put it. Let us leave it like that. We are on clause 30. I put the question that clause 30 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 30, agreed to.

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 32, agreed to.

Clause 33, agreed to.

Clause 34, agreed to.

Clause 35

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, do you want to rise on a point of clarification? If you want to propose an amendment, propose it.

MR MAWANDA: Mr Chairperson, clause 35 talks about cost of management. “The cost of management of the microfinance tier 4s is the debt of the microfinance institution.” 

I will give an example. These microfinance institutions are small. When they are taken over by the authority, they may hire an expensive firm to manage their affairs, for example, PricewaterhouseCoopers. 

I can also give an example of Bugisu Cooperative Union where Government had to save Shs 9 billion in respect to the costs because the costs were over and above the expected costs of Bugisu Cooperative Union. 

I would, therefore, suggest that at least a manageable cost remains as a debt of the institution rather than leaving it hanging; that whole cost falls on the entire institution or we delete the whole of clause 35.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Chairperson, I had not seen this one, which is very dangerous. You can imagine where a malwa group, somewhere in the - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What is malwa?

MR BYABAGAMBI: Malwa is a local brew belonging to the ajono group.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is even worse. We are talking about a word that the Hansard can capture. (Laughter)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Okay, a group of people.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You can say, “A bicycle repair group”. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: A group of people having their association and they register their SACCO and it is mismanaged, maybe by the manager. Their capital maybe about Shs 5 million or even less and the authority brings in consultants to do the audit and the minimum pay for those consultants can be millions of shillings.

You can imagine travelling from here and to the mountains of Buhweju to audit a small SACCO, which has capital of Shs 5 million that has been mismanaged. They may impose a charge of Shs 500 million and that small institution bears a debt of such an amount.

You will just be killing the members. I doubt whether the members will ever sleep when they hear that on their heads is a debt of Shs 500 million. They can even commit suicide. 

Therefore, Mr Chairman –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, are you suggesting that this authority would hire PricewaterhouseCoopers to go and audit a small bicycle repair group?

MR BYABAGAMBI: I know what the Government does. They will tender out and the winner is likely to be PricewaterhouseCoopers. That is true.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairperson, I would like to thank the engineer. When the Ministry of Trade and Cooperatives took over Bugisu Cooperative Union (BCU), they had management costs, which led BCU to incur losses because they were hiring expensive vehicles, consultants and sleeping in expensive hotels. This is the trend. Therefore, his proposal that the authority should incur the cost is good.

If the microfinance institution makes profits from savings, it will pay Income Tax. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I hear from the minister on this? There is a proposal to delete clause 35 from your Bill.

MR BYABAGAMBI: I had not completed, Mr Chairperson. I had allowed hon. Ekanya to give information.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable member. The proposal is that clause 35 be deleted.

MR BYABAGAMBI: I do not want to delete it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Then you need to help us by proposing what you want to do instead of speaking before we know – 

MR BYABAGAMBI: It was a preamble; I am coming to the real point.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Start with the point.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Chairperson, yes, we need auditors to audit these microfinances and it is necessary. Therefore, my proposal is that the authority, especially on these small microfinances that have been categorised as (a) - there are those in category (b), which are regulated by the Bank of Uganda.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, you would help if you propose.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Those in category (a) are the small ones where the Authority can bear the cost. That is my proposal.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What about the others?

MR BYABAGAMBI: The bigger ones, which are in category (b), which are regulated by the Bank of Uganda, can share the cost. However for the small ones, the authority bears the cost.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairperson, I think the way the minister is moving is right. However, the point of departure is whether we should now categorise the institutions. My understanding is that they will be paying Income Tax. For that reason, I disagree with hon. Mawanda on deleting clause 35. It should read, “The authority shall bear the cost of management of a Tier 4 microfinance institution during the period of the takeover by the authority”. I beg to move.

MR KASULE: Mr Chairperson, we passed clause 33, which is about management and takeover period. We are taking over a SACCO, which is in distress and disarray. Now, we are saying that the cost of that management within that period – because the authority comes in to help the savers. Now you are saying that the authority should take over the entire bill. The inefficiency is with the SACCO. That means that we would rather not allow the authority to takeover because they take over to help stabilise this financial distress. If they took over 10 SACCOs, they would then come to Parliament and we appropriate money for them to go and - (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairperson, I have read about this. First of all, the authority should ensure that no microfinance institution collapses because we shall be giving them money so that they do not move to distress and takeover. 

Therefore, in case you go for takeover during distress, meet the cost. If the Tier 4 SACCO makes a profit or saved money, which should have paid for management - they will pay Income Tax. It is very simple. When you make profits, you remove expenses and then pay 30 per cent Income Tax. What is the problem?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What is the number of institutions that this authority is supposed to regulate? What is the capacity of this authority? You have some in Gulu, Mbale, Kasese, among others. The only way the authority will know that there is problem is when there is a problem. Before there is a problem, they may not know.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairperson, according to the Tier 4 Bill, the microfinance institutions are supposed to make regular reports and the authority is also supposed to inspect them. Even if they hire their own internal auditors, they are supposed to file reports with the authority. 

As we speak, we have been borrowing loans to which the Government extends savings and pays for the managers of these SACCOs and Cooperatives for about two to three years. For example, our pension fund would not be where it is if Government did not support it. Mr Chairperson, we are debating on behalf of the poor people in the villages.

MS AMALI: Mr Chairperson, I thank colleagues who have contributed on this particular provision. However, we are trying to treat a sickness that is affecting SACCOs and collapsing them. It is true that some of them are collapsing, not because of anything but because there is no law to regulate them.

Mr Chairperson, we have already passed clause 33, which mandates us to allow the authority to take over the limping SACCOs or those in distress. If we are saying that the authority is the one to pay the dues, the problem will go into circular motion, where SACCOs will be reluctant because they know that Parliament can appropriate money to pay through the authority. (Interjections) Yes, I am talking about what I know. Could you protect me, Mr Chairperson?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You are protected.

MS AMALI: Some colleagues have declared their interests here, even the ones who are talking behind me. However, we should make this law knowing that we are all Ugandans and we are protecting the economy. Honourable members, you represent these very poor people and yet you are saying they should continue losing their money. 

Mr Chairperson, I would like to make my last point and I beg Members to listen to me. We should reconsider this provision and maybe suggest a threshold of SACCOs, just as my colleague said. However, we cannot leave it open to say that the authority - the House is already complaining of bills and expenditures. This will make me ask this House for more money in order to run the authority, which I do not think we can manage.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. It would be wrong for us to blame the inefficiencies of the microfinance institutions on the authority. No matter how efficient the authority is, there will always be some organisations that are poorly managed and there is no way you can blame the poor management of these microfinance institutions on the authority. To say that the authority shall bear the cost means that you are going to cripple the authority not to dare go into these organisations and take them over because they will fear the expense.

If anything, we should make the microfinance institutions that fail to live up to their responsibilities to pay the cost because in the first place, they were supposed to manage. Now that they have mismanaged people’s funds and the authority has to come in, they should bear the cost. I beg to submit.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Chairperson, let me try to clarify this. The cost we are talking about is the cost incurred during that very period of taking over the management of Tier 4 institutions only. If you get PricewaterhouseCoopers to manage a SACCO of only five people maybe for ten months and you say that the fees of that institution, which has been taken over, should be borne by the institution- no. 

We are not shielding the managers or the people who mismanaged the SACCO. We are only looking at that very period you have taken over the microfinance institution to run it or maybe turn it around. You cannot say that they should pay. Where will they get that money from? 

They are already in distress; they do not have the money but to pay for their sins, their responsibility will be to pay for the mismanagement of that microfinance. During this period of managing it, either to turn it around or to wind it up, how do you tell someone who has died to dig his own grave? 

MR MAWANDA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. I agree with hon. Byabagambi that the time we are talking about is this very time of takeover. For example, when these cooperatives or SACCOs are sitting, they pay themselves an allowance of Shs 5,000 to Shs 10,000. However when a manager comes to takeover, he will pay himself, on a daily basis, something like Shs 1 million, which is over and above what is being paid by the real owners of the SACCO.

That is why we are setting up the authority to regulate Tier 4 microfinances. Why then would it allow the SACCO to go under when the SACCO is supposed to be submitting quarterly reports? The authority should be able to detect danger.

An example is Bugisu. Government has paid more than Shs 10 billion because of the mismanagement or during the period of takeover. We are actually trying to help Government not to spend much more money during the takeover period.

I suggest, as hon. Anywarach has said, that this cost be met by the authority so that it also knows that it should do its obligation of supervising and regulating these institutions. Thank you, Mr Chairperson.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. The period under which the microfinance institution is taken over can be described as a receivership period; when someone is coming in to salvage a bad situation that has occurred as a result of poor management and other possible inefficiencies created by management.

Here is a situation where someone comes in to solve a problem on your behalf. I believe and it is in order that this microfinance institution that is experiencing problems be responsible for the expenses that accrue to it as a result of this situation - that is how receivership works.

Regarding the issue of “at what cost”, there is always a criteria for determining costs - (Interjection) – no, you know very well that I am a professional. Do not heckle. Please, when I tell you that I am a professional, I am. I know what I am talking about.

Mr Chairperson, this should not be debated in view of what Members have experienced with their SACCOs. We are trying to cure a situation. Here is a regulator whose role is to regulate Tier 4 institutions. If a Tier 4 institution has got a problem, a regulator asks you, “Can you sort out your problem?” If you cannot then he comes in to enforce.

I do not see why a regulator should be given an obligation to pay for the inefficiencies that a Tier 4 institution has accrued because of its poor management problems. Therefore, Mr Chairperson, since Members have issues to do with the over charge, let the drafters help us and we put a subclause (g) somewhere or we insert a sub-clause under clause 35 to say that the fees payable should be commensurate to the size of the microfinance institution. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MS BBUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. We seem to be in a tight situation. The SACCO is failing because of mismanagement and in its failure; the small savers are being affected. Under remedial action, you are taxing the small savers to pay in order to correct the mismanagement. I do not know whether this can work. 

I wanted us to compare this with Bank of Uganda and the commercial banks. Bank of Uganda is the regulator of commercial banks and this case is similar to that of the authority. What happens when a commercial bank goes under receivership? Who takes the responsibility? I remember in the case of Cooperative Bank, Government took the responsibility and that is Bank of Uganda.

Therefore, the problem here is that these cooperatives are so many and spread out all over the country. I am really wondering how the authority is even going to regulate all these SACCOs. I do not know the number of staff they are going to have or the kind of efficiency. For example, deep down in Ngoma, Nakaseke, they may not be able to get Internet connections to transmit the information and will require actual travel to go there and collect it. There is a problem.

As the previous speaker has suggested, we may have to consider setting up a threshold for the different categories. We can set up the fees according to the different categories such that the small ones and the big ones are charged according to their size because their problems will be different. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there are questions that we need to ask. One question is, what problem does this provision seek to cure? What is it seeking to prevent? What uncertainty is it predicting so that it is prescribing for it to handle that kind of situation?

Secondly, we also need to confirm that the law we are passing is capable of implementation. If it is not capable of implementation then we are wasting time.

MS BBUMBA: Can’t the anticipated problem be handled under the regulations because we are going to get the regulations? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The question we should have asked the minister is whether this problem is real or not. If it is real, how have you been handling it? Is this prescription based on experience?

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairperson, you have asked a right question and thank you, hon. Bbumba. 

I think our main point here is to capture the principle, which is that there will be a point when these microfinance institutions will go into financial hardship and takeover will be necessary and, therefore, the question of cost will arise.

Therefore, the general principle here should be that there will a period of takeover and the authority will be responsible. We should leave the rest of the details to the regulations. That is what I would like to propose.

MR KASULE: Mr Chairperson, of course everybody is thinking now. These SACCOs are member-owned SACCOs. If somebody is going to incur costs on their behalf, why don’t we say that – of course we passed clause 34, which is about liability under a contract; “A party to a contract with the Tier 4 microfinance institution shall not be relieved of his or her obligations.”

However, concerning costs, why don’t we allow the members to be consulted on the costs to be incurred because this is their authority? There is a difference between managers and the owners. If you are going to incur costs on behalf of owners, why doesn’t the authority consult the owners during the two months that the authority is going to preside over this SACCO?

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairperson, hon. Kasule has a point but the challenge we have goes back to the question you have asked. We told the Minister for Microfinance that according to the certificate, we are just passing a law that will not be implementable. We told her that this authority requires substantial amounts of money because according to the report from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, in every village, you will find one to 20 Tier 4 microfinance institutions or community microfinance institutions and SACCOs.

Therefore, to regulate or manage them – nowadays, in virtually every shop there is a moneylender. The SACCOs are very many and based on that, under the Cooperative Act, you cannot create a liability without asking the members. That is the point hon. Kasule is raising and this Act is now trying to take away the power of the members in determining certain expenditures.

The point you have raised is fundamental and the certificate of financial implication is below the belt as it cannot help us to move forward. However, at the end of the day, we say to the honourable Minister for Microfinance that you have been there and this has been a thorn on our skin. We shall pass the law and hope that Government will provide the money.

Mr Chairperson, hon. Bbumba has raised a very important point. To protect the commercial banks, costs are covered by Bank of Uganda and we capitalise Bank of Uganda when it makes losses. When it comes to microfinance institutions and people who are living on Shs 10,000, we are now saying, “Suffer.” What a world this is. 

I look at the debate between Clinton and Sanders. They say Clinton is for Wall Street. Are we also for Wall Street, that we only care for commercial banks where Bank of Uganda meets the cost and when it comes to these poor villagers who are saving Shs 10,000, we are telling them to meet the costs?

Mr Chairperson, we were in Kenya and met the regulator there. There are standards and benchmarks to meet as a regulator. If they do not help the SACCOs or Tier 4s to grow and not go under distress, they are sacked because they are paid to ensure that these institutions grow and move up from Tier 4 to Tier 3, Tier 2 and Tier 1.

I know we are in a catch-22 situation but the only way to bring these people from the informal sector to the formal sector is to appropriate here.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are all the anticipated organisations registered in the formal way? Not all? Are we only dealing with those that are registered? Because then you would know the bulk that you would have left out. 

MS BBUMBA: Mr Chairperson, we have to deal with only registered ones otherwise, you will have no basis for regulating them. You set up the conditions for regulation at the time of registration. 

However, I would like to give information about Bangladesh. This is a country with many successful microfinance institutions and these institutions are strongly supported by Government. Whenever they go into distress, Government comes in. That is the information I would like to give.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What is guiding this debate is, we are looking at all the poor little SACCOs in all the villages and that is affecting the trend of this debate.

COL. (RTD) MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. Yes, we support people to save and we should encourage this. However, we should also regulate so that not every villager can go and save. We could say that we allow microfinance institutions to be registered at sub-county level. That is when they will become formidable and easily regulated.

Secondly, in order to protect these savers and Government, why don’t we introduce an element of insurance? If it is there then insurance should take care of this. Thank you.

MR KABAJO: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I am wondering whether your question is covered in clause 36, which talks about categorisation of SACCOs. It seems that not all the little SACCOs in the villages are supposed to be covered under this Act because you have got categories (a) and (b). I am not sure that –(Interruption) 

MR EKANYA: I would like to inform the House that there is a provision here that nobody will operate any SACCO or microfinance institution if they are not registered. We made a provision that registration will be at the sub-county level so that our people are not cheated. If you want to start a SACCO, you are given time to go to the sub-county, get a certificate as being community-based and then you go to the district. That is the provision and so it is not something very big – (Interruption)

MR KASULE: Honourable members, there is a SACCO stabilisation fund in clause 55. Maybe stand over clause 35 and read ahead. There is a SACCO stabilisation fund and one of its objectives is to provide financial assistance to SACCOs that are insolvent or are likely to become insolvent. 

Maybe, after processing that then we will know the consequences of taking care of the costs of management - (Interjections)- these are management fees away from – (Interruption)

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. We are talking about the fees of the managers who have taken over an institution. We are giving an example that instead of hiring Mubangizi and Company Certified Public Accountants, you hire PricewaterhouseCoopers and you leave the peasants with that burden of the debts. So, the Stabilisation Fund or something has nothing to do with the costs of the receiver. So, who meets these costs? That is the question. As I said, if you hire Mubangizi, he will sleep in a lodge; if you hire PricewaterhouseCoopers, they will sleep in a hotel. 

Therefore, this is the cost we would like to mitigate so that the peasant is not ripped off at the end of the day.

MS JOY ONGOM: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. The object of this Bill is “to establish a SACCO Savings Protection Scheme; to provide for a Central Financing Facility; to provide for licensing of money lenders; to provide for self-help groups….”

My worry is that these self-help groups are very many in the villages. At the end of the financial year, the shares are very few and the total amount they save is about Shs 30 million or even Shs 10 million. 

We are now talking about the costs of management; many of these save their money in the villages and are not willing to take it to the SACCOs or banks because they fear costs. But they need to be protected – the minister knows this. Several of these groups are down on the ground. How are we going to protect them? And how are they going to have these costs on their own head? They may not be willing. I am telling you that if you allow this clause to stay, they are not going to save with the microfinance institutions or the SACCOs at all; they are going to keep their money in pots. Thank you.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Chairperson, this is a complex industry; some of us have been engaged in it since 1990 and we have met all the problems. We know what is in this industry very well. We have set up SACCOs which are successful and some have collapsed. By the way, I have got three big successful SACCOs in my constituency but it has not been very easy.

Therefore, Mr Chairperson, to cut the long story short and move forward, let us categorise the SACCOs. Secondly, those that are already licensed – because there are those, which are not going to be licensed; for example, you cannot stop the villagers from saving. How are you going to stop them; even in your constituency? (Interjections) You cannot stop them. But for those which will be registered and in a certain category, we should put an insurance fund, which will help in case of such management crises such that the insurance can meet the management fees. 

Otherwise, to tell these poor people that you are going to pay the management fee during the takeover is like telling them to lie down and have their heads cut off. Thank you, Mr Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: From this debate, we might have to stand over this clause, see how we can categorise these SACCOs and then move forward.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. Many people do not save because they fear that those who are managing these SACCOs will mismanage and run away with their money and nothing will be done. I do understand the principle of wanting to supervise these institutions to make sure that they work and people’s money is protected. And that maybe, when there is a problem, then Government can come in. But where is the responsibility of the managers – those who are in charge and those whom people have entrusted with their funds, why don’t we see that responsibility here? 

We had an organisation called COWI– it came to the villages and mobilised people’s savings and they just disappeared. That is why we cannot mobilise sufficient savings from the masses because they fear that if they put money in these SACCOs, people will disappear with their money.

So, if we want this law to encourage savings, we need to place responsibility on the managers. Of course, I say this knowing that when you have a group of villagers and they want to save, then you are saying that “people who are going to keep that money are responsible” – if you put that heavy responsibility on them, then they also fear. But I think there needs to be an element of responsibility on those who mismanage the funds without shifting the burden to the authority. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can we stand over clause 35?  (Ms Amali rose_) Will it enable us to handle clause 35? 

MS AMALI: Mr Chairperson, I would like to start by allaying the Members’ fears that with this Bill, the SACCOs and the Tier 4 microfinance institutions are going to be regulated in thresholds. We have the categories as Members have seen and the SACCOs that are small and are under Category A. For example, the savings groups that my colleagues are talking about – they are not going to be subjected to prudential regulation that calls for takeover. 

Mr Chairperson, we have both prudential and non-prudential regulation structures that we are going to put in place. For the groups and smaller SACCOs that may not be able to meet the costs, they are going to be put under regulatory guidelines. If you look further into what we are suggesting here, you will find that it explains this.

So, Mr Chairperson, maybe as my colleague, hon. Anywarach said, we should think about thresholds and the figures that may be paid and put them in the regulations.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I stand over this clause?

COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE: Mr Chairperson, I appreciate and accept the minister’s guidance. What we are talking about is the protection of these funds when there is distress; what happens to these poor savers of Shs 10,000? How will their money be protected? How do we ensure that this money is protected forever? That is what we are talking about in my understanding. 

What she is saying is right and I accept but we want to see that once a manager is appointed and the board is in charge but the money is mismanaged, the savers’ money is protected. This is what we are trying to find a cure for – (Interjections)- Takeover, yes; whether you hire PricewaterhouseCoopers or whatever – you still must find money for those savers. This man who comes to take over will not find any money for the savers. He will simply come and establish that the money was embezzled. Period! I am proposing insurance.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we will stand over clause 35 because we are not able to proceed with it. 

Clause 36

MR KASULE: Clause 36 is on the categorisation of SACCOs. The committee proposes as follows:

1. Replace subclauses (2) and (3) with the following:
“(2). Category A SACCOs shall be those that are licensed by Bank of Uganda under section 114.
(3). Category B SACCOs shall be those that are licensed by the Authority.” 
The justification is: to provide for a distinction between SACCOs that are regulated by Bank of Uganda and those regulated by the authority. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I am worried about the cross referencing. Section 114 is for which law?

MR KASULE: Section 114 is ahead.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is it of this Bill?

MR KASULE: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can you read it.

MR KASULE: Clause 114 is on the amendment of the Micro Finance Deposit-Taking Institutions Act, 2003. It says, “The Micro Finance Deposit-Taking Institutions Act, 2003 is amended-
(a) 	in section 2, by inserting immediately after the definition of ‘person’, the following – ‘Registered society’ means a cooperative society registered under the Cooperative Societies Act;
(b) in section 4 (1), by inserting the words, ‘or registered society’ immediately after the word ‘company’…”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, proceed.

MR MAWANDA: Mr Chairman, you are saying that category A will be those SACCOs that will be registered by Bank of Uganda. Will Bank of Uganda license a SACCO and then allow it to be regulated by this authority?

MR KASULE: What we are saying is that there is a law called “The Micro Finance Deposit-Taking Institutions Act, 2003” and those institutions are managed by Bank of Uganda. We are using this law to categorise SACCOs and differentiate those that are managed by Bank of Uganda and the ones that are managed by this authority.

MR MAWANDA: I think we are looking at categories of SACCOs that are going to be regulated by the authority. We are not looking at the SACCOs that are going to be registered by Bank of Uganda. What are your category A, let alone those ones regulated by Bank of Uganda? I ask this so that we know those under A and those under B. Thank you.

MR KASULE: In clause 36, we have categorised SACCOs as A and B. We have also qualified them through their thresholds. We have said category A SACCOs shall have a voluntary savings volume of at least Shs 300 million but less than Shs 1 billion, and we have also mentioned the minimum paid up capital. Category B SACCOs, we have said, shall have voluntary savings and paid-up capital of less than Shs 300 million and so on and so forth. So, we have categorised them using these amounts.

MR EKANYA: Honourable minister, to be licensed by Bank of Uganda is not only about thresholds or capital; it is about your credential capacity. We have deposit-taking institutions under tier 3 that have not qualified to be licensed by Bank of Uganda because of poor credential capacity. This is why it is provided for in the law that when you apply, Bank of Uganda supervises and your capacity is built and then you are given a licence. 

Secondly, I see a gap in this provision because you are only talking about SACCOs and yet this Bill is about SACCOs and microfinance institutions. You may have some microfinance institutions that may have Shs 4 billion or Shs 10 billion but they want to continue to operate as microfinance institutions or a SACCO. So, why is the focus only on the SACCOs and yet the law also covers microfinance institutions? 

We have also left out money lenders. We have money lenders who have portfolios of Shs 100 billion and they can distort the economy. If you are talking about inflation and microeconomic issues, they deserve to be under Bank of Uganda. Some of these lenders are bigger than some of these banks but we have left them out. This is inequality. Are we for Wall Street - big money - or for the poor people? I know money lenders who are really big guns and yet we are not pushing them to be under Bank of Uganda. 

Honourable minister, why do you want to push? If I can detect, Members will think that we are protecting our interests. Let us appoint people of capacity in this authority. Even if you want to bring Dr Kasekende, the Deputy Governor of Bank of Uganda, to head the authority, so be it, so that they can also protect the money of the poor people in the village who are robbed every day. The trend here shows that our poor people will be left to the sharks because the authority will not have capacity to regulate. I seriously oppose this.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Chairperson, I am just seeing this; if a SACCO is licensed by the Bank of Uganda, will that SACCO be supervised by the authority? How can that work? This is a puzzle because it is completely impossible. 

The SACCO is licensed by the Bank of Uganda. When I license you, I give you my conditions and regulations to follow because I am giving you a licence; how then do you give me to somebody else to supervise? How do I surrender you after I have licensed you? It is like producing a child and you give it to another mother to look after. Let Bank of Uganda remain with their monetary issues and let this go straight back to the authority.

GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA: I thank you, Mr Chairperson. From the provisions of this section, my SACCO is outside this category. Our savings are around Shs 31 billion and shares are Shs 83 billion. I do not see how the authority is going to supervise this SACCO and yet the cap is already indicated, according to the definitions of category A and B, unless I am totally outside this Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairman, what do you do with the Wazalendo SACCO?

MR KASULE: That is why we are referring Wazalendo to Bank of Uganda because of the high risk with which they hold that money. They save Shs 36 billion; the amount of risk on the depositors’ money is so high that it is better managed by a more professional body than the authority, and that is Bank of Uganda. 

MR EKANYA: Is Bank of Uganda the one managing National Social Security Fund (NSSF)? This fund has trillions.

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. When you look at the way this law has provided for money lending, they have handled money lenders with soft gloves and they have become very hard on SACCOs. You have categorised SACCOs but you have not done the same for money lenders.

Mr Chairperson, there are money lenders whose share capital is more than Shs 100 billion. In fact, one of them is here. (Laughter) You can move into his office and borrow Shs 10 billion or Shs 20 billion in a minute. They are not being catered for in the law. However, when it comes to SACCOs, they have been squeezed to the marrow. 

Therefore, Mr Chairperson, I would suggest that these SACCOs that are above the threshold he is talking about, and since they will be managed by Bank of Uganda, be left out of this category. I thank you, Mr Chairperson.

MR KASULE: I have got advice from the minister.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let the minister give it.

MS AMALI: Mr Chairperson, I think this matter was conceded to long time ago. My technical people have just taken some time- I think that we conceded on this matter of categorisation using thresholds and we proposed that it should be handled in the regulations. I beg to concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What are you conceding to? The committee has proposed something in its report.

MS AMALI: I think there was an amendment by the committee on clause 36, which we agreed to, that the threshold should be dropped and this should be considered in the regulations.

Mr Chairperson, money lenders cannot be handled by Bank of Uganda because they do not take deposits. That was the reason why they were not included –(Interjections)- We know they are transacting in money but they do not take deposits. They are a private business and that is why we are putting them under another provision but not under Bank of Uganda. There is no way out.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I thought we were looking at clause 36 and the amendment proposed under clause 36 by the committee; is that what you are conceding to?

MR KASULE: What the committee was saying is that category A - the ones that are presumed to have high risks and with big money - are managed under Bank of Uganda. This is the same with the deposit-taking microfinance institutions. However, the Members are saying that there are people who perpetually want to behave as SACCOs and not banks or deposit taking institutions, so we let both categories be managed under this authority.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Where are these categories actually defined?

MR KASULE: They are categorised under clause 36. It says, “Categorization of SACCOs 
(1) SACCOs shall be classified as- 
(a) Category A SACCOs; and 
(b) Category B SACCOs.”
We shall change (2) to say that category A SACCOs shall have a voluntary savings volume of at least Shs 300 million. We have agreed that the authority manages both categories.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay now? I put the question-

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairperson, I think when we begin defining limits here, we are indirectly injuring the interests of those who want to operate as SACCOs. If you say in (2) (a) that they should have a voluntary savings volume of at least Shs 300 million to Shs 1.5 billion, that means our SACCO at Parliament with almost Shs 18 billion  will not fall here.

I think the question of minimax and maximin should be avoided. If the chairman of the committee and the minister are not ready, we should stand over this because it will affect our discussions in the clauses ahead. This should be clearly defined; Gen. Katumba was talking about Wazalendo and he said they have billions and billions of cash within their SACCO and they are okay with it. When we begin defining limits of money here, we are not saying anything different from what we have been saying in the debate we have been having, that if we leave some of the SACCOs to remain under Bank of Uganda, then we will be doing a disservice. We should stand this over or we leave it open.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What you have conceded to is what is not clear.

MR KASULE: Mr Chairperson, I think the Members have said that we delete that part of categorisation of SAACOs and SACCOs be left as SACCOs. In that case, we delete clause 36 that categorises SACCOs. The next thing is now registering and getting a licence. Categorisation appears only here, so we can delete it and proceed. Okay-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What is okay?

MR KASULE: The technical person has reminded us that when we look at the amendment in clause 36, since we are not specifying the limits, or the threshold, it will be done in the regulations. Therefore, we delete clause 36.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The proposal, therefore, is to delete clause 36; is that where we are?

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Chairperson, I hate to say this but I can read unpreparedness on the part of the chairman of the committee and the other relevant officers. Would it not be procedurally correct that we stand over this Bill and give a chance to the chairperson to read through, liaise with the minister or consult, because we might end up with a bad law yet it was well intentioned? I would propose that we stand over the Bill so that we have thorough consultations so as to come up with a good law.

MS AMALI: Mr Chairperson, I would like to thank my sister for being concerned. However, this Bill has been on the shelves for as long as you know, and all these Members know how much they have been pushing us because of this Bill.

I would like to concede to the deletion and we consider the rest of the principles. I do not see the reason as to why we should stand over on this because we have conceded to it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the final proposal is that clause 36 be deleted from the Bill. I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 37

MR KASULE: Mr Chairman, under clause 37 - SACCOs to be registered under societies and licensed under this Act - the committee proposes to insert a new subclause (3) to read as follows: “Subject to subsection (1), a SACCO may carry on the business of financial services if-
(a) it is operating on the probationary period, pending registration under the Cooperative Societies Act; or
(b) it has applied for a licence under this Act.”

The justification is that a SACCO needs to mobilise members and resources to qualify for registration and a licence.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay, Members? 

MS ATIM: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. I read here that subject to subsection (1), a SACCO may carry on the business of financial services if it is operating on a probationary period. What will the probationary period be? Is it a period of six months, one year or three months?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The period will be provided for in the subsequent regulations. Can I now put the question to the amendment? I put the question to the amendment as proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 37, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 38

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairperson, my concern is in relation to borrowing. Last time, we had an extraordinary general meeting for our SACCO and we were told that there must be a limit of liability defined, which must be approved by the meeting, and it should lie at the desk of the registrar. I find myself having difficulty in comprehending this because it says here, “borrow in an aggregated amount not exceeding a limit prescribed by the authority”. Where do we now put the functions of the registrar? It should come out clearly.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Which registrar?

MR ANYWARACH: When we had the extraordinary general meeting for our SACCO, they said it is a law that we must come up with a resolution defining our maximum liability, which would allow us to borrow money, and that resolution must lie at the desk of the Registrar of Cooperatives.

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. That is according to the Cooperative Societies Act, where you have to get a maximum liability from the registrar. However, when this Act comes into force, it will be determined by the authority.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Can I put the question to clause 38? I put the question that clause 38 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 38, agreed to.

Clause 39

MR KASULE: Under the licensing of SACCOs, the committee proposes as follows:
1. 	In sub-clause (2)(a), insert the word “certified” immediately before the word “copy”. The justification is to prove the authenticity of the copy of the certificate of registration.

2. 	Delete sub-clause (4). This is because the authority should take the initiative to verify the authenticity of documents submitted for registration without waiting for returns filed by the Registrar of Cooperatives.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Those are the amendments from the committee. I put the question to the amendments.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 39, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 40

MR KASULE: Under the issuance of licence, insert a new subclause (5) to read as follows: “The licence issued under subclause (1) shall remain in force until revoked under clause 45.” This is to reduce the procedures and cost of doing business and improve competitiveness of doing business in Uganda.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 40, as amended, agreed to.


Clause 41
MR KASULE: On the use of words “Savings and Credit Cooperative Society” or “SACCO”, the committee proposes to insert a new sub-clause (3) to read as follows: “Notwithstanding subsection (2), a registered society shall have up to 12 months period to apply for a licence under this Act.” There is need for an incubation period between registration and licensing.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that the justification?

MR KASULE: Yes.
	
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You have read it as if it is part of the clause.

MR KASULE: I said (3): “Notwithstanding subsection (2), a registered society shall have up to 12 months period to apply for a licence under this Act”. The justification is that there is need for an incubation period between registration and the licensing of SACCOs.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear, honourable members?

MS BBUMBA: Mr Chairperson, my worry is the high failure rate of the SACCOs in the first year. There are many, which do not reach their first birthday. I do not know what will happen to those in that category.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Chairperson, the probation period for a SACCO to register has been two years and we are now reducing it to one year and the justification is not clear. What are you-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, probation is when you have been given authority to operate on a probationary term. It does not include the time when you are just there without anybody knowing that you are there. You are registered but on probationary terms. However, for this one year, they are talking about the period when you have not taken any step to register.

MR EKANYA: Hon. Syda Bbumba raised a very serious question. However, in life some must be manure for others to survive.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Survival for the fittest. 

MR EKANYA: That is normal.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 41, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 42

MR KASULE: Clause 42 is about an annual fee. Under subclause (3), the committee proposes to delete the words “upon application for renewal of the licence”. This is because the licence is issued once and remains in force until revoked. The application for renewal is not necessary. (Interjection)- This is clause 42 – annual fee. It says,
“(1) 	The SACCO shall pay a prescribed annual fee in respect of the licence.
(2) 	Where the SACCO fails to pay the annual fee prescribed under subsection (1), the licence shall be cancelled.
(3) 	The annual fee payable under subsection (1) shall be payable on the issue of a licence and thereafter annually upon application for renewal of the licence.”

The committee proposes that in subclause (3) delete the words, “upon application for renewal of the licence.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Which clause are we dealing with?

MR KASULE: Clause 42. We are removing the words, “upon application for renewal of the licence”. In subclause (3)-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What happens to the headnote of that clause?

MR KASULE: There is confusion here. Let us leave it as it is in the Bill.

MS BBUMBA: Mr Chairperson, whereas I have no problem with paying the application fee once, renewal of the licence annually is important because it would provide checks on an annual basis. If you leave it open until it is revoked, by the time they come in to revoke it, it will be too late. I do not know about the fees, but it is a check on compliance.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We already have a problem with clause 40, which we already passed with an amendment saying that the licence issued under subclause (1) shall remain in force until revoked. That is what we passed.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairperson, the reason it was agreed like that was because there are two institutions operating; you first register a company and then you become a bank. Therefore, once you have a licence from the cooperatives, you need a licence to now operate as a financial institution. There are two different aspects in this operation and we need to understand that.

Annually, we file returns to the Registrar of Companies; it is not to get a renewal. (Interjections) Yes, it is the same thing. Let me tell you what I know; it is unfortunate we are not in that field. To operate as a bank, you have to be registered as a limited liability company and then you apply to Bank of Uganda for a licence. You only pay the fee and the licence is not renewed. Once you have the licence to operate a bank - Mr Chairperson, I think the licence should stay in force - the regulators look at your net worth to operate and they keep advising you. You only pay the fee that is required.

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairperson, thank you. Unless we are doing something else other than licensing, I think that licensing must be periodical, and in this case it must be annually reviewed. You have to put in a fresh application to be licensed to continue. This is what we had deliberated on in the committee. I do not know whether things changed later on, but this was the spirit under which we were moving.

MR KASULE: In the committee, as I remember, you wanted to say that we give a licence annually and then we stop there and then in clause 43, we go to renewal of licence. This statement “upon application for renewal of licence” was ahead of clause 43 and it was not necessary.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, how did you then take the decision in clause 40? You were the one who made the amendment that it shall remain in force until it is revoked. They inserted a new subclause (5) in clause 40.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairperson, there are two things I am looking at. How do I attain a registration status? That is the one, which should remain. They are separate.

Mr Chairperson, in clause 40, we should have said that the registration status will remain in force until revoked and not the licence issued, and then we go to the licence. Otherwise, a licence must be renewed yearly.

MR MAWANDA: Mr Chairperson, when you talk about registration, the only institution authorised to register companies in Uganda is Uganda Registration Services Bureau. You only go to this authority to get a licence. It is not their mandate to register people. Therefore, we need to differentiate between registration and licensing. This authority does licensing; it does not do registration.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clauses 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44 and 45 are all about licensing of SACCOs. The whole subject is licensing. We may have to review clause 40 in which we approved that the licence will remain in force until it is revoked. We do not have to recommit; we can deal with it since we are still at committee stage. If we had reported to the House, then we would have had to recommit. Yes, we have reported but we have not yet left the subject.

MR KASULE: Much obliged.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That means for the clause which you brought, Mr Chairman, you owe this House an apology.

MR KASULE: We apologise, Mr Chairperson. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That means we need to go back to clause 40, deal with it properly and then we come back to this, so that we are clear about what we are doing.

Thank you, hon. Bbumba, for bringing this out because how do you give a licence for eternity. Can we now go back to clause 40 so that we clean it up and move forward? Everything else revolves around it.

Clause 40

MR KASULE: Mr Chairperson, as you guided, let us drop the proposal of the insertion of a new subclause (5). 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Under clause 40, therefore, there is no amendment. The amendment that had been proposed and adopted is now under review. We are saying there is no amendment under clause 40. Therefore, I am going to put the question to clause 40 without amendment. I now put the question that clause 40 as it is in the Bill stands part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 40, agreed to.

Clause 42

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There is no problem with clause 41, so now we come to clause 42.

MR KASULE: In subclause (3), delete the words, “upon application for renewal of the licence.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Why? 

MR KASULE: The justification is that the licence is issued once and remains -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, that does not apply anymore. That collapses on its own weight.

MR KASULE: Consequentially, it is amended. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There is no amendment in clause 42. I put the question that clause 42 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 42, agreed to.

Clause 43

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is there an amendment in clause 43? The proposed amendment now cannot work. I put the question that clause 43 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed.)

Clause 43, agreed to.

Clause 44, agreed to.

Clause 45

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Revocation of SACCO licence - Your amendment may not now be valid. It has been declared insolvent. You may want to look at it because you would like to add another condition. If it is declared insolvent, therefore, the licence stands revoked. That is what we are saying.

MR KASULE: The committee under revocation of SACCO licence had proposed that under subclause (1), we merge subclauses (d), (e) and (g) to read as follows: “(d) has been declared insolvent.” 

The justification is that the proof of inability to pay debts, liquidation and dissolution are processes and procedures of insolvency proceedings. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that correct? Can I then put the question to that amendment? I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 45, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 46, agreed to.

Clause 47
MR KASULE: In subclause (2) (e), insert the words “notice in the Gazette and a paper of wide circulation” immediately after the word, “authority”. The justification is: to give notice to the SACCOs of any new changes in the minimum holdings of liquid assets.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay, Members? 

MR BYABAGAMBI: I do not know whether the liquid assets are defined. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: If they are not defined, then you might need to define them. The liquid assets are defined; they include cash at hand, cash in the bank, mobile money slots, short-term Government securities and savings with other institutions. They are defined.  I put the question to the amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 47, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 48, agreed to.

Clause 49, agreed to.

Clause 50, agreed to.

Clause 51, agreed to.

Clause 52, agreed to.

Clause 53, agreed to.

Clause 54

MR KASULE: Mr Chairperson, under the headnote “unclaimed balances”, we propose the following amendments: 
1. 	In sub-clause (6), replace the word, “five” with the word “ten”. The justification is: not to discourage the spirit of saving but to prevent misappropriation of members’ savings by the SACCO. 

2. 	In sub-clause (7), delete the words, “within one year of transfer.” The justification is: not to discourage the spirit of saving and to protect members’ savings. 

MR MAWANDA: Mr Chairperson, sub-clause (6) reads, “Unclaimed balances shall, after a period of six years, be transferred to the authority and the authority shall employ…”-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, which one are you reading? There is no “six” in subclause (6). 

MR MAWANDA: It is five years, sorry; “…the authority shall employ them to offset the costs of supervising SACCOs….” I think this is not fair. First of all, the authority has got its own budget, which it uses to run its operations. Secondly, this will be a window to misuse unclaimed balances. 

I suggest that if they are not claimed by the owners, let this money be transferred to the stabilisation fund. It even goes ahead to say that the authority may use it as they may deem it appropriate. At the end of the day, they will just get this money and embezzle it. We must, therefore, know where these unclaimed funds go to at the end of the day. Sub-clause (7) (a) also says that after a year, someone might come and claim his money. If it will have been spent, where will this money come from? 

MS BBUMBA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I think we should pick a leaf from what happens in the commercial banks. When an account has not been operational for a given period of time, the money is transferred to a dormant account and it stays there as far as the records are concerned; it is never written off. When the owner comes, he is asked to prove that he is the owner of that money and it is given back. 

Somebody may have travelled abroad for some reason and they are not there to claim the money. Therefore, that money should not get lost through expense. Using it for the authority’s activities means expending it and he or she will never recover it. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Chairperson, I entirely agree with hon. Syda Bbumba, but I defer with how these monies are going to be used in case the owner does not surface at all. In my view, this money should go to recapitalisation of the SACCO; it should not be taken by the authority or be given by the-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: How long is that period of not showing up at all? 

MR BYABAGAMBI: 10 years. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: If a person has not shown up at all, what happens if he comes after 10 years and 11 months? 

MR BYABAGAMBI: If you take 10 years without even inquiring whether you have money in the bank or somewhere, then you should be deemed dead, lost, AWOL or not interested in those balances. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairperson, I think you lectured some of these things in the school of law. There is a story of a woman who deposited money in the bank; she gave birth but unfortunately, passed away immediately. The daughter or the son could only claim the right of estate after 18 years but this boy did not know because the institution did not advertise. These cases are being discussed and they are good practices. We thought that those good practices need to be considered before it is declared that the money does not belong to anybody. 

We also looked at the other case of the custodian board where the Asians were compensated. Later on, when the new Government came to power, some of them claimed to have not been compensated. Because of poor management of records, we paid twice. 

We had, therefore, asked our technical people to look at the global best practice. We proposed to create an institution in future that will cater for these unclaimed balances. However, for this case we need to find a better way to define it; it should be 18 years and it must be advertised. The money should be in a fund or it must go to the state. Ten years is too short a time. 

MR KASULE: Mr Chairperson, the committee had proposed 10 years. However, hon. Ekanya from law school says 18 years. I think the committee of the whole House can take a decision on the number of years; at least, we wanted longevity from five to ten years as proposed in the Bill. 

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Chairperson. Normally, when you are opening an account in a bank, you provide the name of a next of kin. Can’t you give that money to the next of kin, who is the person that will succeed you? It is much better than giving it away to the organisation. Thank you.

MS AMALI: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I would think that 10 years is okay as the committee has recommended. However, I also believe that members of this SACCO provide data when they are joining the SACCO, or something of that kind. Supposing we think about – I also float my own proposal - the next of kin? I think it would really be okay. 

The SACCOs are in place to develop poor people. So, if this person had children, his wife or any next of kin that has been indicated, just as we do here with our pensions and even the SACCO. I think it would be appropriate to indicate the next of kin, if they show up or if the records are clear.

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. The practice at microfinance institutions is that when a woman opens an account, she does not even want her husband to know. When the husband opens, it is the same thing. So, eventually there is no next of kin. That is the practice. In such circumstances, I agree to the 10 years. However, if this money is not claimed at the end of the day, let it be used to recapitalise the SACCO and let the institution not use this money. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There was a proposal to advertise. Can we comprehensively handle it?

MR BYABAGAMBI: We need to be extra careful with the issue of the next of kin. I think these are the reasons why when a wife opens an account, she does not want her husband to know and vice-versa. This man may come home when he is drunk and he knows that the wife has so much money on the account and just cuts off her head and takes all the money, knowing that the law gives it to him. These things are happening and we see them happen.

What am I trying to say? Let us advertise so that they know that there is a balance. I think even commercial banks also advertise that such and such accounts have been dormant, the owners can come and claim their money and that if they do not claim it within a given period, the money will be forfeited. I think that is a good practice to be used.

After listening to the paralegal down here, really I think somebody should be mature. If I am a single mother, I have only one child and the child is my first born and maybe I die while giving birth, I think we should give a chance to this child so that after 18 years of age, when we advertise this child should take the mother’s money. Therefore, I propose that we move from 10 to 18 years through advertising.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairperson, my position is this: We are looking at an account that has remained in abeyance but under SACCOs. These are small microfinance institutions though they can be big like ours. You need to motivate the members to be active so that no member is deliberately redundant. They should participate in the activities of the SACCO. Actually, we need to encourage them to constantly participate. In that spirit, therefore, we cannot leave an account in abeyance for 18 years before we move on.

The position of the Bill right now is two years, which befits the situation of the SACCOs we are encouraging to grow. We are not talking about savings or fixed deposits like in the bank; these are SACCOs. Therefore, I propose to Members that two years is very excellent. My reasoning is that in case of death, you serve the Administrator-General’s Office. You even have situations where CAOs in the villages manage these estates. Instead of somebody going to the Administrator-General’s Office, the CAO comes into play; it actually starts at the sub-county.

This is money in amounts like Shs 10,000, Shs 20,000, Shs 40,000 or even Shs 2000 on the account but we are giving strict conditions. Do you know how much it costs to advertise in a newspaper? It is a lot of money. Therefore, I think two years is really adequate.

MR KASULE: Honourable members, the first process on unclaimed balances occurs within the SACCO, where they allow somebody to withdraw. Sub-clause (1) says, “…in the case of a saving for a fixed period, from the day on which the fixed period terminated; and in the case of any other saving, from the day on which the last transaction took place or a statement of account was last requested or acknowledged by the member, whichever is later, a withdrawal shall not be allowed on the savings account except with the permission of two officers….”

I think what they are saying is that they want to transfer the money into a dormant account. Later, in five years, that is when they can consider transferring it to the authority. It is processed in the first two years and then later after five years, it is transferred to the authority. So, there are in two parts.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairperson, I would like to agree with hon. Kasule, but we need to introduce another clause. From the authority, the money should go to Bank of Uganda because monetary issues rest there –(Interjection)- Yes! Even after five or ten years, Bank of Uganda has an unclaimed balances account. This kid has to grow and mature in order to claim the estate of his or father. 

My brother talked about the SACCOs being active. I know of Members of Parliament here who have bought shares in companies. The rules are that, if you buy shares in a company you should be trading virtually weekly or monthly. However, there are Members whose accounts have been dormant for three to four years; they are not trading, which is contrary to the practice. We are learning some of this behaviour.

We need to move this, after 10 years, to Bank of Uganda so that it forms part of the resource of the state. Tomorrow when this person has grown to 18 years of age, then Bank of Uganda will advertise.

There was a similar situation with Government of Uganda after the war. For those who suffered as a result of the war, their pension was so small that by paying them, it would be of no value. The Government had to add some zeros so that they would receive something of value. We need to avoid a situation of Luweero Triangle where up to now people are still claiming property destroyed in the Luweero war and the banks that were broken into. 

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. We are legislating for microfinance institutions and SACCOs. These are institutions with small monies. Do not look at microfinance institutions as commercial banks. First of all, the money we are talking about as being dormant, at the end of the day will not be there. There are monthly charges. Even in six months or one year, the account will be depleted. Therefore, when you say that you are giving it 10 years, the account will be in negative.

The Member from Padyere said that we need to motivate members, because we are trying to grow this business. However, for it to grow, people must see some good business taking place. Therefore, if you are now giving it 10 years – I would actually suggest that if it is not two years, let us give it five years at most. Ten years is too much time. Besides, the money will not be there.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairperson, I have a problem with my brother. We asked him to declare his interest – (Interjection) – Yes; we have to be fair here. 

Yesterday, I said that some commercial banks or financial institutions in Europe are now paying depositors some money to allow their money stay in the bank because the interest rates are negative. It is happening in Japan. We could also reach that trend –(Interjection)- The microfinance institution that you talked about was a lender having Shs 36 billion, Parliament having Shs 18 billion and others. Let us be fair. Let us not own SACCOs or microfinance institutions and then compute that if we retain each person’s Shs 5,000 that will be Shs 1 billion. I am sorry that I am talking like this. 

Mr Chairperson, in one of the commercial banks, there was a gentleman who was arrested. He developed a software and for every transaction, especially for Members of Parliament and people who hold big chunks of money, he would remove just five shillings. By the end of the month, he would take home Shs 200 million. So, keeping this money in dormant accounts- just Shs 10,000 is a lot of money. I would like to propose that we agree and move it to 10 years. Thereafter, all unclaimed balances should go to Bank of Uganda. Why should they stay with the SACCO or microfinance institution?

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I hope that in the regulations, there will be a consideration to the effect that before the money is transferred the microfinance institution should prove that there is no next of kin. I heard Members say that spouses do not want to reveal their next of kin. However, when I sign and put your name as my next of kin, I do not have to inform you; it is in the records. If anything happens to me, then they can look you up to access my benefits. Therefore, that should not be used as an excuse. I will take the information - (Interruption)

MS BBUMBA: Mr Chairperson, even if the person does not disclose to the spouse that he or she has opened up an account, the people operating the accounts may be living in the same village, they would know each other and they would leak the information.

MS KAMATEEKA: Okay, I concede. However, where the next of kin has been declared and the information is available, the microfinance institution should reach out to that person before transferring that person’s money. Thank you.

MR KASULE: Just as I said, this is a process. In subsection (3), we cater for advertising after three years. Subsection (4) says, “A SACCO shall not charge on the dormant account any fee or cost apart from the cost of the advertisement referred to in subsection (3).” 

Subsection (5) says, “An account may be transferred out of the register of dormant accounts if the member, or if he or she is dead, his or her legal or personal representative, makes a request to that effect.” It is as if they can allow a relative to come and claim this money. If that is not done, the unclaimed balances, after five years, are transferred to the authority.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, is there anything substantially wrong with the Bill the way it is?

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairperson, there is absolutely nothing wrong with the way the Bill is. Unless otherwise, maybe we are not concentrating on what the intention of the drafter was.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I put the question. I put the question that clause 54 stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 54, agreed to.

Clause 55

MR KASULE: Mr Chairperson, clause 55 is on the SACCOs stabilisation fund. The committee proposes to delete the entire clause. The justification is that the establishment of a stabilisation fund is likely to promote mismanagement of SACCOs’ business. 

Further, the requirement of SACCOs making an annual contribution of one per cent of their assets towards the stabilisation fund amounts to a tax that will substantially reduce the assets of the SACCO over time and result into the collapse of the business. In other words, the justification is that one per cent is bad and is tantamount to a tax, which will run down the savings of the SACCO.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In other words, you are proposing deletion of clauses 55, 56 and 57 to do away with the issue of the stabilisation fund. Is that the proposal from the committee?

MR KASULE: Yes, Mr Chairperson.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairperson, I am reserved about deleting this. Most of the money we have been using in these SACCOs is borrowed from World Bank, African Development Bank, Arab Development Bank among others. It is used to support SACCOs to start up their businesses; we give them furniture and pay the managers for one year. However, globally now, there is no money. Unless we still think there is money but the World Bank is broke and China is cooling. We need to mobilise our own money here. 

Our savings and mobilisation to GDP is the lowest in Sub-Saharan Africa. Tomorrow, when a SACCO is in distress, like Bank of Uganda now, we have to capitalise. Why are we capitalising Bank of Uganda with all the prudent management?

Members, we are mixing the SACCO stabilisation fund with the SACCO savings protection fund. The protection fund is about the mediation after people have borrowed money and they fail to pay. The stabilisation fund helps SACCOs get capital. Where are we going to get capital? If we did not have NSSF, which was started by some few people, even funding our budget would be a crisis. We are borrowing from NSSF to a tune of Shs 4 trillion to fund this Government, which is part of what we are using for operations. 

Therefore, we need to allow the creation of this stabilisation fund; it is just one per cent. We need to have it. I know it is going to be costly, but some SACCOs will go under and Government will need money to support them. In some areas like Karamoja, the north and east, where people are poor, they need to be supported to start SACCOs, but you are now saying we delete this. Why did Government borrow from the PTA Bank? It is because the IMF refused to lend us money. There is no money around the world. Things have changed.

Therefore, Mr Chairperson, I would like to request the chairperson of the committee to allow this. The stabilisation fund is like creating another NSSF. It is in Kenya, it is South Africa; we need to allow this happen so that we can move this country forward. 

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I agree with the chairman of the committee that this should be deleted. One of the reasons people are not going to commercial banks is because they fear these costs. The moment you start introducing as many costs as possible, you will be discouraging people from joining SACCOs. 

For the beginning, let us delete this but as the industry grows, we can re-introduce it. You pay membership fee – (Interjection) - No, no let us delete it for the beginning. As the industry grows, we can start charging so as to create a stabilisation fund. He says it is in Kenya, but it failed to work. They are actually using insurance not a stabilisation fund. Therefore, I agree with the chairman that in the meantime, we delete this. As the industry grows, we can always introduce it. Thank you, Mr Chairperson

MS ALUM: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. Before we agree with the chairperson of the committee on the deletion of clauses 55 and 56, I would like to get some clarification. 

We stood over a clause concerning who should bear the costs in case a SACCO is not doing well. However, here, the chairperson is proposing to delete clauses 55 and 56, and yet when you read 56 (c) and (d) it says, “(c) to purchase the assets of insolvent SACCOs or take over all or any portion of the liabilities of the SACCOs; and (d) to supervise, administer and reorganise the affairs of the SACCOs that are likely to become insolvent.”

The clarification I am seeking from the chairperson of the committee is: if we go ahead to delete these and yet we have stood over the other clause which was talking about the costs, do you mean we shall go with the other argument of the members bearing the costs? Are you trying to tell us that you are still tackling the issue that we stood over? Thank you, Mr Chairperson.

MR MAWANDA: Mr Chairperson, I think this will be a disincentive to the well performing SACCOs. Why should a well performing SACCO pay for a SACCO that is not doing well? Here, you are saying that the money that will be collected under these funds should go to cater for those which are not doing very well, but the ones that would be doing very well will be discouraged. It may imply that they do very well in order to finance the ones that are doing badly.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, are we against a stabilisation fund or the source of its financing? If the stabilisation fund was coming from another source, would you be against it? 

MR MAWANDA: No, Mr Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  That is what I am saying? So you are not against the stabilisation fund per se. What you do not want is for it to be picked from -

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairperson, as I sat here with hon. Ekanya the first time, I looked at the whole stabilisation fund idea and I was against it because the SACCOs would be subjected to – They would have paid for a licence, and then they have to register with the stabilisation fund, and that means that they are also going to be charged and they will make losses. 

However, after asking whether the stabilisation fund’s source was something else other than that which would affect the monies of the SACCOs, I got convinced. Looking at the fact that SACCOs have been borrowing from the Microfinance Support Centre, like my SACCO, Erusi, I am convinced that we really need the fund. However, we may have to prescribe monies from donations, for example, or wherever, just like we did on what would constitute monies that would go to the account of the authority. We should describe the sources of the fund clearly. 

Otherwise, we need a stabilisation fund because there will come a time when you will need it. Like the honourable member said, if you are doing well, you do not have to support your friend who – It is like saying as long as you are alive, you do not need to go and attend someone’s burial as if you will never die.
I think we need to drop that idea. 

Let us support the stabilisation fund, and the way it is drafted is okay, except for the one per cent. I do not know how it would affect the bigger SACCOs; that is my only issue. Alternatively, we could totally drop the percentage bearable by SACCOs, but prescribe some other sources, even Government, through appropriation or whatsoever. However, we need it. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, can you do a symbolic contribution just to make sure that there is a stabilisation fund. Can you adopt the principle; say, instead of one per cent we reduce the percentage, but the principle should be adopted with a token contribution or something like that? Would that make sense? This is important so that we do not lose the whole idea of a stabilisation fund because right now we cannot think of any other source.

MR MAWANDA: Mr Chairperson, I would like to suggest 0.5 per cent.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, can we go by 0.5 per cent to adopt the principle of a stabilisation fund then later on see we what other sources can be adopted? I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairperson, it is okay, but hon. Mawanda was even confusing us. However, the point is that if you are big, the authority will spend more money and staff to regulate and monitor you. If you are small, they will send two junior officials. So your weight is equivalent to the meat you eat. (Laughter) I agree to the 0.5 per cent. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: When you talk about eating meat, it might be a completely different variable. We have adopted 0.5 per cent in the amendment. I put the question to the clause as amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 55, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 56

MR KASULE: Mr Chairperson, since the committee of the whole House has disagreed with the sectoral committee, then clauses 56 and 57 can stay because even the percentage in clause 57 is 0.5 per cent. 
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I now put the question that clause 56 stands as part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 56, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What was the amendment? So there was no amendment on clause 55?

MR KASULE: Mr Chairperson, we started debating ahead of time –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairman of the committee, you should be helping this House.

MR KASULE: We started debating the percentage which was in clause 57. Once we agreed to the stabilisation fund, it meant all those clauses would be passed by this House.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, so there was no amendment in clause 55. Let the records show that. Clauses 55 and 56 have been adopted without amendment.

Clause 57

MR KASULE: Mr Chairperson, instead of one per cent we proposed 0.5 per cent. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that the amendment?

MR KASULE: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 57, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 58, agreed to.

Clause 59, agreed to.

Clause 60, agreed to.

Clause 61, agreed to.

Clause 62

MR KASULE: Mr Chairperson, under the headnote “central financing facility” in clause 62, the committee proposes to rephrase subclauses (1) and (2) to read as follows: “(1) A central financing facility may be licensed under this Act. (2) A SACCO shall not borrow from more than one central financing facility.”

The justification is that the law should not restrict any member of SACCOs to establish a central financing facility; and a SACCO can be a member of more than one central financing facility but should only borrow from one central financing facility.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What? It should be, “should not borrow from more than one”.

MR KASULE: Honourable members, the headnote is, “central financing facility” and the clause reads as follows: 
“(1) At least 10 SACCOs may establish a central financing facility for the SACCOs. 
(2) A SACCO shall be a member of only one central financing facility. 
(3) A central financing facility shall only serve member SACCOs and not individuals; and 
(4) A central financing facility may be operated by- 
(a) an apex society; 
(b) a cooperative union; or 
(c) a company incorporated by the SACCOs for purposes of operating a central financing facility.”

The committee proposed a redrafting thus: “(1) A central financing facility may be licensed under this Act. (2) A SACCO shall not borrow from more than one central financing facility.” I think they want to – (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: It should say, “more than one central facility without the approval of the authority” because the authority should be able to regulate your capacity to borrow. In other words, what the amendment is recommending is that you cannot borrow from more than one commercial bank. However, if the authority has assessed your capacity in terms of liquidity and ability to pay and it has looked at your books of accounts, there is no reason why they should stop you from borrowing, because this facility may not have the –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, but the draft you have proposed does not say what you are saying.

MR KASULE: Maybe what you can say is that our amendment should read, “A SACCO can be a member of more than one central financing facility but should not borrow from more than one central financing facility unless approved by the authority.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, what you are proposing is not different from what hon. Ekanya said. The point is in (2), which says, “A SACCO shall not borrow from more than one central financing facility.” Hon. Ekanya is suggesting that if it has the capacity, it can borrow from more than one but that should only be done after an assessment from the authority.

However, the way he proposed it does not deal with that. He is asking you now to help him draft it properly. I do not want to come into drafting right now, but let me do it; you might have to enlarge it because that one sentence will not deal with it properly.

MR KASULE: Hon. Ekanya is proposing that the clause should read thus: “A SACCO shall not borrow from more than one central financing facility except with approval of the authority.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Does that take care of it? It says, “…shall not borrow from more than one except….” The presumption is that it can borrow from one. Okay, that works for me.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairperson, I have looked at the definition of a central financing facility and we are saying that its membership will be composed of at least 10 SACCOs. The general rule of SACCOs is that a SACCO is not yet a central financing facility; if you are a member, you borrow and if you are not a member you do not borrow. I thought this principle should also apply to the central financing facility - if you are a member, you borrow from the central financing facility. 

In subclause (2), a SACCO is restricted to being a member of only one central financing facility. So, if you are restricted to being a member of only one central financing facility, I am wondering under what circumstance you will be allowed to go and borrow from another central financing facility to which you are not a member. It looks like the proposal of the chairperson presupposes borrowing from anywhere. Otherwise, if we are restricting this to borrowing from a central financing facility, then I do not see it practicable that you are not a member of this central financing facility but you can still be given money. The chairperson of the committee should make that very clear.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, the amendment that is proposed by the chairperson of the committee deletes subclause (2), which is about belonging to one central financing facility. That is not there anymore. The new drafting does not say a SACCO will only belong to one central financing facility.

MR EKANYA: Outside that, I would like to seek clarification from either the minister or Members; does this bar a SACCO from borrowing from a commercial bank? I think we are getting a bit fatigued. Does this provision bar a SACCO from borrowing from Stanbic Bank, for example?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: This provision relates to the central financing facility. Are we clear, hon. Anywarach?

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairperson, when the constitution of a central financing facility is done away with, it leaves us with the general definition of a central financial facility under the definition clause; they just leave it loose - a mechanism. 

However, I was thinking that deleting subclauses (1) and (2) makes it a little bit amorphous. Subclauses (1) and (2) are very essential for us to understand clearly how we are proceeding even on the other amendments we are making of borrowing from one central financing facility or not. For me, it is clearer when we leave subclauses (1) and (2), except maybe we may have to amend. 

“At least 10 SACCOs may establish a central financing facility for the SACCOs”. That is okay. Subclause (2), “A SACCO shall be a member of only one central financing facility.” We should not limit them. We can say, “at least two” or “two maximum.” That will mean there is already an advantage of borrowing at least from two central financing facilities. If you do away with subclauses (1) and (2), it becomes more amorphous; we should leave subclauses (1) and (2).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The central financing facility is defined. It means a mechanism established on a cooperative basis in order to facilitate financial stability of member SACCOs. It does not say you can only belong to one central financing facility. 

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairperson, we are saying the same thing. When I looked at the definition clause, it talks about the central financing facility as an established mechanism. However, clause 62 is trying to bring that mechanism into practical reality. The mechanism prescribed under the law is that 10 SACCOs constitute that mechanism we are talking about. If I decide to belong to two mechanisms or even three, what is wrong with that? So, (1) is okay but subclause (2) is limiting, that the SACCO cannot belong to two or three.

MR KASULE: We have said yes, the SACCO can belong to more than one. However, on borrowing there is a restriction, so that you do not borrow from many places and then eventually, you are encumbered and you go under. That was the idea behind this. Members thought that for a SACCO to be monitored so that they do not go under, there should be a restriction on borrowing, and hon. Ekanya proposed that if a SACCO is to borrow from more than one, then it has to get approval from the authority.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is it okay now? How do you set up a central financing facility? How many people can do that?

MR KASULE: It is done by the SACCOs themselves, not individuals. They have to come together as SACCOs – those are the entities – and they create this fund that will help them. It says they have to be 10 SACCOs to have this facility and it shall only serve SACCOs and not individuals.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, the principle was that 10 SACCOs can form a central financing facility but now that is lost in this amendment. That one has been amended. Subclauses (1) and (2) have been re-drafted to constitute the other one.

You said, “Rephrase subclauses (1) and (2) as follows…” So, we now do not have both of them except for what is in the rephrased clause. That means there is now no requirement for 10 to constitute a central financing facility. You now cannot set it up. How many SACCOs can set it up? It is not there. 

MR KASULE: Mr Chairperson, I think if we re-drafted it as the committee has proposed, it means even five SACCOs can form a central financing facility.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Even one.

MR KASULE: No, one is a SACCO. If you want to pool resources – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, no, no; I can decide to call myself a central financing facility depending on my capacity.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairperson, based on your intervention, I think we need to move away from the old thinking about cooperatives and central financing facilities. We have the authority and it should set up the requirements for establishment of a central financing facility, so that two or three SACCOs with liquidity and prudential management can establish a central financing facility and not just any 10. This is because you can have 10 SACCOs composed of me, my brother there, my sister and him, with very poor management and yet we can even go to court and say that we are allowed to establish it. So, we should leave this to the authority to establish regulations for the establishment of a central financial facility.

A SACCO in Karamoja, with all due respect because that is where my grandfather comes from, may not need to put in place prudential management equivalent to a SACCO where hon. Ruth Nankabirwa comes from in Buganda; they have the money, they are educated and have the knowhow. Therefore, we should allow incubation of this central financing facility depending on the environment. We should allow the authority to do this because it will be very hard for SACCOs in Karamoja to be coming to Kampala to seek assistance in order to develop the capacity of their central financing facility. Let us leave it to the environment and this can be put in the regulations under the authority.

MR KASULE: What I have gathered from the technical people is that we can, as a matter of principle, remove the words “at least 10” and say, “SACCOs may establish a central financing facility.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Say two or more.

MR KASULE: Okay; “Two or more SACCOs may establish a central financing facility.” Ahead, we can say, “A SACCO shall be a member of at least….”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The principle you want to incorporate into this is that it should not be a single entity setting up a central financing facility, so it should be two or more. That is the principle we are agreeing upon, instead of the magic number 10. Therefore, any number can do it as long as they have a common interest in setting it up. What is the amendment now?

MR KASULE: Let me try it out. It should read thus: 
“62. Central Financing Facility 
(1) At least two or more SACCOs may establish a central financing facility. 
(2) A SACCO shall not borrow from more than one central financing facility except with the approval of the authority.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay? I put the question to that amendment.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 62, as amended, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think this would be a convenient place to pause so that we can start on another part – mergers and acquisitions – when we return. Thank you.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICROFINANCE) (Ms Caroline Amali): Mr Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICRO-FINANCE) (Ms Caroline Amali): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Tier 4 Microfinance Institutions Bill, 2015” and passed clauses 1 to 62 with amendments but stood over clauses 5 and 35.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICRO-FINANCE) (Ms Caroline Amali): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have done substantial work. In fact, we have finished the Order Paper; the one item that remained is the Bill, which we have also done very well on. The two items that were deferred are motions that were not presented because the substantive minister who should have presented them was not in the House. Therefore, substantially, we have handled the entire Order Paper and the Bill has progressed very well. Thank you, honourable members, for persisting.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I thought that the Government Chief Whip was going to reconsider her position and request that the date that you had pushed the other matter to, be brought forward so that some of us who passed via “massacre” can plan for other activities. Thursday is far. I am requesting her to think of Tuesday. She can guide us.

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, we have had consultations with hon. Kwizera and some Members of Parliament concerned about his motion coming on Thursday and we have made steady progress. Bringing it forward to Tuesday will not do any harm because we are really trying to harmonise. Members have gone through the documents that hon. Kwizera lay on the Table. The problem was that Members had not internalised those documents. So, if we can handle the matter on Tuesday-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had already made the ruling that we would open up this matter on Thursday. That is what the Members who have left the House know. Now, how do I notify those Members who might be concerned but might not come here on Tuesday?

THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Cecilia Ogwal): Mr Speaker, I think the request still stands because it was your ruling. Since it is your ruling, you can rule that the matter be brought forward to Tuesday. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In view of the request made by the honourable member for Tororo County and confirmed by the Government Chief Whip, and reinforced by the Opposition Chief Whip, I now say that the matter that had been deferred to Thursday on the motion for the de-gazettement and gazettement of forest reserves be handled on Tuesday next week. This House stands adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 o’clock.

(The House rose at 7.20 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 3 May 2016 at 2.00 p.m.) 

