

Thursday, 8 April 2021

Parliament met at 2.29 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I just have one issue to communicate. I have received, informally, complaints about the Naguru/Nakawa land. During the weekend, we read in the press that the land has been given away to some individuals.

I do recall that there is an outstanding question to the Government from the former residents of Naguru/Nakawa, who had been promised the first right in case the land was to be allocated.

I ask the Minister for Lands to come and update the country about what is happening to the Naguru/Nakawa land and if they could do so by Thursday next week. Thank you. There are a few matters of national concern.

2.32
MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise a matter of national importance under rule 46(2) of the Rules of Procedure concerning Otuke. Otuke District, in 2012, was invaded by locusts which left most lives of the people miserable. They lost all their crops hence causing famine in the district.

I request the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Relief to come and rescue people of Otuke. I raised this issue many times but I got no response. My humble request is to call upon the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Relief to come and rescue people of Otuke. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: It is true that Hon. Acon has come here several times with that issue. I ask the Minister for Disaster Preparedness to give us a response by Thursday next week. Thank you.

2.34
MR LAWRENCE AKUGIZIBWE (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter I am raising concerns the theft of cows and other small ruminants in Kyenjojo and most parts of the country that happens at night.

Much as some farmers are investing a lot of money in farming supplemented by Government efforts in technical services and finding, they are making losses through cattle theft which happens at night and yet we know that these days, there is curfew everywhere in the country. However, thieves still manage to move to people’s homes and steal cows, goats and sheep at night.

My prayer is that the ministers of Security and Internal Affairs should come and assure Parliament, the country and farmers on the plan they have to secure their animals because on a daily basis, Kyenjojo loses a lot of animals and other districts of Toro where I normally move and interact with people. We need to be able to secure farmers and their animals. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Fortunately, the Minister in charge of Security under Internal Affairs is here. I hope he will be able to say something about stock theft which the honourable member claims is now countrywide.

2.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We will take interest in that matter immediately; we will get in touch with our forces on the ground to find out the extent of the theft and take necessary action to make sure that it is controlled. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: So, we expect an update probably next week?

MR OBIGA: Yes, by Thursday we should be able to have an update.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister.

2.37
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on matters of national importance. I have been observing a big crowd around the Immigration Department along Port Bell road.

Last night, when we adjourned about a quarter to seven, I passed through that same road at about 8.00 p.m. to observe a number of women camping around the immigration building. This means that the people who queue during the day end up sleeping at immigration area waiting for the queue the following day.

This exposes our women, who were the majority as I observed yesterday, to insecurity. I would like the Minister of Internal Affairs to tell us whether he has failed to find a safer and faster way of processing passports.

Why should our people be exposed to risk at night, especially women and some of them even had children sleeping with them there? I was touched when I saw this.

I believe that the minister is aware that these people are sleeping there. Is it because the ministry has failed to process passports or there are other issues? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Again, the minister in charge of immigration is here. He can maybe tell us what he thinks about the situation.

2.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Madam Speaker, it is true that many of our people who want services of immigration, particularly documents including passports, have been crowding that area.

Our process – at the moment – is that people make applications online. We inform the people, through the same process, when to report for two things: The first one is what we call “personalise”. We take their fingerprints and pictures for the e-passports because we are no longer issuing the old type of passport. The second one is to come and pick the passports. This process, in case of what we call “express” should take one to two days only. Any other process should take not more than one week.

What has been happening is that most of the people who have been applying newly have followed that process but the crowd that you see is mostly people who are coming to collect their passports, whose processes had been completed during the COVID-19 pandemic period.

In that process, we were issuing close to 1,500 passports a day for collection. We advised people who are coming to follow the schedule of their time but they do not.

Secondly, our problem has been compounded by the labour export companies. Most of those people are dropped in the course of the day, evening and night; sometimes as early as 4.00 a.m. or - like the honourable member said - some of them are allowed to sleep there by labour exporting companies. 

We have tried to sensitise them to follow the process but they have failed. What we are doing right now is to speed up the process of collection of passports. However, we are also looking at the possibility of opening an issuing centre temporarily in a wider area which is more secure for the people and not encourage them to sleep there. Even if they sleep there, we will not have things like ablution, cleanness and these other items. We do not want to encourage that.

We believe that in a short while, we should be able to clear that crowd and make people not to suffer in the place. We would like to ask for co-operation from the public to follow our instructions, but at the same time, give us a little bit of time, particularly the labour exporting companies which are bringing a lot of people to our premises. I thank you. 

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I think the minister has just told us that there is nothing he can do about the matter and that is what concerns me. Does it mean that he has now given up? These people can continue sleeping there? Our women should continue being beaten by the rain everyday because of just passports?

Madam Speaker, this makes my heart even worse than before. I thought the minister was coming to give us a solution to the problem because I see women being exposed to the fierceness of the night; anything can happen. I feel disappointed with the kind of answer that the minister has given. Can we devise a better way of resolving the issue, rather than saying that you have sensitised them but there is nothing you can do? That means there is nothing you are going to do about it.

THE SPEAKER: Is there anyone who has a proposal to deal with that issue? I think let us try and find a solution. Is there anyone who has a proposal for that issue?

MR OBIGA: Madam Speaker, I did not say we are doing nothing. I think that is what the honourable member wanted me to say. I said that we are looking for a place where we can receive these people in wider and better premises, where their security can be guaranteed. The question is when, not whether we are doing or not. Sooner or later, we will come and inform the country.

Secondly, I said that we are asking the labour companies to co-operate with us, so that they deliver people at the right time. We cannot go on the streets and look for everybody and say, “If you are going for passports, we want to secure you”. We cannot.

We are doing something. We are very sorry that many people are making our people suffer but the process is now easy that there is no need for people to suffer; except that they are being brought even when they are not scheduled for action.

I promise that within a week, we shall be able to tell Ugandans what we have done. Thank you.

2.44
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Madam Speaker, what brings all these problems is the method of work we use in this country. Somebody who stays in Gulu has to come to Kampala to get a passport. Somebody in Arua has to come to Kampala to get a passport. Somebody from Mbale has to come to Kampala to get a passport.

Other countries have decentralised these services. It can be easier to have a regional office, processing passports in Arua or have a regional office, processing passports in Mbale or Soroti, so that not everyone has to come to one place here in Kampala.

Madam Speaker, if the minister is looking for a long-lasting solution, he should look at decentralising services, so that people can get them where they are. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I hope that as we are processing the budgets, include this in your recommendations.

2.46
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Initially, when we used to submit applications for passports through the Post Office, these lines were not seen. If the minister is saying that the people are now many and come for their details to be taken, at least publish. If you know that you have detailed days - even if it is ten people on a Monday – publish it in the newspapers. 

Let people know, so that I know on a Monday, I am going to pick my passport. On Friday, I am going to pick my passport but not have everybody who has applied for passport turn up on the same day and then you say, “They were not scheduled”. How do people know they are scheduled?

Therefore, it is up to the ministry to make sure that they come up with a procedure and schedules and let Ugandans know. As the honourable member has said, issuing of passports can be decentralised. Someone came and gave you their details. Now, picking the passport can be through a local centre. Thank you.

MR OBIGA: Madam Speaker, we even do better than publishing in newspapers. When you now apply online - whether in Kampala or in our regional centres, which I will soon mention – there is a place where your telephone number is indicated. If you do not have, your nearest neighbour or a relative’s telephone number is indicated.

When you are scheduled for an interview in Kampala – if it is necessary – that message is sent on that phone number. When you are invited to come and pick your passport, that message is sent on your phone. So, what we are doing is much better than just newspapers because not all newspapers reach the corners of this country.

Secondly, we have passport processing centres. We have Mbale, Arua, Gulu, Mbarara and Kampala.
These are working and they do not take any longer or shorter than Kampala because it is all online. A person is required to come in only when we want to personalise. Personalising means coming and taking additional features from what you have provided if they are not. Most of the people in our headquarters are not from upcountry. Most of them are dropped there by these labour exporting companies. 

When you used to send papers through the post office, how many people were travelling? We are now issuing 1,500 passports a day, leave alone other work permits and so forth. Therefore, on the question what we are not doing; we are trying our best. Yes, I agree that there is this blogging and we need to address it. 

In our method, I would like members to accept to give us time to address that issue by opening up a centre soon and be able to reduce that population; we believe it will happen.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much honourable minister.

2.50
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am before this microphone to talk about a matter of public importance concerning the exorbitant power connection fees charged by Umeme currently. Two years ago, Ugandans were charged less than Shs 300,000 to have an electric pole connection. But also two years ago, so many Ugandans applied to Umeme to be connected. Unfortunately, all those that paid that little money have not been connected up to now. Every time we tried to reach out to Umeme, they say, they do not have materials.

Recently, I followed up on this matter and discovered that they now only connect somebody who is ready to pay either Shs 760,000 or Shs 2.76 million for a pole connection. They now tell people that they have materials only for those who can pay that money.

Madam Speaker, this tells you that power is only going to be left to the rich; people who can pay those huge amounts of money. 

My prayer is that the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development comes and explains to us what will happen to people who had earlier applied for connection? What will happen to the poor people who cannot afford that high amount of money? The minister should also justify these changes and the higher charges that Umeme is charging for connection these days. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: The minister should come in a fortnight’s time to give us an update on those issues.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE PREVENTION AND PROHIBITION OF HUMAN SACRIFICE BILL, 2020

2.53
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here to finally present the Bill entitled, “The Prevention and Prohibition of Human Sacrifice Bill, 2020,” for first reading.

Recalling that in 2017, I moved a motion seeking leave of Parliament to present a private member’s Bill to address the chronic problem of human sacrifice and particularly targeting our children in this country. Having done extensive consultations and working closely with the key stakeholders, both in the NGO world and the Government, particularly the First Parliamentary Counsel Department in Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, the Law Reform Commission, the Civil Society Organisations and our own legal arm of Parliament I now, therefore, wish to present this Bill for first reading.

I also sought for a certificate of financial implication from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which has been duly granted. I would like to take this opportunity to appreciate the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for swiftly working with me to have this certificate processed.

Therefore, as I wind up –(Interjection)– yes, it is very rare, it is true. I would like to thank the minister and the team at the ministry because this is my second private member’s Bill that is coming through without any roadblocks.

My prayer, as I lay this Bill on the Table with the certificate of financial implication, is that owing to the fact that we are left with very few days and the fact that we carried out extensive consultations since 2017 to date, it would be prudent for the committee, before which this will be going, to fast-track it because it is long overdue so that we can pass it before the expiry of the Tenth Parliament. I beg to present. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Bill is sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. However, I would like to caution that in the event that it is not completed during the Tenth Parliament, it will be saved and handled during the 11th Parliament. Thank you.

STATEMENT BY THE RT HON PRIME MINISTER ON THE NEED TO REVIEW THE 9.00 P.M TO 6.00 A.M CURFEW

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I received a letter this afternoon from the Prime Minister indicating that he is not able to attend but that he has delegated Hon. Obiga Kania, the Minister of State for Internal Affairs, to handle item four.

2.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Madam Speaker, it is true, as you have said, the Prime Minister asked me to make the following remarks regarding the issue of the curfew.

As we all know, the curfew and all other Standard Operating Procedures regarding the COVID-19 pandemic were issued after a careful study and guidance by the national taskforce, which is under the direct supervision of His Excellency, the President. They have so far worked very well and we thank God and thank the President for the guidance, and also the population for the co-operation, which they have shown.

Of course in some circumstances and in quite many circumstances, socially and economically, they have been biting. However, when you compare the benefits with life, it has been a suffering worth taking.

Therefore, the national taskforce is reviewing the entire SOPs including the issue of the curfew. They will advise the President and, on that advice, as usual, he will announce the next steps which have to be taken regarding the SOPS, including the curfew. 

In the meantime, my Ministry of Internal Affairs had consultations, particularly with our Muslim clerics and the leadership regarding the obvious time of Ramadan, where some people will be affected. It was established and advised by these leaders that the critical times for our brothers, the Muslims, will be up to about 8.00 p.m. to 9.00 p.m., which are the times on which we need to give consideration, as far as the curfew is concerned. 

We encourage most of our activities to be done before 9 o’clock but where there are not, these will be relaxed as and when it is necessary for the communities to perform their religious rites. Therefore, efforts have been made to make sure that the curfew will not affect the operations of the Ramadan period. Thank you. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, thank you, for bearing my approach on this matter. I thank you for the work. You have stated it rightly that the Prime Minister is not coming but he delegated the Minister of Internal Affairs, who is actually within the right docket of this matter. 

According to our Order Paper, this statement is supposed to be presented and debated. Yet, the minister is here submitting like members on a statement. This matter is very important, not only for Muslims. One of the major problems of curfew now derived from the honourable minister’s department is that the police have turned it into an employment opportunity during the night. 

Therefore, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for us not to take what the minister has said now? Shouldn’t we wait for the Prime Minister to give a statement and debate the curfew issues properly so that we get a better solution to this problem?  The minister has told us that it is doing very well yet people are suffering. 

Yesterday, at around 9.30 p.m., they arrested taxis along Jinja Road because it was past 9.00 p.m. and they were going home. Yet, jam ends at 10.00 p.m. We are here but the minister cannot come to give a statement and the one delegated, cannot give a statement.

I have been with the minister in the Committee of Defence and he just came here to give us a flat statement. That is not the way to move, when the Order Paper is clear; we need a statement. There are issues related to curfew, which we would like to look at. There is no justification for curfews to continue running up to now, when people in the village are enjoying themselves; discos are moving and the police is giving protection to those well placed in the system. In Munyonyo, the police are guarding those with big bars. They play music and drink until morning. When you go to Mchomo Muchomo - the local people are being arrested and have to pay dearly. Yet, there is no report about this curfew. People are indeed suffering. 

This is the procedural matter I am raising. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the Prime Minister to come with a statement and give us the status of curfew? They should tell us how much they have achieved, how it has moved and why it should stay on? In fact, curfew is illegal under the Ugandan laws. 

THE SPEAKER: Minister, I thought you were giving a preamble and then making the statement. I do not know where the statement is. 

MR OBIGA: Madam Speaker, I thought I was clear when I said that the Prime Minister asked me to come and make these remarks, not a statement. Therefore, that item should remain on the Order Paper and the Prime Minister will come and make a substantive written statement. 

My remarks were that the national taskforce is consulting over this matter, and the police are consulting with the clerics of the Muslim leadership to mitigate steps that can be taken so that the issue of Ramadan and other things run smoothly. When that statement comes, what my honourable colleague has raised and other issues can be substantively discussed. 

Regarding the issue of the police extorting – whether they do it under curfew or any other activity, it is illegal and wrong. What we need is to get a report and take action on the matter. It is not wrong because it is under curfew. That is the essence of what I said here. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the statement will remain on the Order Paper for Tuesday next week, and the Prime Minister must come and answer.

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, the minister has talked about the Muslim clerics that he has consulted. Indeed, when I raised this issue yesterday, I informed the House that we are beginning Ramadan next week, where we always go for late prayers. 

The minister has said that the security will relax but I do not buy that. Otherwise, there is no way the police are going to relax by not arresting those coming from the Mosques and other activities. 

Madam Speaker, since we know that the Prime Minister is going to come to make a statement here as far as curfew is concerned - there is a need to review curfew, which is being applied selectively. We know areas where people move up to midnight without any hindrance.

My major concern is for the minister to come out clearly and say that Muslims are allowed to go for their prayers, starting from Wednesday, next week, without being arrested by security operatives or police. Is this what the minister has said, that prayers have been allowed as long as we identify ourselves? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am aware that Cabinet meets on Monday. I think the Government should take this matter seriously so that on Tuesday, the Prime Minister comes here and tells the country what they are going to do. How will you say the Muslims can move and others should not? The Prime Minister should come on Tuesday and make this statement. Let us go to item five.  

LAYING OF PAPERS

    I) TAX EXPENDITURE FOR THE PERIOD JULY 2020 TO MARCH 2021 FINANCIAL YEAR 2020/2021

3.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Tax expenditure for the period of July 2020 to March 2021 for the Financial Year 2020/2021. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that report is for information indicating what the minister has done. So, it is available for your perusal.

    II) THE COMBINED 8TH AND 9TH PERIODIC REPORT OF THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION ON THE ELIMINATION OF ALL FORMS OF DISCRIMINATION AGAINST WOMEN (UN CEDAW)

THE SPEAKER: Is the Minister of Gender here? They are not here; lay them if they are here.

3.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Combined 8th and 9th Periodic Report of the Government of the Republic of Uganda on the Implementation of the United Nations Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women (UN CEDAW).

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee of Gender Labour and Social Development for perusal and report back. This is the first time the report is being laid. We thank the Ministry of Gender and Government for this.

    III) ANNUAL BUDGET MONITORING REPORTS FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/20 FOR THE LISTED ENTITIES

3.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Annual Budget Monitoring Reports, Financial Year 2019/20 for the following entities:

    (a) Education and Sports Sector
    (b) Health Sector 
    (c) Roads Sub-Sector 
    (d) Energy and Minerals Development Sector 
    (e) Science, Technology and Innovation Sector 
    (f) Information and Communication Technology Sector 
    (g) Public Sector Management 
    (h) Agriculture Sector 
    (i) Industrialisation Sub-Sector

I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, each of those is sent to the relevant sessional committee for consideration and report back.

RESPONSES BY MINISTERS TO URGENT QUESTIONS:

(I)	MINISTRY OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT

THE SPEAKER: Is the Minister of Energy here? Not here. Let us go to the next item.

(II)	MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT

(III)	MINISTER OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES

THE SPEAKER: I do not see any of them. 

(IV)	MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT

THE SPEAKER: They are all not here.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO $ 90 MILLION FROM THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK (IDB); AND $ 15 MILLION FROM ARAB BANK FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IN AFRICA (BADEA) TO SUPPORT DEVELOPMENT OF IRRIGATION SCHEMES IN UNYAMA, NAMALU AND SIPI REGIONS PROJECT

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson Committee on National Economy.

3.12
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Syda Bbumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to present a report of the Committee on National Economy, on the proposal by Government to borrow up to $90 million from the Islamic Development Bank (IDB); and $15 million from Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa (BADEA). This is to support development of large irrigation schemes in Unyama, Namalu and Sipi Regions Project and 96 small scale schemes.

Before I proceed, I would like to thank my colleagues we worked with in analysing this request. 

I would also like to lay on Table the following documents, which we considered in analysing the request:

    1. The report of the committee, which is signed.
    2. Minutes of the meeting to consider the proposal.
    3. A brief to Parliament on the proposal by Government to borrow up to the amount already stated.
    4. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development letter on clearance of finance implications.
    5. The IDB project appraisal.
    6. The project appraisal document for small-scale irrigation schemes.
    7. The draft credit financing agreement between the Republic of Uganda and Islamic Development Bank.
    8. The draft credit financing agreement between BADEA and the Republic of Uganda.
    9. The draft framework agreement between the Republic of Uganda and IDB.
    10. The draft agency agreement between the Republic of Uganda and IDB for the Uganda irrigation schemes development in Unyama, Namalu and Sip regions.
    11. The revised draft financing terms and conditions of the Uganda irrigation scheme development in Unyama, Namalu and Sipi. 
    12. The BADEA Aid Memoire Appraisal.
    13. The proposed concept from Micro Finance Support Center Limited, for collaboration in implementation of these projects.
    14. The progress report of the farm income enhancement and forestry conservation programme.
    15. The status of implementation of irrigation under the Ministry of Water and Environment.
    16.  The National Planning Authority letter clearing the request.
    17. A letter from H.E the President to the Ministry of Finance, clearing the borrowing. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, the request was presented to this House on the 18 December 2020, and was referred to our committee. The committee considered and scrutinised the request and I now wishes to report.

On methodology, we had meetings with the finance ministry and the water ministry. We reviewed over 20 documents, which are listed in paragraph 2.2. 

We also made field visits and inspection visits to the rehabilitated five new irrigation schemes in Nebbi, Oyam, Butaleja, Kween and Kasese to assess the level of utilisation of these facilities by the beneficiaries.

Background

The development of irrigated agriculture has boosted agricultural yields and increased the number of cropping seasons to two or more in many parts of the world, thereby conserving important forest resources, contributing to price stability under climate variability, and helping to feed the world's growing population, as well as increasing productivity.

Irrigation can bring many benefits to a community, and can make important contributions to the women empowerment, as well as nutrition and health outcomes.

The water and environment sector is constrained by weak local private sector players, high-energy costs and limited grid power network; leading to high level tariffs, because many of the people carrying out irrigations are using diesel-powered generators which are quite expensive.

Water for production is defined to include provision of water infrastructure for irrigation, livestock, fishing, mining, wildlife, industries, aquaculture, maintaining the environment and ecosystem. Currently, only two percent of water is used for production. 

The country is increasingly facing a major challenge of prolonged droughts and unexpected floods due to climate change, and variability and is predicted to be water-stressed by 2025. 

To promote commercial agriculture, Government will sustainably use water resources for irrigation, livestock and aqua-culture.

This proposed project comes under the umbrella of the bigger programme entitled the "Farm Income Enhancement and Forest Conservation (FIEFOC)." The first phase of FIEFOC was concluded in 2013. Currently, we have an ongoing Phase II, which is going to be complemented by this project. 

Complementarily, IDB, under this project, is planning to scale up the irrigation schemes to cover three new sites: Unyama, Namalu and Sipi with an additional 4,100 hectares to reach a total area of 8,138 hectares under irrigation. 

On the project linkage to country strategy, it is linked to climate change, natural resources, environment and water management. It is also linked to agro-industrialisation programme. 

The irrigation schemes which are going to be devolved are in line with the above programmes, and if well implemented, will directly support the following objectives of NDP III:

    1. Increasing agricultural production and productivity. 
    2. Reducing climate change vulnerability.
    3. Reducing human and economic loss from natural hazards and disasters, and 
    4. Increasing incomes and employment through sustainable use and value addition to water, forests and other natural resources.

It is worth mentioning that this proposed project intervention is listed in the NDP III, as one of the interventions that will increase access and use of water for agricultural production under the Agro-Industrialisation Programme.

It is also linked to a number of planning frameworks, among which are the following:

    1. Uganda National Climate Change Policy, 2015;
    2. National Irrigation Policy, 2018; 
    3. National Agricultural Policy, 2010; 
    4. Agriculture Sector Strategic Plan, 2016-2020; and 
    5. Draft National Irrigation Master Plan, 2010-2035

The project is aligned with the SDGs:

    1. SDG 1 on  reducing poverty;
    2. SDG 6 on water management and sustainability;
    3. SDG 13 on climate action and increasing rural resilience to climate change risks; and 
    4. SDG 15 which is on the protection of natural resources through better management of forestry and natural resources.

Table 1 under paragraph 6 gives the performance of the loans, which have been extended to the water sector from a number of sources. The performance of the ongoing externally funded projects in the water and environmental sector are quite a number, and they are up to $764.2 million.

On the performance of the Farm Income Enhancement and Forestry Conservation Programme, as of December 31, the Government of Uganda obtained $76.7 million funding in 2016. This loan has performed well. This project seeks to consolidate and expand the notable achievements of the first phase of the Farm Income Enhancement and Forest Conservation project that was completed in December, 2012. 

The specific objective is to improve household incomes, food security, and climate resilience through sustainable natural resources management and agricultural enterprise development. 

The Farm Income Enhancement and Forestry Conservation Programme: Project 2, which was approved by the Parliament on 8 January 2016, has also performed well. 

On Agriculture Infrastructure Development, the physical performance was high in the various places where it was implemented. 

Agribusiness Development Component also made good progress. 

The Integrated Natural Resource Management equally performed well. 

Project management was also fairly okay except for the effect of the COVID-19 Pandemic.

In terms of project disbursement portfolio, the overall disbursement of that loan stands at between 55 per cent and 70 per cent, which, by our standard, is taken to be a fair performance. 

The project is behind schedule because of the weather changes and also the COVID-19 pandemic, as I have already stated. 

The project objectives, impact and outcomes are covered under Table 3. 

Under paragraph 7.1 on project beneficiaries and location, the project will be located in Northern and Eastern Uganda. Sometime last month when we presented a loan request for providing water to Isingiro, members raised serious concerns about providing water for other stressed parts of the country. This loan is addressing exactly that. 

The target areas that will directly benefit from this project are located in the districts of Amuru, Adjumani, Napak, Nakapiripirit, Katakwi, Ngora, Soroti, Moroto, Kapchorwa, Bulambuli, Bukedea, Sironko, Amudat and Bukwo.

By way of components, the project will have the following components:

    1. Agriculture Infrastructure Development will take $98.14 million.
    2. Agribusiness Development will take $5.44 million.
    3. Integrated Natural Resource Management will take $14.05 million, and 
    4. Project Management will take $7.12 million.

The Cost and Financing Arrangements

The irrigation schemes which are to be developed in Unyama, Namalu and Sipi Regions for farm enhancement are estimated at $124 million, and the breakdown of how this fund is going to be raised is covered under Table 4.

On the loan terms, economic and financial returns and budgetary provision, the Islamic Development Bank will provide financing to enable Government of Uganda implement the irrigation scheme development in Unyama, Namalu and Sipi Regions under what is called the Installment Sale Financing and Islamic Solidarity Fund for Development.

On the installment selling, goods or services will be sold in accordance with the terms of contract whereby part of the purchase price is paid at the time of the sale while the remainder is paid in specific instalments; and this one is covered under Table No.5.

Table No.6 addresses the terms of the Islamic Solidarity Fund for Development and Table No.7 gives the terms for the loan from BADEA, the Arab Bank for Development for the poor in Africa.

The loan conditions are the following:

Evidence, satisfactory to the bank, to the effect that the execution and delivery of the financing agreements on behalf of Government of Uganda have been duly authorised and ratified.

There should be a legal opinion from the Attorney-General on the loan documentation and instructions of the Central Bank or department unit charged with servicing of debt payment of the sale price instalment of Uganda; under the financing agreements, this too shall be affected on time.

On the financing conditionalities, these are covered under paragraph 10.4. The Islamic Development Bank instalment financing window is non-concessional with a grant element of only 10 per cent; because to be concessional, the grant element must exceed 30 per cent.

The public debt management framework requires that external borrowing to finance social service projects should be undertaken on concessional terms.

Whereas this project has economic returns higher than the interest rate as required for non-concessional loans, it requires generating revenues within five years to facilitate servicing of the debt and generate foreign exchange as per the Public Debt Management Framework of 2018.

According to Table No.8, the present value of the loan is lower than the nominal value of the loans contracted; this implies that the country’s future payments for these loans are less than the proposed amount to be borrowed.

On the budgetary implication, the Government of Uganda will be required to provide counterpart funding for this irrigation development in Unyama, Namalu and Sipi regions amounting to $19.7 million, which has to be budgeted for and accommodated within the Ministry of Water and Environment medium-term expenditure framework (MTEF) projections.

The Ministry of Finance has committed to avail the required funding under the Ministry of Water and Environment and we hope they will live up to their word.

The economic benefit and returns of the project stand at 16 per cent and we apply sensitivity analysis of 10 per cent; still the economic rate of return will be 13.4 per cent.

Under the third scenario where the benefit has been reduced by 10 per cent and costs increased by 10 per cent, the economic internal rate of return will reduce to 12 per cent which is still good.

The project will benefit a further 300,000 people out of which 20 per cent will be female outside the project areas. The women will benefit in the project areas but in the surrounding areas there will be another 20 per cent benefit to the women.

It will also assist the formulation and implementation measures that will reduce deforestation and promote agro-industry which will lead to emission reductions and protection of carbon reservoirs as part of the reduction of the emissions and deforestation and degradation rate.

Project implementation 

The project is envisaged to be implemented within five years starting from effectiveness date. The project executing agency shall be the Ministry of Water and Environment and it will be implemented under the current arrangement for execution of farm enhancement and forest conservation.

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries will be a key implementing partner in the projects activities that fall within their mandate.

The implementation of project activities at the district and county level will be carried out through the established structures under the office of the chief administrative officer; and will be coordinated through the national project coordination unit.

On the loan and current debt situation, this is getting very close to the threshold of 50 per cent. The loan will increase the country’s nominal debt despite the increase in foreign debt and increased risks and vulnerabilities, the debt is still sustainable.

We measure the performance of ministries on a number of criteria regarding loan compliance the ministry got 64 percent. 

Observations and recommendations 

The committee noted that absorption of funds for debt financing projects in water environment were very slow and the committee recommends that:

Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Water should ensure that inefficiencies that affect the sufficient utilisation or absorption of funds for debt financed projects in the water and environment sector are mitigated to guarantee the timely realisation of the project development objectives and project social and economic benefits.

On fulfilment of loan conditions, the committee noted that there is usually lack of detailed engineering designs, inadequate consultation and agreements of stakeholders, weak presence of implementing institutions at the local levels and lack of understanding of Islamic Development Bank procedures and rules.

The committee recommends that Government ensures the speedy fulfilment of effective conditions of financing agreements for these loans; in order for the committed funds to be released by the Islamic Development Bank and BADEA.

These Arab funders are not impatient but they cannot wait indefinitely like many of the traditional lenders; if we take long without utilising the money committed, they will cancel the loans and at a cost.

Terms of borrowing for social service development

The committee noted that the Islamic Development Bank installment sale financing window, where we are getting $80 million, is non-concessional with a grant element of 10 per cent.

Therefore, the committee recommends that Government should ensure that these borrowed resources generate high rates of both economic and financial returns to boost exports and domestic revenues.

The Minister of Finance should comply with the public debt and other financial liabilities management framework when contracting debt for social service and development, though irrigation is not purely a social service because it contributes to economic development.

Meteorological stations in the country 

The committee noted the lack of reliable meteorological stations and data across the country that is a major challenge during the design of irrigation schemes - and also to the farmers; the information which the meteorology authority has been giving out has not been reliable.

This has affected many of our farmers. The committee recommends that Government should enhance investment in irrigation development by public/private and other players to promote Integrated Water Resources Management approach in irrigation planning, development and management.

They should also ensure that irrigation planning and development is technically feasible, economically viable, socially desirable and environmentally sustainable.

It should also strengthen institutional capacity at all levels for co-ordination, planning, development and management. It should also promote the generation and utilisation of irrigation research, innovations, technologies and technical support services.  

On support for smallholder schemes, the committee observed that smallholder irrigation systems often cost considerably less - even including operation and maintenance - than the larger ones.

The committee therefore recommends that in order to achieve a level of irrigation investment sufficient to support sustainable agriculture for improved food security and nutrition in the country and considering that many of our farmers are smallholders, Government should deliberately raise investments in smallholder irrigation systems across the country to enable more stable food production.

On linkages with other sectors, the committee observed that if irrigation is to make an important impact on food security and nutrition, irrigation development cannot be viewed in isolation. 

As energy consumption in agriculture grows, it is imperative to assess the energy requirements of both new irrigation projects and rehabilitation projects before they begin. 

On that, the committee recommends that Ministry of Water and Environment and the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development ensure that a checklist on energy needs for irrigation of both new irrigation projects and rehabilitation projects is developed and all energy requirements are integrated in the promotion of this project and all the ongoing irrigation projects.

Impact on climate change

The committee observed that the water sector is highly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change, with persistent drought causing water stress. 

The committee recommends that Government should ensure that adequate resources are provided to the Ministry of Water and Environment, to enable the ministry take into account climate change resilience in developing and utilising water resources for productive purpose.

Madam Speaker, the committee – with those observations and recommendations – recommends that the request by Government to borrow up to US$ 90 million from the Islamic Development Bank and US $15 million from the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa to support implementation of irrigation schemes development in Unyama, Namalu and Sipi regions, located in the many districts which I have already referred to and the development of 96 small scale irrigation schemes be approved, subject to our recommendations.

I beg to submit. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and members of the Committee on National Economy. Before I invite the members, I just have three areas of concern:

First, you have reported that the meteorological services in the country are apparently inadequate and yet we have had the Uganda Meteorological Authority for some years. I do not know whether the minister will be able to explain to us that lacuna. 

I have also noted that Parliament has been very co-operative. In 2018, we approved a loan on Integrated Water Management and Development Project. This was in December 2018 and effective date was July 2019. So far, only Shs 3.27 billion has been disbursed.

Another loan on development of solar-powered irrigation and water security supply systems was cleared by Parliament on 17 September 2019 but nothing has been disbursed. The Irrigation for Climate Resilience Project loan was approved by Parliament on 25 August 2020. The effective date was 17 December 2020. Still, there is no disbursement.

A loan on supply and installation of solar-powered water pumping systems in rural areas was approved on 6 October 2020. Still, there is no disbursement so far. I do not know whether there is anyone who will be able to update us on those issues.

Members, the report has been signed by the necessary number of members. You are free to make your comments.

3.43
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and the chairperson of the committee for your good report. However, you know I do not support these loans.

First, I am very interested in knowing how the Kibuku Irrigation Scheme started. As you have said, Madam Speaker, a number of loans have been passed but disbursement is not there. In the same report, we have heard from the chairperson that Government’s contribution is not ready and budgeted for, meaning that –(Interjection)– Not so? Please correct me but the money is not yet released.

Even then, the ministers going to implement this loan are not around to defend it. They have left the work to my good friend, Hon. Syda Bbumba. How do we get all that input?

Madam Speaker, I was reading about Tanzania where their President, now the late John Pombe Magufuli, stopped loans and they tried to put control on all wasteful resources in their country. The country was run for five years without borrowing and they have done tremendous development. 

We are always passing loans and I support them but I have never got a single loan benefitting Kalungu; not even a tarmac road. However, when it comes to paying, my people and I continue paying for every loan that we are passing.

Can we be assured that these loans – Why don’t we develop a culture better than what we are doing, Madam Speaker, rather than going for loans all the time? We are now going to pass this loan. Members of Parliament from those particular areas will be raising matters of national importance here, “We passed this loan but nothing has taken place”.

Can we get a status report from the Committee on National Economy or the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to give us the performance of all these loans we have passed, at least for the last one year?

I remember we passed a loan to build a road to Bukakata. It has taken almost eight years. It was after your intervention here, Madam Speaker, that construction of the road has now started. 

If you pass around Queen’s Way, those flyovers they are constructing are because of loans. Imagine small projects are costing us over five years. People are suffering in traffic jam. I do not want to support these loans, unless I am given assurance that disbursements will take place immediately.

We move from the Arab Development Bank and then we go to the other bank. People are going to get tired of Uganda’s borrowing. We shall end up having –

Hon. Bahati, let us save some money and get money within our country other than borrowing all the time. Otherwise, our children are going to suffer.

I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

3.46
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Madam Speaker, thank you. Hon. Syda Bbumba does a very good job of bringing these loans here but I wonder whether she takes time, with her committee, to look at the loans she has passed and know how these loans are performing.

That would really give us a good basis to keep approving. Even before you come to Parliament, you are a chairperson who will say, “The other time, I approved this money for this ministry, and they effectively used the money.”

However, in your report, you are saying that the people you are approving for this loan have a low absorption capacity of the money you keep giving to them.

Madam Speaker, there was a time when we had drought in this country; around 2018 and we were trying to find a solution and among the solutions that we looked at was to set small irrigation schemes. It was passed and we agreed here with hope of effectiveness.

Madam Speaker, I was still a member of that Committee on Natural Resources and after a year down the road, money was passed and the irrigation schemes were nowhere. The committee insisted that these irrigation schemes must appear and that is when they started working on a small one for members of the committee.

In my constituency, they established a small scheme and you get surprised that since 2018, the scheme they established has never operated, because we see just a foundation that this is where they are constructing a scheme but which cannot yield. They put up things here and there but it is not doing the work that it is supposed to do. 

Money was lost there and these people are nowhere to be seen now after a few more years. For me, whenever I look at that project, it tells me that probably, many of the money we give to these people ends up in this area.

Madam Speaker, we also had a debate here concerning water for production with the Ministry of Water and Environment but do they have the capacity to do agri-business in agriculture? Or, should that be a docket of another ministry? Because what I saw in this ministry, the people they sent to that project in Kassanda in Kalwana sub-county were so amazing. They brought somebody whom they employed and knew nothing about agriculture at all. However, this is the person they sent to do business development.

Wouldn’t it be prudent that a matter of such a project which is focusing on agriculture is a joint effort? The Ministry of Water provides water for production and matters to do with agriculture extension and ensuring that people get into the business of doing agriculture using this project is left to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

Madam Speaker, that debate was never concluded and I am seeing it appearing here where we are approving a loan and it is still going to be the Ministry of Water to go and carry out agribusiness development, which I think they are not competent in handling.

Lastly, I keep seeing this coming through; of having quite colossal sums of money going into management. When you look at this loan itself, honourable chairman you need a clarification on this. When you see the money you put on management of the project is quite a lot. Yes, here it looks small because you have written it here in dollars.

However, once you convert that money in Uganda Shillings that is quite a lot of money. You have $9 million, $10 million; $3 million for management after all the work of the people initiating this project are within the ministry. How are we going to continue borrowing so high or over something we can handle?

Madam Speaker, going forward, the chairperson of this loans committee must come up approving, looking and justifying all these details and say, “This is proper and we saw that it is fitting”. However, when you look at the project cost and the money going into management, I think that it is quite a lot of money for a project that is going to be managed within the ministry.

Madam Speaker, I wonder whether the chairperson can come up and say they consulted somebody with experience and knowledge in these irrigation schemes. Probably as a House we gain confidence that this is an appropriate loan and this is the best available cost that we can pay for this loan.

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  

3.53
MS NOELINE KISEMBO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for the good work they have done to process the report in support of the loan.

I would like to support the loan proposal but I have a few concerns: In the first place, with the increasing climate change, reliability of rain water for production is a big challenge for farmers, especially the smallholder farmers. Therefore, water for production becomes a necessity. 

I support the loan but my only concern is, like the report has pointed out, the majority of our farmers in this country are smallholders. Whereas I have seen a component in the loan of around 96 small scale irrigation schemes, we need more of these because the majority of the farmers are small scale farmers and this component would attend to them directly.

The other concern I have is that whereas many times we have approved these loans for irrigation, water, I do not see Bunyoro sub region featuring out in as far as water for production is concerned. I would like to implore the Government that this focus is also made.

In the Bunyoro sub region, we have the forthcoming oil production and it has all the effects on the environment, climate and the people in this subregion are going to be more affected and we never know what will come with these oil activities and processes. Climate change might be worse. Therefore, we need a component for Bunyoro subregion as far as water for production is concerned especially the small scale irrigation schemes.

Lastly, I would like to talk about the low absorption capacity. The report has highlighted that this very sector for which we are processing the loan, the absorption for the previous loans is low which means that even this one we are processing is going to fall into the same category. 

Unfortunately, the sector minister is not here to assure us and the country that once this loan is approved is going to be put to effective use and it will be absorbed. Therefore, I have difficulties there, maybe - I have also seen the commitment by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development who is here that they will provide the counterpart funding required for this loan to be absorbed.

However, many times it is easier said than done. We want the commitment put into action because even on the previous loans, this has not been very effective. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Where is the Minister for Water and Environment? They are not even here.

3.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, the State Minister for Water, Hon. Kibuule, is on his way. The senior minister has some health challenges which she is handling but on the strangers’ bench, we have the technical people who are feeding me with information to be able to – 

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable minister, we want answers on the failure by the Uganda National Meteorological Authority to give information that was in the report; the minister must answer that. We also want to know why the other follow-on have not been disbursed yet they are in the report.  

MR BAHATI: We are waiting but meanwhile, we are getting the answers. 

3.58
MS VIOLET AKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for the report presented though I have about two concerns that I would like to raise. The first is on the low absorption rate of these loans. Every time we pass loans in this august House, their absorption is low yet we pay high interest rates on them. 

I wonder why we should continue borrowing loans we cannot absorb yet we know we are going to pay high interest rates. We probably need to come up with a criteria; that before we make additional borrowing, we have to ascertain that whatever was borrowed before was utilised to probably 90 per cent.

Secondly, in the district, I represent year in and year out; we have the challenge of either drought or over flooding. Katakwi District is surrounded by water bodies such as Lake Bisina and Lake Opeta. At one point again on this very Floor of Parliament, we tried to make a recommendation; is it possible for us to tap into these water bodies that surround the district through an irrigation scheme? 

I wish that we could tap into one of the main schemes and not just Namalu, Sipi and Unyama. I would have loved to see Katakwi being one of the districts where a big irrigation scheme is established tapping into these water bodies that I am talking about, so that during the droughts we are able to utilise the waters for irrigation. We have these lakes but we are not able to fetch water using cups to take to our gardens. We could even be able to feed the whole country. 

During floods, we have not been helped, through the small dams so that they act as drainage channels for this water that we get all the way from Karamoja and then the heavy rains in Teso subregion because the land is flat. 

I would like to find out from the committee what informs the selection of these irrigation schemes. One of it would have been having water bodies around - and like I have rightly said, Katakwi is endowed with such natural resources but we are not making good use of them. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, just for clarification, the Namalu catchment area includes Napak, Nakapiripirit, Katakwi, Ngora, Soroti and Moroto. That is what I see here.

4.01
MS JANE AVUR (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee of National Economy for presenting this report. I also would like to thank Government for making efforts to ensure we have irrigation schemes across the country so that throughout the year, a number of our people can remain in production using this water. 

However, I would like us to note that many times, these projects come with other components embedded in them yet the Ministry of Water and Environment seems to only focus on the construction of the dams; it forgets or is slow on implementing the other components of the project. A case in point - we have a construction of an irrigation dam in Pakwach. If you look through the committee report, it is indicated that trainings were done and hoes were distributed to local farmers but this is not true. When I crosschecked with the local communities back home - and even with the Ministry of Water - I noticed that this is not true.

I, therefore, agree with the member who said that before or during the time the committee is processing another loan, they should have all the right information. They could even visit at least one of the on-going projects or completed projects so that our people are not duped.

When you go to most parts of West Nile now, you will notice that the rains have not come, although we already have a lot of rains in some parts of Uganda but they will come and you find a lot of wasted running water across the country. 

I request the committee, at a later stage, or Government to explore the possibility of harvesting running water. Parts of Bugisu will be flooded very soon, like most of our areas have been flooded. Where does that water end? We are just waiting for it to dry or sweep up people and kill them. Why can’t we think of a project where we can harvest water? Madam Speaker, I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether the chairperson would like to answer some issues - I do not see the ministers here responsible for this sector. 

4.04
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and the chairperson for bringing this motion. 

I also would like to add to what the Woman Member of Parliament for Katakwi has said. In Kanungu District, we equally have areas that are always seriously affected by rain and sunshine. We appreciate that the Government tried to put for us some irrigation schemes in one parish called Kibimbiri but that it was never completed. According to my research, it was going to be used within three villages. 

I, therefore, request that we also look at areas in Kanungu such as Nyanga, Kihiihi and Nyamirama. We need to extend irrigation there because we have enough water bodies such as River Ishasha, Mitano and others where we can harvest water from to help people have food throughout the year. When it is time for sunshine, those people never have food because of the dry soils that affect the production of food. 

If this loan is to be passed, Madam Speaker, then, we need to look at those areas also and consider them for the good of our people. I would like to thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I really thank the chairperson of the Committee on National Economy because they have done their work and have been very sincere. It would not be fair to this country if we passed the loan without getting answers to the questions that they have raised, especially on the absorption capacity. The decision to this is that it is deferred to Tuesday next week. 

Minister of Finance, make sure that the ministers of Water and Agriculture are here. Thank you.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (LOCAL GOVERNMENT) ON THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S REPORTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2017/18 (ON 122 DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENTS; 42 MUNICIPAL COUNCILS; 1,042 SUB-COUNTIES AND 355 SECONDARY SCHOOLS AND TERTIARY INSTITUTIONS)

THE SPEAKER: I believe we had received that report and it was due for debate but I do not see the chairperson here. Let us go to the next item.  

4.07
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (LOCAL GOVERNMENT) (Mr Gilbert Olanya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am the Vice Chairperson Public Accounts Committee - Local Government. I am available and so, we can continue with the debate.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, you listened to the report about a fortnight ago. It was a lengthy report, which raised many issues in the local governments, health centres and academic institutions. You are free to debate.

MS AMEEDE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I listened to this report and on that day, we were quite many. This report touches on serious policy issues as you have mentioned that are needed. Here, I only see the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. It would have been nice if we had somebody from the Ministry of Local Government and the Prime Minister in the House. 

Therefore, I beg that given the attendance - we are few. I would have loved that this report be deferred to enable better debate and probably, when the frontbench is best constituted, you give a stern ruling to send a message to the Government. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Yes. Honourable members, certainly, I was here and what we were hearing was not very good news. It had issues of poor supervision, oversight and so on. Vice Chairperson, let us agree to push it to next week and give notice to the Executive that they must be here. Otherwise, the issues raised in that report were very serious.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Most obliged. We shall wait for next week, as you directed.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Clerk, please, you will notify the Prime Minister and the other ministries.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, yesterday, there was a member of the public that looked at the Order Paper and said something that tickled me. He said, “how can our Parliament be speaking about something that happened in 2017 and yet, we have matters in 2020 and 2021?” 

When I looked at that, I said to myself that probably we need to front-load as much as we can, the matters to do with the Auditor-General’s reports. Yes, we are going to debate the matters of 2017 but we also need to deal with those of 2020 and 2021. I am just requesting that the committee - I do not know how they can do it or how we shall do it but we need to front-load matters to do with the Auditor-General’s report so that we are current in whatever we are debating.

THE SPEAKER: I am sure the committee chairpersons are going to take that into account. Nevertheless, the report was presented here. Therefore, we must debate it whether it is old or not in order to give us an insight of how to move in the future. Therefore, bring it back on Tuesday and notify the Executive. Let us go to item nine.

MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION OF THE PUBLIC PROCUREMENT AND DISPOSAL OF ASSETS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020 AS RETURNED BY H.E THE PRESIDENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 91(3)(B) OF THE CONSTITUTION AND RULE 142 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

THE SPEAKER: Is this for presentation or a report from the committee? Where are they to report on this issue because I understand they completed the hearing? They are not here. Put it back on the Order Paper. Let us go to item 10. Hon. Pacuto is the Vice Chairperson of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets (Amendment) Bill, 2020  

4.12
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Ms Jane Pacuto): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As the committee, we have been able to process the report. Just a few things are still lacking but we are sure that we will be ready by Tuesday.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY ON THE FAILURE BY KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (KCCA) TO ADHERE TO THE “BUY UGANDA, BUILD UGANDA POLICY” IN THE PROCUREMENT OF BUSES FROM INDIA

THE SPEAKER: The Chairperson of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry is not here. Where is the Vice Chairperson? They are not here. Okay, item no. 11.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THE PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION ANNUAL REPORT 2018/2019

THE SPEAKER: The Chairperson is not here. Go to item no. 12.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (COSASE) ON THE AUDITED PUBLIC ACCOUNTS OF SELECTED STATUTORY CORPORATIONS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEARS 2013/2014 TO 2015/2016

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson COSASE. They are not here.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS ON THE ALLEGATIONS OF SEXUAL ABUSE AND VIOLATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS BY MR BRIAN KIRUMIRA AGAINST MS STELLA NANDAWULA AND OTHER WOMEN

THE SPEAKER: Is our Chairperson for the Committee on Human Rights here?

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING THE GOVERNMENT TO DECENTRALISE UBC RADIO BUTEBO FM

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ameede -

4.14
MS AGNES AMEEDE (NRM, Woman representative, Butebo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. However, I would like to co-opt other seconders of the motion because the others are not present.

THE SPEAKER: Move your motion. I am sure you will get some seconders.

MS AMEEDE: I move a motion urging the Government to decentralise UBC Radio Butebo FM. It reads:

“WHEREAS Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC) is established by The Uganda Broadcasting Corporation Act, 2005, as a successor of the State-owned media known as Uganda Television and Radio Uganda;

AND WHEREAS under section 4 of the Uganda Broadcasting Corporation Act, 2005 the objectives of the Corporation are stipulated to include developing the broadcasting bodies into a public national broadcasting centre of excellence, for the purpose of providing electronic media and consultancy services that educate and guide the public;

NOTING THAT the functions of the corporation include but are not limited to;

a) 	Providing radio and television broadcasting services and programmes that contribute to social economic development with emphasis on national unity in cultural diversity;

b) 	Establishing and maintaining offices and installing any relevant broadcasting facilities and transmitting stations in any place in Uganda for purposes of its broadcasting functions;

FURTHER NOTING THAT UBC Radio Butebo is a regional radio, which was established in 1969, to serve the Eastern Region of Uganda with a mast situated on land belonging to the station in Butebo but upon the enactment of the UBC Act, the radio's management and operation was shifted to Kampala on plot 17-l9, Nile Avenue, where the Uganda Broadcasting Corporation is located;

CONCERNED THAT the relocation of UBC Radio Butebo from Butebo District to Kampala has rendered the radio station largely inaccessible to the people it is supposed to serve including advertisers and local governments and this has led to limited local content most especially in the national news and many societal challenges going unabated;

FURTHER CONCERNED that the infrastructure including the four studios which were initially installed for operating the radio station in Butebo were rendered redundant and have been vandalised in the past which has caused unnecessary loss to the Government; 

COGNIZANT OF THE FACT THAT other regions continue to benefit from locally located UBC Radio stations including UBC Mega FM located in Gulu, VOB 93.3 FM and Ngeya FM in Bundibugyo, Star FM in Kampala and Buruli FM in Nakasongola, which have greatly contributed to social economic development in the said areas due to the closeness of the stations to the locals -Butebo and the greater Bukedi that constitute the coverage of UBC Butebo Radio are missing out on this and have been left out to the exploitation of private media; 

FURTHER COGNIZANT of the fact that the abandoned land and infrastructure at Butebo District constitutes enough capacity to handle all installations, productions and the broadcast of various programmes of UBC Butebo Radio as mandated by the Uganda Broadcasting Corporation Act, 2015;

NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED BY PARLIAMENT THAT; 

Government is urged to decentralise the management, studios, production and broadcast of UBC Butebo Radio to Butebo District with immediate effect, so as to fulfil the objectives of the creation of Uganda Broadcasting Corporation, as well as promote regional, economic and social development.”

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, is the motion seconded? It is seconded. 

Motion seconded.

THE SPEAKER: Please, justify the motion.

MS AMEEDE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. UBC Butebo was the pride of that region. I remember growing up as a little girl, I, too, used to enjoy listening to that radio station. There were many educational – 

THE SPEAKER: By the way, can someone send for the Ministers of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance? It seems they have forgotten that they are Members of this House. 

MS AMEEDE: Madam Speaker, it would have been nice if the Ministers for Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance were present. Nonetheless, information could be transmitted to them.

My urge for Government to relocate this radio is to promote local content. News coverage from that region is not being viewed in the national spectrum, thus many societal challenges are left out in the mainstream news.

There could also be a trickle-down effect if that radio station was operating, in form of employment and people giving goods and services like food and transport to the radio station.

Besides, there is infrastructure in that place. It is lying to waste. You know, in this country, there is a tendency that when infrastructure and land lie idle for some time, there are people who would take advantage and buy them at a giveaway price. 

The radio station could also trigger development of local journalism and that would create jobs. 

When I interacted with the local people in the area, they claimed that the radio was working but up to only a certain point, because the equipment was vandalised. Maybe Government should work backwards and find out who vandalised the equipment of Radio Butebo. 

The other issue is that Government is losing out on revenue from local announcements and advertisement. This has created a gap for the people to rely mostly on the private radio stations in Mbale. It is good the Minister of State for Culture is here. The FM radio stations do not have the same agenda as what a Government provider would have. Most of these private stations are involved in politicking or other things, which are mostly for leisure. Some are even of negative consequences. 

The operationalisation of that radio will set a precedent and show that Government is in charge. It will also put Government at the centre of setting the tempo and raising the standards of what ought to be topical issues and what is communicated so that society is developed holistically. If Radio Butebo was in operation, we would have many programmes broadcast in the local languages of the various tribes that are in the East. One area that could be covered is our cultural norms and practices that are almost fading away.

Those are some of the justifications that I put forth to urge Government to operationalise Butebo Radio so that the people of Butebo are fully included in the development and progress of this country. I beg to move. 

TEH SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Ameede. I do not see the seconder. However, Hon. Joseph Ssewungu is here. So, let us hear from him.

4.24
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable member for bringing this motion. 

I was a teacher at Shimoni Demonstration School, which was next to UBC. Throughout our teaching, the biggest media house in this country is UBC. If you take interest, you will find that even some of the other new companies that have established their radio stations tend to use the satellite infrastructure of UBC to strengthen their radio signals wherever they are sending them.

As Hon. Ameede has stated, where we are, we are in an era of FM and not mid-wave and as a result, there is a lot of employment. I am happy that the Permanent Secretary for the Ministry of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance is Hon. Bagiire who was a Member of Parliament. From the time he took over at the ministry, there are a lot of changes. This radio, however, is known to any person including me who was teaching in a primary school. We could name the radio stations UBC have including Butebo Radio.

You remember recently, the Ministry of Education and Sports came and said they were going to teach children through radios. If Butebo Radio is not functioning, how are they going to teach children on radios? 

There is very big business in operating radio stations. For example, the sector has a lot of employment opportunities. Where we are, the young people love to listen to music on the radio stations. They learn from there. Those who are employed to work on these radios are trained from our institutions. Where you have the infrastructure, land and mast, how can’t you put there a radio when the people are ready to pay fees for the announcements?

Government communicates more through their own media than other media stations because this is their own institution. Therefore, I pray that the Minister of ICT - as you say that they should come - according to what I usually see, you give us the Order Paper a day before and we read what is going to happen the following day in the House. It means that every Member who has an iPad and has been holding it for five years must address him or herself to what will take place in Parliament the following day.

Here we are with a very serious issue, where the honourable member is talking about something very useful, people are not enjoying their lives; they are not playing music.

When we talk about Butebo, still people who will be communicating will be using the language from that particular area and then, people who have composed their songs from those areas will play that music and get business. That is why we want the copyright law and all others. 

I support the motion but pray that UBC gives us information on all their radios that are not functioning and they have left them to die. Some people are going to steal that property; others are going to steal mercury.

I am told that most of those masts have mercury, which is very costly; so some people go and steal it and make money out of it while people from Butebo or Kalungu are losing out.

With FM, I think it is a lower frequency like 85 point something; those are the frequencies that are utilised by most of those people. Honourable member, I thank you for bringing this motion and we shall support you but I pray that when I swear in again, those bosses who brought me back to Parliament allow me to come back to the Committee on Appointments. 

I will look at those ministers who are never here coming back and my prayers are that I will still be seeing you there as my Speaker - because I do not hide it - so that you say that, “Honourable Member, you have not been attending; the big man has appointed you again, we had an issue of Radio Butebo and you are from that same region, you never even attended but your office was opposite the place; what do you want in this committee - why do you want to become a minister again?”

I can see Hon. Hamson Obua is happy that he is around and I will just praise him while there like Hon. Bahati. Otherwise, this business of ministers not coming and yet, we are deliberating. I see them at the Uganda Media Centre and yet, the same centre would be using Radio Butebo to give information to those people about what Government has said.

Government radios give firsthand information and are always respected by districts and ministry departments. I beg to move.

4.29
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the honourable member for moving this very important motion. Information is key and when you talk of radios, it makes me remember what happened in northern Uganda.

As she was counting, she read the names of radios set by the Government and one of them is in Gulu, called Radio Mega. Radio Mega played a great role in bringing peace in northern Uganda.

Therefore, the people of Butebo should not be denied a valuable source of information. It is true that Government needs to decentralise UBC Radio Butebo.

Right now and every year the ministry does budget for most of these radios upcountry, the money is allocated but you do not see it getting to those radios.

At this juncture, let Government give management of these radio stations to the region or district where the radio is located for proper management. 

I witnessed this with Radio Mega. Mega FM has a very strong team because it is semi-autonomous. They run their own affairs, employ their own staff and the radio is performing very well.

I feel that if Radio Butebo is decentralised and management given to the people, district and region, automatically the radio will improve.

We also need to ask Government - because all along the minister has been budgeting for all upcountry radios under the Government - let the Government account for all those radio stations. We have very expensive equipment that was bought some time back and right now, if you move, you will never find it. Expensive masts, antennas - I think by now, all have disappeared.

For Mega FM in Gulu, one day most of the equipment was stolen because it was set on a very high hill and management did not find most of it. We were told that some of it was carried from Gulu to Kampala. The Manager Mega FM had to buy new equipment for the radio station. Let Government account for all the materials and equipment that were supplied for all the upcountry radios.

Finally, I thank my colleague and urge the Government to take this in good faith; let Radio Butebo and any other radios being controlled by Government be decentralised so that our people can benefit.

Madam Speaker, you recall that sometime back, Government introduced free-to-air television. Unfortunately, that free-to-air is only concentrating in Kampala while upcountry districts do not access it.

Therefore, we are denying the people upcountry to watch televisions freely. Those ones upcountry like in eastern, northern and other parts of the country pay subscription every month. We are not enjoying the free-to-air service, which was introduced by Government. I also request through you that the Minister in charge of ICT makes sure that free-to-air television is extended to the upcountry districts. Thank you.

4.35
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank Hon. Ameede for the motion and the background information on Radio Butebo.

During the COVID-19 pandemic, the minister of education came to us here and said that the only available option was to teach our children on radio because that was the media channel that could reach a majority of the people.

Available statistics in this country indicates that 87 per cent of Ugandans are listening to radios and only 34 per cent get their information through televisions and internet is less than 10 per cent.

This matter of Radio Butebo and the information Hon. Ameede gave, tells you that people who were relying on that radio are now excluded because a majority of the places are rural. That implies that even the smallest percentage that listen to radio or hear on television is a small margin.

I support Hon. Ameede’s motion as a member of the Committee on ICT. I think it is a right for people who are in that area to listen to radio and listen to the language they understand most.

When you look at the available reports, people in that region are listening to radio stations from Kampala. Trust me, they would much prefer their own language and probably, their own presenters.

For Hon. Ameede to come here and wish that that radio station is stationed in Butebo District, she is 100 per cent right. Madam Speaker, all we need is to ask the minister of finance and the minister of ICT to put this into consideration.
In 2017, there was money that was given to UBC. They called it “revamping UBC” and I think Butebo was one of the radio stations that never benefited from that revamp. If there is anything that can be done and there must be a solution found, we need these people to be catered for as Ugandans.

Madam Speaker, there is a matter that Hon. Ameede raised of vandalisation of equipment or the infrastructure of Butebo. That must be investigated by a committee of Parliament and the information brought here because that is a matter that probably, we cannot ask the minister to undertake. 

The Committee on ICT can take up that information and we see how we can help. Otherwise, Hon. Ameede’s motion deserves 100 per cent support. Thank you.

4.39
MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I rise to support the motion brought by Hon. Ameede. This motion has made me to remember two things.

Firstly, as Government, we have allowed private entities to squeeze out our own facilities. We now have private radio stations all over the country. We have allowed those private radio stations to squeeze out our own facilities and that is why Radio Butebo is suffering in this process.

Related to this, you will also remember that, for instance, we have Uganda Telecom but you rarely talk about it because we have allowed MTN and Airtel to squeeze out our own entity.

The second point I have been reminded about is in West Nile. In Arua, we used to have a state-of-the-art earth satellite, established by the Amin Government. That facility is lying there in waste and yet, we believe that if it is put to good use, that region would benefit from TV facilities.

My prayer to Government is that please, let us see that we put aside some money and strengthen our own facilities. When they are well brought up, they can ably compete with the private facilities. I believe that the Government facilities can even outcompete some of these private ones. If we do that, we can be sure that as a country, we are well covered. 

For the radios, I suggest that as we support the case for Butebo, let us also try to map out the different regions where such facilities can be established, so that we are sure that the whole country is covered. I beg to submit. 

4.42
MS VERONICA ISALA (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The UBC Radio has improved so much, after the interruption of the Amin era that is now competing with a number of FM radio stations.

The presence of UBC in Butebo region is very important and I have been excited to get up and support the motion to decentralise Butebo.

When we were growing up – and that is quite a number of years ago – we had the Butebo broadcasting channel. It used to over the entire Eastern region. All the languages, culture, practices and songs were all aired through the Butebo Channel and most of us benefitted from all this.

How I wish that when the Ministry of Education and Sports proposed that our children were going to be educated on radios, Butebo Channel was on air, just like Mega Radio and others that are working maybe our children would have maybe benefitted. When this idea was mooted, our children never got anything. They would wait for that one time. 

Butebo Channel was very useful for Teso sub-region in particular; we benefitted a lot. I now hear cries from people of Sebei and other areas not getting any radio station at all. They only listen to radio stations from Kenya. If Radio Butebo would be decentralised, then the people in that corner of the world would also benefit from this.

Government has spent a lot of money, like has already been said. With these ambitious national programmes of the national broadcaster, they bring very sophisticated, state-of-the-art equipment. 

However, what we hear is that these things are not functional and some Managing Directors – I mean, these are allegations – and workers of these organisations or institutions actually benefitted. There was a long case of a radio – I think – in Western Uganda, where some of this national equipment were actually taken and so on and so forth.

Madam Speaker, I support the motion. Let Butebo Channel be decentralised to cater for that region and let many more radio stations that are under Uganda Broadcasting Corporation also be decentralised. Let them come out and compete with these very expensive local FMs that Ugandans have now had to pay for through their nose. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.46
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am just surprised that it takes a motion to align the Government practice.

Madam Speaker, the Government has been taking on many private radios and putting them under UBC and the intention is to get close to the people and have a wider listenership such that the message of the Government can easily reach the people. That is not only with the radios. The Government has been taking on private universities in different regions. 

For example, Kabale University is now a Government university in that region, Mountains of the Moon University is a Government university in Toro region, there is Soroti University, Muni University and others. The Government is trying to decentralise this service to the people as much as possible.

Therefore, I do not know why it will take a motion for the Government to decentralise UBC Butebo Radio. The motion should not be urging the Government to decentralise. It should be urging the Government to localise because people prefer the local touch and brand of the radio and it has advantages. For example, if you look at Voice of Kigezi, it is not listened to by people in Kabale alone but by the whole region. 

We have the Voice of Kamwenge on my side, which goes up to Kasese, Fort Portal and all other areas. The cry is to have the Voice of Butebo or UBC Butebo Channel localised in Butebo so that people can have even local Deejays there. I am told the control from Kampala limits the time they are allocated to broadcast on the radio. 

I support the motion and there should not be a big hindrance for the Government to have this UBC Radio Butebo localised to Butebo such that it can compete well with the other radio stations around. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.48
MS VIOLET AKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion raised by Hon. Ameede to decentralise the Butebo Channel radio. 

Like most of the Members have said, indeed, as I was also growing up those days, we used to hear of Butebo Radio. It used to broadcast in Ateso and most of our people in the Teso sub region would listen to this radio, which is no more. 

Indeed, we need belonging. Once we have this radio in the region, as people of Teso sub region, we shall feel a sense of belonging. We are talking of unemployment in this country and this is one way that we can employ most of the youth that do not have jobs. 

During the lockdown, we had a scenario where local newspapers were closed. In Teso, Etop newspaper was closed and Rupiny newspaper was equally closed and yet, these are the Government newspapers. Quite a number of people lost jobs because of the closure of these local newspapers and yet, we are saying that information is both power and wealth.

I would like to urge the ministry of finance and the Ministry of ICT that we need to be seen helping our people through such. Radios and newspapers employ many people; the distributors, sellers, producers and equally to the radios. If we do not have them in the region, it becomes a problem.

We had Members of Parliament from the Sebei sub region and part of Karamoja (Amudat). They were saying that they get news from Kenya. Instead of getting announcements or news from Uganda, they get from the neighbouring country. Maybe, this would be an opportunity that we serve our own people because they are taxpayers, they belong to Uganda and are Ugandans. They should listen to those radios out of option and not because there is no other means for them. However, because there is no other means, they are forced to listen to radios or the FM stations from the neighbouring country. 

Therefore, this is a wakeup call to the Government, especially the Ministry of ICT and the ministry of finance. We appeal to the Government, like the rest of the Members have said. Indeed, let us decentralise Butebo Channel.

I remember in Teso, there used to be also Radio Katwe. I am not sure what it was but it was that side of Dakabela. I think we need to investigate this. I think we need to revive some of these institutions of the Government. 

Above all, the appeal I would like to make in relation to this motion is whether it is possible that we can revive the Etop and Rupiny newspapers, which were Government newspapers. They had employed quite a lot of youth from Teso and northern and probably in the west where some of them were closed due to the COVID-19 pandemic.

We have tried to manage the pandemic and that should not be a big do that people in their hundreds lose their jobs when ministries, departments and Government continue in operation. Madam Speaker, I would like to second the motion and I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, Hon. Ameede has raised a very serious issue of policy nature. She has complained that since 2004, when the Uganda Broadcasting Act was enacted, which as you remember joined UTV to Radio Uganda and became effective in 2005, that is when the station was abandoned; 17 years ago. You can imagine, 17 years of laxity.

In addition to that, it is a breach of the Access to Information Act, which is a law in this country. Therefore, the Government is breaching the Access to Information Act in that manner.

Thirdly, honourable members, I am personally disappointed because almost every year, when I return from the campaigns against FGM in Karamoja and Sebei, I have reported to this House that our citizens are cut off from communication from Uganda. I have said it many times on the Hansard. I have spoken and even written to the ministers but apparently, no one is interested in solving that issue.

Therefore, our people continue listening to Kenyan radios and in Amudat, the same thing is happening. Anyway, I do not know. Yes, one of the ministers has finally surfaced.

4.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION, TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Mr Peter Ogwang): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you and also begin by thanking my colleagues who have made contributions. Specifically, I would like to thank Hon. Ameede for moving this motion.

On issues concerning Butebo Radio, as a ministry, we would like to associate ourselves with Hon. Ameede that it is true the ministry is in the process of one, decentralising most of these radio stations to their respective sub regions or regions where they belonged. What is lacking - and I would like to also appeal to Parliament - and the minister of finance is here. You are all aware that this current financial year, which is ending, UBC has not had a budget from the Government. We did appropriate here but in terms of actual release of money, to UBC, we never got any money.

For that purpose, it is within that money that plans of extending these radio stations back to their respective areas was in plan. For that matter, we are all aware that even then, we have moved ahead to begin looking at putting up another radio station within Mbale region.

In Mbale region, UBC has land. We were doing this because the site we are talking about, which my colleague knows very well, is in a sorry state, which needs some big investment in terms of revamp of Butebo Radio.

However, I would like to confirm to Hon. Ameede that we are in the process and within next financial year, we intend to work on the structure of Butebo then push back the studios to Butebo. Why Butebo? The focus is that Butebo covers almost about eight languages in the Eastern Region, like colleagues have mentioned. Initially, it used to cover Busoga up to the entire Teso area which borders the Kumam. The main purpose of us making Butebo get back to its place is there.

The other issue I would like to address here is the question which the Rt Hon. Speaker raised. It is also true that we have procured transmitters to install new radio stations in Kapchorwa, which is going to cover the Sebei sub-region for the purposes of the Sabiny speaking people. 

We are also going to upgrade the radio station in Moroto to cover Amudat and other parts of Karamoja. There is already a radio station there but it needs to upgrade its transmission for purposes of having a wider coverage that extends to Amudat and all parts, including Karenga, which is at the North East of the country. That is also going to be handled and the transmitters have been procured. 

I would also like to inform colleagues of the liberalisation of the sectors, specifically radio stations. As of today, we have 332 FM stations. We are also working on the Government radio station that was in West Nile under UBC, which will be operationalised within the next financial year and other parts of the country. 

As far as the ministry is concerned, we are working together but I request Parliament to help us with resources for purposes of supporting this upcoming FM stations to give information to the community. 

The last one is on the issue of Etop and Rupiny. It is true that, as the Ministry of ICT, New Vision Corporation belongs to the ministry of finance and so, I would like to address that answer to the Ministry of Finance. 

It is true that me, who is in the information sector, would wish to have Rupiny and Etop back. I am happy that Hon. Bahati is here. He can explain more in as far as Etop and Rupiny are concerned. 

I would like to thank my colleague, Hon. Ameede for the motion. Thank you. 

MR OLANYA: Thank you, honourable minister. Even if you are talking of the radio stations, I request that you also respond to the free-to-air television decoders. It is very important and I think this is the right opportunity for you to respond. 

Honourable minister, I also request, through your team, that you organise and pay a visit to radio station Mega FM so that it guides other radio stations that are under UBC but are upcountry. 

The management of Radio Mega FM is quite unique and currently, as we talk, Mega FM employs more than 60 people who are getting salaries. It is very important for you to decentralise and the best words should be giving those radios autonomy. If you allow Butebo FM and others to be autonomous and run their own affairs, they will employ very many youths and people in that area will automatically benefit. I request you to briefly comment on the free to air decoders. 

MR OGWANG: Thank you very much, Hon. Olanya for the question you have raised. To begin with the issue of Mega FM; Mega FM is a radio station under UBC. As you are all aware, Mega FM was started during the war in Northern Uganda. It was a donation by a non-governmental organisation to the office of the Prime Minister. When those NGOs wound up their operation, they handed over the management of Mega FM to the Office of the Prime Minister, which then handed it over the minister of ICT.

I would like to confirm that I have been to Mega FM and even talked to the people of Northern Uganda during the time of this COVID-19. I addressed them on Mega FM. 

It is true that Mega FM is making a lot of money because it is located in a strategic area in Gulu, a city in Acholi sub-region. 

It is also true that according to our plan, as the Ministry of Information and Communication, we intend, like it the process has started, to decentralise the management of most of these radio stations for purposes of helping us generate revenue, which will be able to run the stations. 

As you know very well, there are areas like Karamoja, Bundibugyo and another one meant to be put in Kisoro – these are areas where sometimes, once Government puts a station there, we have to run generators and pay power bills but if you look at the return on investment, you might not get it. That is why Government continues to invest the money into UBC purposely, most times, not on profit making but for purposes of helping to communicate to our people in those different areas. 

Back to the issue of free-to-air televisions, Madam Speaker, I would like to request that you give me time to come here, maybe on Tuesday, and address the House. There is a challenge in that specific aspect concern about free to air decoders. What comes in Multichoice has pay rights. Multichoice has only permitted a national broadcaster, which is UBC. There are some of us who have subscribed to various pay TVs like Zuku. 

Therefore, most times you find that when you do not pay, they switch you off and yet you are meant to remain on air. You find that it is only UBC that remains. That is why I would like to request colleagues and the august House to permit me to have a meeting and come up with a comprehensive statement in as far as free-to-air TV is concerned. 

I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Let us have the statement by Thursday next week. 

MR OGWANG: Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion was supported by all the Members. I did not hear anyone speaking against it. I, therefore, put the question that the question be put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that this House do adopt the motion as proposed by Hon. Ameede. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO OPERATIONALISE ARTICLE 249 OF THE 1995 CONSTITUTION THROUGH THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND MANAGEMENT COMMISSION FOR UGANDA

5.04
MS SARAH NAKAWUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here to present a motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to operationalise Article 249 of the 1995 Constitution through the establishment of a Disaster Preparedness and Management Commission for Uganda moved under Rules 55 and 56 of the Rules of Procedure.

“WHEREAS Objective XXIII of The National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy mandates the State to institute on effective machinery for dealing with hazard or disaster arising out of natural calamities or any situation resulting in general displacement of people and serious disruption of their normal life;

AND WHEREAS under Article 249 of the 1995 Constitution of Uganda, Government is under obligation to establish a Disaster Preparedness and Management Commission for Uganda to deal with both natural and man-made disasters;

NOTING that there is currently established the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees at Cabinet level under the Office of the Prime Minister charged with the responsibility of dealing with national preparedness and disasters including floods, landslides, earthquakes, droughts and famine as well as refugee matters; 

FURTHER NOTHING that in 2011, the ministry developed the National Policy for Disaster Preparedness and Management that details mechanisms and structures for the effective and practical management of disasters and also urges the Office of the Prime Minister to develop and present to Cabinet and Parliament a National Disaster Preparedness and Management Bill to enforce key provisions of the policy including institutional structures; 

CONCERNED that the challenges posed by natural and human-induced hazards have been a constant thorn in the flesh of the Ugandan economy, with on average of more than 200,000 Ugandans being effected every year by disasters in the past two decades and an average of 1,800,000 people internally displaced over the period of l998-2008 due to floods, landslides, droughts, earth quakes and epidemic diseases;

FURTHER CONCERNED that the current pandemic of COVID-19, which has seriously disrupted the normal life of Ugandans, has escalated the need for Uganda as a country to enhance its ability to handle hazards, through seeking to augment the capacity of the current establishment for disaster preparedness by operationalising Article 249 of the 1995 Constitution;

COGNIZANT OF THE FACT that Article 249(2) requires Parliament, for purposes of the establishment of a Disaster Preparedness and Management Commission for Uganda, to prescribe the composition, functions and procedure for implementation of the functions of the Commission;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that Government is urged to;

    i.  Operationalise Article 249 of the 1995 Constitution through the establishment of a Disaster Preparedness and Management Commission for Uganda; and

    ii. Present for the consideration of Parliament, a Bill prescribing the composition, functions and procedure for implementation of the functions of the Commission.” 

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, is the motion seconded?

Motion seconded.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, it seconded. Can you justify?

MS NAKAWUNDE: Madam Speaker, disasters are so rampant in Uganda. They have caused a great deal of suffering, human rights abuses and loss of property and productive capacity for the people of Uganda. Disasters have contributed to the violation of rights and retardation of social development.

Madam Speaker, Uganda has experienced a wide range of disasters directly affecting most of the country. 

Disaster risk is on the rise throughout the country and yet, our communities are not prepared to respond, in cases of calamities. Natural calamities have been manifested through landslides in Bududa and floods in Kasese, Karamoja and other areas in this country. Recently, we saw on television, floods in Butaleja District.

Many districts have been prone to floods that cause destruction of food crops displacements and transport challenges and these results into farming hence calling for proactive measures to manage possible re-occurrences.

Madam Speaker, other disasters include climate change and change in weather patterns throughout the country with shorter rain seasons and extended periods of droughts. Therefore, natural disasters are one of the biggest threats for the long terms development goals of the country.

Bududa District, for instance, was affected by the disastrous mudslides causing massive destructions of lives and property and eventually, a permanent displacement of victims to Panyadoli settlement in Kiryandongo District.

The population still staying in the affected areas, however, needs sensitisation on how to manage possible disasters because of the likely risks.

Madam Speaker, local communities are more vulnerable to the effects of disasters since they are dependent on the very natural environment that is threaded by disasters, for their livelihoods.

Despite the efforts by the Government in responding to disasters, many of the disaster management programs are not sustainable at local level after the completion of such interventions.

Unless disaster management efforts are sustainable at individual and community level, it is difficult to reduce loses and scale of the tragedy. 

There needs to be an opportunity where people are involved from the initial programming stage of disaster management activities. It is therefore, important to create awareness to communities such that they can take decisions from an informed point of view.

Despite all of that, there is inadequate proactive response towards supporting communities to manage disasters hence the need for the motion.

Madam Speaker, it is therefore, crucial at this moment in the life of our nation, that we address the issues of governance, constitutionalism and the rule of law during this period of the Corona Virus relief and disasters preparedness response.

According to the World Health Organisation, COVID-19 is classified as a public health emergency of international concern. It created global vulnerability and caused immense havoc in all aspects. We need to plan adequately for the aftermath.

Madam Speaker, our 1995 Constitution sets out clearly that Uganda should operationalise principles of governance and rule of law set out in the National Objectives and Directives Principles of State Policy. 

Under Government Principle No. 23, the Government of Uganda must establish an effective machinery to deal with natural and artificial disasters and any hazards such as health hazards.

The disasters preparedness and management commission for Uganda is enshrined in Article 249 of the Constitution.

Under Article 99(2) of the Constitution, the President is mandated to enforce the establishment of the disaster commission by causing to be brought before Parliament an Act to establish the commission.

The Office of the Prime Minister, which is handling disasters today is very busy with a number of a activities. As long as constitutional disasters preparedness and management commission is not in place, civil servants might be tempted to embezzle grants, donations and relief items.

During the COVID-19 pandemic outbreak, funds were collected from the private sector, donors including citizens of the State. By law, this money should have been managed officially by a statutory body established by the Act of Parliament.

We also witnessed, through various media, during the lockdown how a number of assorted items, collected under a fundraising drive on COVID-19, were recovered from people’s homes. This gave a negative image to the tremendous efforts by H.E, the President, in trying to curb the COVID-19 pandemic. As such, there is need for the formation of a Disaster Preparedness and Management Commission so that corruption is brought to an end.

There are disaster related activities, which by law and good governance practices should have fallen under the mandate of the Disaster Preparedness and Management Commission; or example, security deployed to enforce curfew and food distribution during the lockdown, efforts to fight locust among others. All these fall under disasters preparedness and management commission though it is the Prime Minister’s Office that is handling.

It is against the above background that the Government establishes a statutory body to improve on the management of disasters in Uganda, which is a normal business today. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Is there any seconder? 

5.16
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I also thank the colleague for bringing up a very timely motion. 

When locust invaded this country some time last year, I wondered which department was going to coordinate the problem. Initially, I had thought it would be the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities because I had assumed this was wildlife becoming wilder and so, the ministry would coordinate the rest of the ministries. Eventually, it was the Ministry of Agriculture. Hon. Vincent Ssempijja almost became the minister responsible for locusts. 

I wondered under which technical department in the ministry of agriculture, the minister would control and coordinate this problem. Luckily enough, by heavenly intervention, the locusts either did not appear or they were fought and they are now no more. 

When it came to COVID-19, many people made donations to this country and Ugandans entrusted Parliament to supervise such donations. What came across was a task force, which Parliament cannot supervise. Up to now, there are people complaining that they were seeing overwhelming donations including food relief but they did not get anything from these donations. No one is accountable because Parliament that people entrusted to supervise and monitor what belongs to the people is not responsible for the taskforce that handled the donations.

Today, in many of the disasters that strike, the minister, responsible for disaster preparedness has become a small god in the country. He is the one to determine, which occurrence is disaster enough to be attended to, and which is not disaster enough. Therefore, if he has something small, he should do whatever it takes to come here. He is a very good sweet talker. When he comes here, he will say “we are handling” and we have put some relief”. Yet, the rest of the country does not know where to go. Who should define the problem they are facing as a disaster such that they can also tap from money meant for that issue?

Honourable members, this motion has come very timely. Disasters appear in different forms and in different parts of the country. We need a technical arm that must define to us what qualifies to be a disaster and coordinate with the different countries, where these different forms of disasters occur. Other countries, for example, Kenya has a National Disaster Preparedness and Management Centre. We share most of the disasters, like the locusts. Therefore, to have a coordination between Uganda and Kenya, you need a department similar to that of Kenya to purely and perfectly manage and coordinate the disasters that we share.

I would like to thank Hon. Sarah Nakawunde, for the timely motion she brought. I also call upon the Members to support the motion because it is coming to coordinate the problems, which we have had before.

I would like to end by saying that at times, I wonder who defines a disaster. People are hit by famine in some rural areas of Uganda but that does not qualify to be a disaster. They are blamed for not attending to their gardens. Other areas are invaded by locusts and that qualifies to be a disaster. Other areas experience flooding and that is disaster enough. Those hit by floods should also at times be blamed for not putting gullies to prevent water. However, we need a Government department that Parliament can supervise closely to handle all the questions on disasters. Thank you.

5.22
MR MUDIMI WAMAKUYU (NRM, Elgon County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion largely because I am from areas prone to disasters. Five years ago, fire gutted Mount Elgon National Park, which is in my constituency. We share that park with Kenya. When Uganda Wildlife Authority was contacted, they said “It is not our responsibility; it is the Prime Minister’s office’s.” So, the fire spread up to Kenya’s side, but because they have a system, they protected their side. 

Secondly, we have been experiencing mudslides and floods. As a result, people normally come to support us.  They always ask where they should channel the resources. 

Two financial years ago, we appropriated Shs 10 billion to Uganda Red Cross but the Ministry of Health protested and wondered why we were giving the Red Cross money. Usually, when such disasters happen, the Red Cross is first on site before the Government comes in. So, the Red Cross lost that money.

Madam Speaker, when we, in Elgon, get problems, the first people to visit the site of the disaster is Uganda Red Cross. I really support this motion.

Recently, when people were contributing for the COVID-19 relief, other people said the donations should be taken to the districts, and others proposed they should be taken to the national taskforce. Other people suggested they are taken to the Prime Minister’s Office. That level of disengagement is not good.

I support the establishment of the commission to facilitate the process. This will enable easy accountability. I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

5.24
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank Hon. Nakawunde for moving this very important motion. I believe this commission would bring effectiveness in the management of disasters in Uganda.

Currently, the ministry for disaster preparedness under the Office of the Prime Minister seems to be overwhelmed. I remember whenever Members of Parliament bring to the august House problems like floods, drought, hailstorms, bushfire, famine and others in their areas, you find the ministry is reluctant and slow. Sometimes, the ministry may not respond to the problem. 

Therefore, the creation of the commission that will work independently will ensure quick responses to disasters. Automatically, the commission will take quick decisions in handling a particular. I would like to thank my colleague for moving these motions and I call upon honourable members to support this motion so that the country is run effectively.

Madam Speaker, as a country, we have many problems across the broad. And when the commissions are formed, they should map up the areas. If they know that eastern Uganda; Bududa specifically, has floods and landslides, they should think on what to be done.

We should not keep waiting for the problems to occur. We are aware that in northern Uganda, we normally suffer from bush fires, drought and others disasters.  So, the commission would mark and know that in northern Uganda, at this particular time of the year, the most likely problem that may occur is A,B,C.

In western Uganda, what are the common problems that normally take place? There, we shall fight and control any disaster that may come. Honourable Member, I would like to thank you, and I support your motion that the commission be formed. Thank you.

5.27
MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the motion. Many of us have ever brought out issues of disaster in our communities but they have never been responded to.

Maybe, that is what my colleague, Hon. Kasibante was talking about - that they could have been defined as not being disaster enough for response and it pains us. 

Within the districts, we have a disaster preparedness committee headed by the Chief Administrative Officer. Many times, they will make their report and come to you their MP. When you present it in Parliament, it is forwarded to the Office of the Prime Minister and nothing comes out of it.

This frustrates all of us, including the officers at the districts. Sometimes, when disaster strikes, the people in the respective affected areas are reluctant to do anything about on-forwarding the disaster. This is because they know that nothing will be done about the unfortunate occurrence.

I would like to believe that if there was a commission, it would have dealt with those issues differently. I would like to emphasise the point my colleague, Hon. Olanya was talking about; the element of preparedness and the element of anticipating risk in the different regions.

We already know what happens in individual regions; so, what should we do consistently so that we do not just wait for the disaster to come? If the commission was in place; working consistently on preparedness, maybe, we would have reduced on the occurrences of some of these disasters. We would have probably mitigated them before they even affect our people.

Lastly, I know that in the overall budget for a financial year, there is a percentage which is supposed to go to disaster and risk management but I do not know whether this money goes to the Office of the Prime Minister.

Every time that they fail to respond, they will tell you that the ministry of finance has not given us money. If the finance ministry has not given them money, it means that percentage of the overall budget is almost meaningless. One would have expected that if the percentage is provided to the Prime Minister’s Office, it would take care of the disaster. However, this is not done that way.

I would like to believe that if the commission was in place, probably Parliament would compel the finance ministry to ensure that that money, which is a percentage of the overall budget is given to the commission to be able to perform their work. Madam Speaker, I support this motion and as members of Parliament, we need to think about this seriously. I beg to move.

5.31
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County Kwania): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion. Most of the time when our constituencies are struck by disasters, Members have to run to Parliament to make a call; not once but from time to time.

The main challenge is that, I do not know how the policy from the Office of the Prime Minister is. They kind of say that if the disaster is in the department of education, then it is the education ministry to handle, if it is in the health ministry, then, it is the one to handle.

They have then remained with the task of giving relief; jerrycans and such things. This is the time when we need to have a body that will be in place, constantly mobilising resources, designing strategies and be ready to respond whenever there is a call to respond to disaster.

Madam Speaker, if we do not do that, then from time to time, everybody will think that somebody else is going to handle it and then we will end up failing.
 
As a matter of policy, we should put a commission in place, put in resources constantly, and mobilise more resources, so that the country can be able to respond when need arises.

The way we are doing it is completely uncoordinated; the ministry of disaster preparedness is just there, because even the resources that go there deal with too many things. This time round, this Parliament has to support this motion and urge Government to take it, so that we are able to deal with the disaster more efficiently in an organised manner.

Otherwise, members of Parliament are stressed from time to time. One wonders why we have to come to Parliament to talk about disasters when they occur; instead of putting in place a system that would respond anytime. The only task would be to continue to educate and sensitise communities. The district disaster committees are just put there as a strategy to give defence but they cannot do anything because there are no resources.

I thank the mover of the motion. This will help us move a long way in dealing with disaster in this country. Thank you.

5.34
MS JANE PACUTO    (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the honourable colleague. However, I am going to begin on a rather negative aspect of how other Members have contributed.

I am torn between supporting the motion for a commission to be created and strengthening the department of disaster management in the Office of the Prime Minister.

I am saying this is because I am very aware of how this country’s economy is struggling, in terms of resource mobilisation. I am also very aware of how resources are wasted in this country; in a way we duplicate things.

We are now pushing for a commission, simply because a department that is mandated to do what they are supposed to do is not doing it. And we are quick to say that we create a commission I would support the commission because of all this we are lamenting about. We have had several disasters; floods, the COVID-19 pandemic recently but I want to dwell mainly on the floods.

I happen to represent a people who have greatly suffered over the last one year from floods. When I moved along a number of landing sites in Pakwach, I was able to meet elders. They told me that sometime back around 1962 and 1963 - when I was not even born – this again occurred, not only in Pakwach but across other areas of Uganda.

Therefore, it means that these disasters will - either annually or after a spell of years – reoccur and it needs proper planning for them. It needs a proactive team. It needs a department that is fully mandated and does not rely only on the needs assessment done by the district disaster team, but takes their time to get out of the comfortable seats in their offices and actually go to the communities and see for themselves –(Interruption)

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you for giving way. Firstly, this is a constitutional provision, Madam Speaker. Article 249 puts in place a Commission in charge of disaster preparedness and management. We either implement it or amend it.

However, the intent of having this article – when you look through it – was to have a department that could be closely supervised by Parliament. If you want to strengthen the department in charge of this, bring it in line with what Parliament can supervise. It can supervise Commissions and Authorities directly, not any other thing. Thank you.

MS AVUR: Thank you, my honourable colleague, for that information.

I will support this - not forgetting the resource constraints – because we will have a fully-fledged agency or Commission with the right number of staff - and probably qualifications - to continuously monitor, assess and even make on-site visits to some of these places.

Madam Speaker, if you go now to the river banks in Pakwach –(Interjection)– Yes, we were given some little support; posho, tarpaulins, to mention but a few but that is in the short term. Many of these people have been forced off their land and homes, much beyond what the law requires - the 200 metres. Even in the medium term or long term, some of them have no land where to relocate. That is why they are housed in schools and churches.

Some of them do not even have the capacity to construct a new hut. I remember we went with the Woman MP of Buliisa to meet the Prime Minister and we asked what plan they have for these people in the long term. Let us find some land because this will occur again. This is the time to get these people away from the river banks and we take them off-shore.

We needed building materials but they are giving jerrycans and posho. When the commission is in place, they will probably be able to proactively plan – and beyond one financial year.

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: As I invite Hon. Basemera, I want to re-state the position of the Constitution; Article 249(1) Disaster Preparedness and Management Commission.

“1. There shall be a Disaster Preparedness and Management Commission for Uganda to deal with both natural and man-made disasters.
“2. Parliament shall, for the purpose of this article, prescribe the composition, functions, and procedure for implementation of the functions of this Commission.”

Obviously, Parliament on its own cannot move this issue because of Article 93. That is why Hon. Temulanda is saying that let us urge Government to do it.

By the way, this command is 26 years old. This was a command of the 1995 Constitution but not yet fulfilled.

5.40
MS NOELINE BASEMERA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale). Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I thank my sister, Hon. Sarah Nakawunde, for moving this motion. I am in support of this motion. First of all, it is a constitutional provision that Government has the responsibility to implement and it comes in timely.

My biggest concern on this – and why I support putting in place the Disaster Preparedness and Management Commission – is that our response to disasters that have been striking in different parts of this country has been uncoordinated and very ineffective and poor.

I know that many times, on the Floor of this House, members of Parliament have raised issues of disaster affecting different parts of this country but the response has been very poor. If this Commission was in place, I think it would have been easier to manage the response.

One of my colleagues here has rightly put it that planning ahead of time to mitigate some of these disasters would also have been much easier. 

For example, where I come from in Kibaale - in the Western region; during the first rains of the first season of the year, the areas are heavily affected by heavy rains and a lot of strong winds blowing off school roofs and community houses, leaving many people homeless.

This has been happening for at least all the four years I have been here. This means that if we had a Commission in place, it would be able to study the trends of disasters in different parts of the country and then, put in place the necessary mitigation measures to reduce on these disasters.

Therefore, I support the motion and I thank you, Hon. Nakawunde, for raising this important matter. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.43
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion and I would like to appreciate Hon. Nakawunde for bringing this motion. Thank you also for pointing out that this is a constitutional creature - it is supposed to be put in place.

A lot has been said but when you look at the work that has been done by the other statutory commissions like the Uganda Human Rights Commission, the Judicial Service Commission and the Equal Opportunities Commission - which was created just yesterday but with such great impact; this country stands to benefit a lot if we put the disaster preparedness commission in place.

As Members have already pointed out, these issues of disaster will no longer be dealt with on a selective basis but rather on a comprehensive basis, case by case. 

In addition to that, the commission will be making its annual reports to Parliament. Parliament will be able to examine those reports. We will be able to work together with the commission to see areas that need enhanced funding. 

The commission will also carry out research – like other commissions have done – and present their proposals to be able to get sufficient funding for disaster management in this country. The Disaster Preparedness and Management Commission was needed like yesterday. I beg to submit.

5.45
MS AGNES AMEEDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Butebo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the foresight of the Member who has moved the motion; it is a timely one. This will help to streamline the management of disasters.

In the past four years, we have had disasters in Butebo although I have not come knocking at your office, Madam Speaker. I have written to the respective ministry. It is with pain that I state this and I have solely one point that I would like to put across, and I would like you to help us to communicate. The Government procedure so demands that when I write to you, you should reply.

I have in the past written to the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and the Minister of Education and they did not reply. In one instance, a storm blew off a whole block of a primary school that is Government aided and about four classes were left without iron sheets.

Therefore, together with the report of the disaster committee of the district, I wrote to the ministry of education. After a while, I went back to them and they told me that they have no capacity and that I go to the Office of the Prime Minister. Indeed, I wrote concurrently to the Office of the Prime Minister and I was chasing both ends.

However, what surprised me is that nobody from the ministry of education bothered to go and inspect the school. That brings to mind, all the inefficiencies in the Auditor-General’s report, regarding who is supervising who?

Another disaster had about 100 persons lose their homes and I wrote to the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and there was no response. It actually almost cost me votes as the community was up in arms; we lost houses and you did nothing. However, I wrote and I still have copies of those letters on my laptop.

Another disaster happened last year where a school again lost a class block and the most shameful thing is that this school is in my parish of birth and it was even started by my father. I wrote attaching the letter from the disaster committee and nothing has been done up to now.

Initially, I had to spend my own money and buy tarpaulins to cover the block so that it does not get further spoiled. Now, even the tarpaulins got torn off and I have engaged the Chief Administrative Officer and he is saying he has no money and there is no response to my letter from the ministry of disaster preparedness or the ministry of education.

Therefore, my plea to you, Madam Speaker, is that an instruction be given through the Leader of the Government Business that when Members of Parliament write, it is good manners that they to reply to our letters so that we give accountability to our electorates.

Thank you, Madam Speaker.
 
5.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Gender and Culture) (Ms Peace Mutuuzo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank Hon. Nakawunde for raising this very serious concern.

Indeed, the Government is also very concerned and we are planning proactively to manage some disasters, which we can now predict because we know every two years, there are either droughts or floods hitting the eastern part of Uganda. Kasese has been prone several times and we are now proactively planning for it in the third National Development Plan.

First of all, as Cabinet, we have already passed a resolution to install a very strong satellite that can predict but can also measure and know which parts were originally wetlands and have now been turned into settlement areas. However, we are also thinking of merging and harmonising a number of institutions and commissions which are work-related to reduce on expenditure on administration and save money to about Shs 989 billion worth; so that we can put this money into programmes of five different sectors that will handle disaster and climate change.

Madam Speaker, climate change and disaster are one of the strong priority areas that we intend to embark on in the next five years as we implement the National Development Plan III. These resources will be channelled to Ministries of Agriculture, Water and Environment, Education and Sports, ICT, Gender, OPM, all to do either mind set change to proactively plan, plant trees, gazette specific areas to ensure that there are no settlements in those particular areas, in response to manage or mitigate climate change or disasters.

Madam Speaker, the country is aware that financially, our resource envelope is not doing very well. COVID 19 has slowed down business where we were generating resources to implement a number of programmes. Therefore, it would be very important that we go through the third national development plan as designed as we prepare for the Budget so that we can see through the plan that the Government is preparing to implement in order to ensure that we curb climate change and disasters.
    
This time, we are putting resources together to prepare for disasters and mitigate them so that we reduce the disasters that occur. Over the years, we have seen a recurrence of certain disasters and now, we are planning.

Therefore, I beg to request that this august House givestime to the Government to lay the plan so that we look through the areas where we are going to mitigate disaster. We may not handle them because some of them are not predictable but at least to a very good certainty of confidence, we would be able to handle a number of them.

That is my submission, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much. Honourable members, in principle, there is an agreement. -  Okay, Leader of the Opposition.

5.53
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank Members and particularly, the mover of this motion to remind us about what we laid down in the Constitution but have been slowing down in the implementation.

There are two things that we need to understand about this motion. One, we should leave the Government to deal with the policy administration of governance. You have seen that the Prime Minister’s Office has tried but it cannot deal with the actual implementation of dealing with disasters and that is why we are disappointed. 
 
Therefore, when people say that we are constrained because of resource envelopes, then they are not seeing far. What I would have advised is that the Government should look at itself and begin to reduce the excesses in the Government. Why don’t we have fewer ministries rather than have very many ministries, some of them are doing the same things? Why do we have very many ministers and ministers of state? If you could reduce that, we would be able to save a lot of money to finance specialised commissions and deal with some specific areas.

Madam Speaker, I would like to draw the attention of the House to some two experiences which bring to mind that it is important to have specialised commissions to run some of these things. The post Idi Amin war, the Milton Obote Foundation put in place that Commission of Reconstruction and Rehabilitation, and the people of Mbarara and Masaka remember that commission did a great job. They accounted for every single coin that was given to them for the specific work.

Madam Speaker, you can see what has happened today; Bududa is still a disaster up to now. The Government is firefighting. When there is a flood, then Government runs with machines to deal with the crisis and yet Government should be able to identify disaster prone areas and plan for them.

As I speak, quite a big area of Teso and Lango is submerged under the floods. We have been talking about the floods. There are women with children who are sleeping under trees in this period of rain because the Government has not taken any action. 

Right now, Dokolo, for example - and I think some parts of Serere - is suffering from three pandemics. We have the Coronavirus, the floods and the grasshoppers that have hit Lango. You have to beg the Prime Minister’s Office to alert the Prime Minister that this is a disaster. 

There is an area called Kachung where the water works that supply the new city of Lira are now under water. If nothing is done immediately to deal with that disaster, water supply for the entire Lira will be cut off. What will you do? You will have created more disaster than you would have handled if the actions are taken on time. 

Madam Speaker, I have heard the minister but I would like to advise the minister that you should look at the Constitution. What we do as Parliament is to advise the Government and pass this resolution. You have seen that there is consensus. We need this Commission. 

After our resolution, go back and come back to us with an Act of Parliament for the creation of that Commission. If you delay, we are going to ask Sarah and the team to come up with a private member’s Bill but this is urgent and important because the entire country is now battling with disasters and some actions need to be taken. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the question be put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that this House do adopt the motion, as proposed by Hon. Temulanda. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

THE SPEAKER: We shall expect a treasury memorandum from the Government telling us what they have done about this resolution. In item 16, I would just like to remind you that tomorrow is the last day for presenting amendments on the rules. If you have any amendments to the proposed rules, tomorrow is the last day to submit them to the Clerk because next week, we shall handle the rules. Let us now go to item 17.  

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO URGE GOVERNMENT TO DEVELOP AND ENFORCE POLICIES AND STRATEGIES TO PROTECT GIRLS AGAINST ESCALATING CASES OF TEENAGE PREGNANCY AND CHILD MARRIAGE DURING AND AFTER THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC

5.59 
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise under rule 55 of our Rules of Procedure to present a motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to develop and enforce policies and strategies to protect girls against escalating cases of teenage pregnancy and child marriage during and after the COVID-19 pandemic. 

“WHEREAS Articles 31(l) and 34(4) of the Constitution prohibit child marriage and obligate parents to care for and bring up their children respectively;

AND WHEREAS the Children Act, Cap.59 and the Penal Code Act Cap. 120, all contain specific provisions aimed at protecting the girl child against sexual offences including rape, defilement and child marriage, both within the community and the family setting;

AWARE that Uganda has also ratified a number of international conventions aimed at protection against human rights abuse and child marriage of the girl child including;

    a. the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
    b. the Convention on the Rights of the Child;
    c. the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women;
    d. the Protocol to the African Charter on Human and People's Rights on the Rights of women in Africa;
    e. the Maputo Plan of Action; and
    f. the International Convention on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights;

NOTING that the COVID-l9 pandemic led to the closure of most sectors of the economy, including academic and tertiary institutions in 2020, which hitherto productively engaged and acted as protective structures for the girl child against teenage pregnancy and child marriage;

CONCERNED that the COVID-19 pandemic and resultant closure of schools has resulted into the girl child, especially in rural areas, engaging in uninformed sexual conduct with 296,314 girls aged between l0 and 19 years being reported to have had their first antenatal care clinic visit in one of the several health care facilities in Uganda between March and December 2020 alone, with districts like Maracha, Mayuge and Yumbe reporting an increase of 22 per cent, 33 per cent and 10.5 per cent in teenage pregnancy respectively in the said COVID-l9 period;

AWARE that Uganda has the highest rate of teenage pregnancy in sub-Saharan Africa with over 25 per cent pregnancies among teenagers registered every year, with statistics showing that before the COVID-l9 pandemic, 36.5 per cent of women aged between l8 and 22 years were reported to have been married off before the age of 18 years and one in every 10 girls is married off before the age of 15 years, with districts including Rakai, Bukomansimbi, Gomba, Luwero, Mityana, Mubende, among others, reporting 128; 167; 196; 12,944; 3,200 and 1072 child marriages respectively;

FURTHER CONCERNED that as a result of the lockdown and redundancy in homes, many sexual violations emanated from within the family setting itself, with reports indicating that sexual abuse was the third most reported form of child abuse contributing 20.1 per cent of which 98 per cent of the victims were girls and 17 per cent of the perpetrators were family members;

ACKNOWLEDGING that the COVID-l9 pandemic and its resultant effects and challenges may be part of Uganda and the world's new mode of operation for a period unknown, yet the existing laws and structures are weak and not enforced to address the challenges of teenage pregnancy and child marriage during the period of a pandemic like COVID-l9;

RECALLING that this House has, on numerous occasions, raised concern over the surging number of teenage pregnancies in Uganda;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that:

    1. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development renews the 20l5 National Strategy to End Child Marriage and Teenage Pregnancy in Uganda to curb the escalating cases of child marriage and teenage pregnancy, and ensure that it is funded.

    2. The Ministry of Education and Sports introduces policies and programmes allowing and supporting teenage mothers to return and stay in school as well as sensitizing the communities against stigma.

3. 	Government strengthens the enforcement of laws against defilement, child marriage and other forms of child sexual abuse and exploitation as well as engaging in sensitisation of parents on their roles on the upbringing of children.

4. 	Government fast-tracks the passing and adaption of the National Schools Health Policy to enable every learner have access to health services, information, knowledge and skills.

5. 	Government provides adequate resources to the institutions of the Police, local councils and probation officers to enable them perform their roles in protecting girls against teenage pregnancy and early marriages.

6. 	Government increases funding to the Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme (UWEP) under the Ministry of Gender Labour and Social Development and provides credit to women organisations of low interest rates so that the women can better fend for the girl child.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Members, is the motion seconded? Motion seconded, justify.

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, I would like to point out first that we do appreciate the Government for the policies and programmes of women empowerment generally, including our Constitution.

Statistics show that Uganda is one of countries with the highest rates of teenage pregnancies and child marriages. Even before COVID-19, 25 per cent of girls aged between 15 and 19, either had a child or were pregnant; COVID-19 only made matters worse. 

In Mayuge, there was a 33 per cent increase of those who attended antenatal and in Maracha, it was 22 per cent. In West Nile, it was 10 per cent, from 6,075 to 7,377. These are only those who attended antenatal - you can imagine those who did not attend.

Madam Speaker, in yesterday’s New Vision on page 34, it was reported that in Kasese alone, 19,000 kids are abused every year, representing 5 per cent of the population. The paper is here and I will lay it on Table. These are figures from the probation offices at the police stations. You can imagine those who do not report.

The matter has reached alarming proportions, Madam Speaker. We must have firm policies to allow our children to return to school or we are perpetuating poverty.

These girl children will give birth to so many children. They are starting early; that means they can produce about 20 children who they will not able to educate or to look after, yet we know that there are some who have gotten into this situation and gotten back to school, and they have become responsible citizens. They have become doctors, engineers and they are contributing effectively to the socio-economic development of this country. Therefore, all is not lost if we can allow our children to go back to school. Not only allow them but also facilitate them to return to school.

We must have firm strategies to economically empower the parents so that they can fend for the girl and provide the necessities.

Madam Speaker, UWEP has done very well. The women have proved faithful. They borrow this money, use it, multiply it and then they are able to return the initial seed. 

They are able to look after their families and provide school fees for their children. That is why we strongly suggest that the Government should increase UWEP funds because only a few of the women groups could benefit. We should make sure that many benefit because it has had impact, so that these women can provide the basics necessities for the girl child and keep them in school.

We must also devise means of instilling, supervising and actually demanding effective and responsible parenting using all relevant structures of Government, especially the local governments, and using the cultural and religious institutions. This should be everybody’s responsibility - the protection of our children and making sure that we have a quality population. Of course, it takes Government, a leader to mobilise the other structures and make sure that we operate together.

We must also call for effective implementation of the existing laws on defilement. We have the laws in place - even the few statistics I read here, some of which were from the probation officers but they are inadequately facilitated. Some girls report at the police stations but some of their parents are asked for fuel to facilitate the police officers to go and carry out the arrest or to facilitate the probation officers to go investigate. Madam Speaker, we need to put sufficient funding to these departments of the police and probation.

Madam Speaker, the motion speaks for its self but we would like the Education Health Policy strengthened and youth friendly corners. These were providing sexual education to the young girls and family planning education and services because it is important that our girls stay in school; first, that they have knowledge of what happens and then they can protect themselves.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Department of Research of Parliament, who issued a policy brief yesterday morning with the necessary statistics out of the research carried out with the help of UNFPA. Out of this research, you see six districts of Central Uganda with 18,000 teenage girls pregnant during this period. We would like to thank our department and to encourage them to do more but also, to make sure that this information reaches everyone and can be used. Madam Speaker, with that, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, is the figure for Luwero 12,944?

MS KAMATEEKA: Can I clarify later, Madam Speaker? 

6.14
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank my colleague, Hon. Kamateeka for bringing this motion, which is very important to our country.

It is very unfortunate that with COVID-19, our girls became targets; the pandemic has been a bad thing for our children. 

We went to Maracha recently and found out that actually, like Hon. Kamateeka has said, the numbers of teenage pregnancy are too high. Some girls were brought before us as proof, and they told us the reasons they became pregnant. We felt so bad about it. 

We found out that even before COVID-19, West Nile had night markets, which would start at 8.00 p.m. So, you can imagine a girl child of 11 years going to the market in the evening to take stuff for sale. What do you expect from that? The ministry has to take serious actions on those evening markets. I have never seen such markets in any other part of Uganda apart from West Nile. I wonder how the Government could allow this night market. How do you allow young girls in a market that starts at 8.00 p.m.? That is really unfortunate.

Another issue that I found in West Nile, which really disturbed me was that the parents were sharing houses with their children. So, at night when they are enjoying their things, the children would listen in. So, the next day, they would also go out and try what the act is all about. 

I do not know how we shall help our people. I do not how we shall advise them. Otherwise sharing a house with children is unfortunate. I tried to talk to the youth but from the way they explained the issue, I concluded that our people need help. 

We also found out that domestic violence was so high in Maracha. Mothers were leaving their children at home. In their absence, the fathers would come back home drunk and have sex with their daughters unknowingly. Perhaps they know it is their daughters but they just ignore the fact. This is really unfortunate. The ministry has to do something to protect these girls. 

The people also told us that the role model girls from that area do not like visiting home. I request Ugandans from West Nile, especially the ladies, to always go there to make sure those girls see them. Go to the radio and talk to them. Do not leave them to the Government and politicians alone. You also have something great you can do for our girls there. They need to see you and all of us. They need to know what we do to appreciate that a girl child can be important.

I am very happy to have met many girls in the schools I visited. They always asked, “Elizabeth, are you also going to be like Hon. Kadaga?” They love you everywhere, Madam Speaker. When they talk about Kadaga, you are the woman they are talking about. So, role models are important to make a girl child believe that a girl can also be somebody important. 

In West Nile, however, if the girls do not get the opportunity to interact with the role models, they will get demoralised. So, people from West Nile should take it up and encourage our girls so that they can know that they are also important. 

I met somebody who shared with me her experience. She told me that when she finished Senior Four, she got married. She had wanted to continue with school but that her mother sweet-talked her into marriage. The marriage, however, did not last. She said that she used to hear of Miria Matembe and she decided that since things had not worked out, she should go back to school so that she could be like Miria Matembe one day. 

Although she has not reached a high level, but at least she is somewhere because Miria Matembe encouraged her. So, please, the role models we have should help our children. They need to hear and see you. You need to talk to them on the FM radios and encourage them seriously.

I would like to add to the prayers of Hon. Kamateeka. There are girls who have got pregnant because of the lies they were told but they would love to go back to school. They, however, do not have school fees. Alternatively, they wish that since they have no school fees, they should be given some money to start up small businesses. 

I am always surprised - recently, we met a group of some teenage mothers. One of them told us that if she got only Shs 100,000, she could start a business and look after her child. You see, they do not even need a lot of money to start their own businesses to earn a living. 

I pray that the Government looks for these girls through NGOs because they know them. Sometimes our district probation officers do not know them because to reach those offices, you need to have paid money or otherwise. Most of the NGOs, however, know where these girls are. 

Through the NGOs, these girls can be mobilised to be helped with little money to start their small businesses so that they can earn a living. These girls have children and they are not educated. They have no land nor shelter. They really live very miserable lives when they could have gotten a chance of studying to have a better future. 

Government should give them some money so that they can proceed with life. It is not very much money; even if there were a million or two million girls, and each is getting Shs 150,000 or 200,000, I am very sure my Government cannot fail to raise that money.

Through you, Madam Speaker, I request that Government finds funding for those girls to encourage them not to lose hope or to abandon their children like some who leave them on the roads. This will enable them to live well and look after their children. I thank you.

6.22
MS AGNES AMEEDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank Hon. Kamateeka for moving the motion. 

The issue of teenage pregnancy is very painful. I almost shed tears at one of my village meetings during the primaries in the elections. It just did occur to me that in this particular subcounty, there were many young girls of about 15 or 16 years old who were pregnant. I did ask the community why they are doing that to the kids. It was very painful to see those kids pregnant. 

It is true Government has done some work but there is a lot of work that needs to be done. Teenage pregnancy is a cultural, moral but also an economic issue yet we are not utilising those Government structures to actually attack the problem.

We have the probation officers who only wait for the incident to occur. Honourable minister, how about you empower the probation officer, the police officer and the community development officer to actively have continuous engagement with the communities about teenage pregnancy.

We also have women councils who could be good mentors. It could be like – I do not know how to put it but part of the assignments of the Women Council of that parish could be to encourage girls to go to school. Some girls just need some positivity and a little counselling. For example, I am paying fees for two girls who I met by accident during school time but they were out of school.

I asked them why they were not in school. One girl told me some boy had teased her and so, she did not want to go back to that school. I offered to pay for her in another school and now, for the last two years, this girl is back to school. 

How about we had people constantly monitoring girls and encouraging them to stay in school? Some police stations do not have holding facilities for kids who have been abused. What are we going to do about that? Lack of holding places for girls who have been abused - a police station only has two uniports and they are supposed to follow-up those cases yet some of the cases require some investigation and so, it becomes a challenge –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MS AMEEDE: As I conclude, I would like to request the honourable minister to give this some prominence; let us have a targeted programme. Otherwise, this issue has been largely left to NGOs, who are selective; they are in certain places and when the programme winds up, nothing else is done. How about if we keep a continuous national programme of the Government involving Government structures. Thank you.

6.26
MS NOELINE BASEMERA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank my sister, Hon. Jovah Kamateeka, for moving this motion.

Madam Speaker, this motion speaks for itself. The issue of teenage pregnancies and child mothers is very disheartening. COVID-19 has only worsened the situation. In our rural communities, this is a very serious concern that is worth the Government’s serious attention.

Recently, I went to a church in our community in Kibaale and I felt bad to see many child mothers; very young teenage girls breastfeeding. It was very painful. I imagined that they gave birth between the age of 13 and 15. Now, by the time they are 35 years, how many children will they have given birth to and are they able to look after them? It becomes a big burden.

This is a serious challenge. I am happy the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development is here. How I pray that the ministry, in addition to the efforts by the NGOs, can champion a serious campaign, which we will all join against teenage pregnancy and child marriages in this country. This is indeed a big problem. 

Like the mover of the motion proposed, for at least those who can go back to school, arrangements should be put in place so that they are able to go back to school. There should also be deterrent measures for the defilers of these young girls. These defilers go scot-free and the reason they are increasingly misbehaving is that some of the young boys who defile them are relatives. It is terrible. 

Madam Speaker, we need deterrent measures against the defilers. Thank you.  

6.29
MS JANE AVUR (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank Hon. Kamateeka for this motion. It is a naked truth that teenage pregnancies are on the rise and worse still, in our region of West Nile.

I know a Member has already mentioned late evening markets. When you go to a number of our districts, you will not believe as a leader in this country that the leadership at the local government level can allow a market to start at 6.00 p.m.

When you move a little bit late in the night - we are talking about young girls but these girls produce with their peers. You find a boy of 16 years has produced a child with a girl of 14 years. Very young people moving around the market, bar or a discotheque and you wonder whether there are still administrators in this country.

I call upon the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development to work closely with the Minister of Local Government. Where markets begin very late, let them close. They should come up with ordinances at local district levels not to allow these community discos. Otherwise, the discotheques in the towns are properly regulated. If they can be regulated -

Whereas we are calling upon the Government, as parents, we must take on our responsibility. There is need for skillful parenting. We must have regulations. I do not buy into the fact that a parent cannot discipline an errant child. It is time we went back to community parenting. This thing that when I get your child doing something wrong I should just pass, that I should not even rebuke the child, is not African. It is time for us to collectively bring up our children, if we are to realise any good Ugandans at all. Thank you.

6.32
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank, Hon. Jovah Kamateeka, for bringing up this matter in a motion. Last year, from January to August in Kwania District, 1,500 teenage girls got pregnant just in eight months.

This means that if the trend of handling teenage pregnancies and child marriages is not checked, then we are going to destroy the future of girls in this country. My concern is that as Parliament, we should ensure that among the prayers that have been put by the motion, we can manage the gaps in enforcement of the laws that already exist.

Most of these girls are between 12 to 17 years, which is within the defilement age. How this is being enforced by the police, parents, and the community is what stands to be questioned and needs to be improved.

Secondly, the responsibility is right at the court of parents. Parents have become negligent of what their children are doing and they do not care. COVID-19 only escalated things but there has been a silent problem going on. I believe we must take on the parents in guiding, counselling, nurturing and protecting children as the primary concern in fighting this. 

Madam Speaker, as I move home at 6.00 p.m. in my village, girls, and boys as young as five years to 19 years are moving to the trading centers and markets and they are going to dance from 10.00 p.m. to midnight, while their parents are seated at home, watching TV and not doing anything.

Therefore, I think the response of communities in nurturing children collectively is what we should campaign for, so that everybody takes care of the children who are getting spoilt or are not being taken care of in the centers. Otherwise, these laws are in place. We may pass resolutions here but if we don’t take this direction, then we are going to fail in fighting teenage pregnancy.

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

6.35
MR TONY KALULE SENGO (NRM, Gomba County East, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. As honourable members came up with a litany of lamentations, I was boiling with anger in my seat. I have a feeling that this nation is becoming very immoral.

It starts right from the homes. What are the parents doing? How can you come here and say, “Well, you see, many of these girls have been made pregnant by their relatives”? What have we done to those relatives? Why do you let them go scot-free, after such shame? If you make an underage girl pregnant, the law should come in. You should be punished heavily. This is the only way to stop immorality in this country. We cannot live like this. 

You then go on and say that the parents are given some money and the whole story ends there. What have you done to those parents who are misbehaving? This is what I am calling immorality in the homes. Let us be serious. Let us punish even those parents who are misbehaving. How do you let your daughter be impregnated and then you ask for a few millions or thousands of shillings, and then the whole story ends there? No, no, no! We are not serious enough.

Whereas we may lament here and say this and that; unless we enforce morals in this country, we are not going anywhere. For example –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You are raising an interesting issue. Please conclude.

MR SENGO: Madam Speaker, let me conclude by appealing that from now on, let us use a strong hand. Let the Police come in. Let the defilers be made accountable; let them be put in. Let them be punished. Let even the parents who are neglecting their roles be punished. Let us have serious morals if we are going to build a serious nation.

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the early days of the NRM, the vice chairperson of the local council was in charge of children, at all levels. However, I do not know whether the vice chairperson of the village or subcounty knows this. That was their responsibility, among others. 

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When the Government started giving local council chairpersons some money and leaving out other members – I am saying this after consulting them; they told me – one of the vice chairpersons told me, “They are paying the chairman, yet I do more work than him. Why should I continue?” 

The woman told me the truth and I said, but these are important. She said, “No, I am working for nothing. They only see the chairperson and my chairman is not even educated like me. I am the one who handles some cases. So, I will not do anything again.”

The point is very clear. I talked about three aspects but the only underlying contentious issue is, they are not being recognised. It is only the chairman being recognised, Madam Speaker.

6.39
MS SHEILA MWINE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank Hon. Jovah Kamateeka for this motion. Earlier on, we talked about disaster preparedness in this country. However, this is the mother of all disasters in our country; that in one year of the COVID-19 pandemic, we are talking of children in our homes being pregnant. So, schools are safer. Are schools safer for our children than our homes?

It is so saddening, Madam Speaker, to see young babies – I will not even call them children. Some of them are babies below 14 and 16 years – being mounted by their fathers, uncles and those people who should be loving and taking good care of them. It is so sad.

I was in my village last week. The story is different. Hon. Kamateeka said that it is in the rural areas. I would like to assure you that this is going on even in the urban centers, town councils and in our very own environment. How can we let down our children? How can our children, instead of continuing in school, be pregnant and become outcasts? You are saying, “Let us bring them back. Let them come back to school.” 

In conclusion, I am going to talk about the Police because some of these cases are reported there. Somebody rapes a child but once they are bribed, that is the end of the case. We want to talk about these things openly and say that the Police is aiding rapists and people who are raping their children.

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.42
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to appreciate Hon. Jovah Kamateeka, for this very important motion. Hon. Kamateeka, when you presented the motion, I felt that you were perhaps looking at what is happening in my district, Amuru. 

In Amuru District, in the last Primary Leaving Examinations, more than 80 girls missed the exams. They did not participate in the exams because many of them were pregnant; they were feeling ashamed and had to disappear. 

Last week, very many parents – about five of them were rounded up by the Police. Those parents were giving out their girls, young as they were, for marriage. Two of the girls were 13 years old and in Primary Six. I am happy that the police went, rounded them up and arrested the whole family.

Madam Speaker, this motion is very important. We need to safeguard our girls. Unfortunately, the boys who are impregnating those girls are in school; they are very comfortable. Some of the parents of those boys are simply laughing but the parents of the girls are really suffering.

We need this policy. Let the strategies be put in place and I appeal to the Ministry of Education and Sports to hurry. We should come up with a policy that allows those girls who get pregnant and deliver to go back to school. Delivering a baby is not the end of life. Let the parents also be told so.

Finally, let us also pray that parents also take care of their children because it is shameful for a parent to accept to get money from their 13-or 14-year-old daughter; it is embarrassing. Therefore, let parents also take care of their young daughters. Otherwise I support the motion. This is the best motion so far because when passed, it is going to help in the protection of our young girls. I beg to move.

6.44   
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank Hon. Kamateeka for this very important motion focusing on child marriages and teenage pregnancies.

Madam Speaker, I would like to ask questions and I hope that one day, the Government will answer. When the director of one of the schools in Uganda was cited as having impregnated very many girls - taking advantage of these girls who are disadvantaged - what action did the Government take? To my knowledge, nothing! Why?

Madam Speaker, it is on record that during this COVID-19 pandemic, very many girls got pregnant across Uganda. What has the Government done to track these girls in order to know the actions to be taken? None. This is a symptom of a breakdown of the system, not only in our society but even in the Government. It shows that we have a government which does not care. 

If this is happening to my child, it is also happening to your child. Therefore, we must all be concerned; the Government should respond responsibly and be able to track all this evil taking place in our society and be seen to be doing something.

Madam Speaker, I took the trouble to invite some of the parents who have had experiences with girls who were impregnated during this pandemic. I was shocked that some of the parents did not turn up but the girls turned up. A girl who looks about 15 years old was carrying a child at the back and another one in the womb. (Interjection)- Yes and you would ask “then what?” And she would say “I don’t know where to go.” These girls are suffering rejection by their parents, the family of the boy - and sometimes the boys even disappear. They are suffering psychologically.

Therefore, my prayer, in addition to Hon. Kamateeka’s prayer, is that one of the things that the Government should focus on is psycho-social services to these girls. We need to put aside funds to first of all rehabilitate them psychologically and take them back to school.

There must be funds to take these children back to school because we cannot just leave them there. You have also learnt from Dokolo that some of these girls who are married off while young, are battered by their husbands. The same man keeps bringing young girls on top of young girls.

Madam Speaker, there is a breakdown of our society and we need to look at this motion holistically, making sure that not only the Government should define its own role in effectively dealing with this matter but also the parents, through cultural institutions, religious organisations must all play their part in making sure that we come up with an effective solution.

I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, I would like to confirm to you the figure for Luweero; it is indeed 12,944. Remember that I quoted for Kasese what appeared in yesterday’s New Vision that it was 19,081 girls who got pregnant just in one year.

In addition to the prayers we have made, we need statistics because these are just a few statistics here and there. We picked from a few probation offices and studies like the one of the Research department of Parliament; the Government should be in position to provide statistics of these girls. As Hon. Cecilia Ogwal has said, to follow them up, we need to know what is happening to our girls so as to put in place measures to protect them.

Madam Speaker, I have for example Bukwo with 919, Serere has 3,429, Kitgum has 1,519 – and these are just picked from the health clinics and probation offices. However, we need proper statistics. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: What we may want to add to that motion is that we need an audit by the Government, of the situation of these children in this year of the pandemic.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, we could use LC Is; I have found them very effective only that they are abandoned. Local councils are at the lowest point of administration; if we could use them, they would be in better position to avail us whatever information we need from that particular village. Therefore, you talk of the village, coordinated from the parishes, from parishes to the subcounty and to the districts. We could try that method.

THE SPEAKER: Every child lives in some village.

6.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (GENDER AND CULTURE) (Ms Peace Mutuuzo): Thank you, Madam Speaker for giving a lot of attention to this subject. I also want to thank my sister, Hon. Jovah Kamateeka, for speaking to the gender agenda and passionately contributing – by all members – towards this very important subject.

The Government is concerned by the increasing cases of teenage pregnancies and child marriages. We are making efforts to curb the teenage pregnancies and child marriages especially within this COVID-19 context with difficulties but we are making some progress.

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development embarked on implementing the national strategy to end child marriages and teenage pregnancies in 2015 and indeed, after five years, right now, we are conducting an assessment plan and that is why you see these figures coming out. It is because of the robust plan we have put on the ground to generate data, which we feed into our policy and plans for implementation.

Madam Speaker, previously, perhaps you would not get to know how many have been defiled. However, right now, before the closure of the year, we are getting figures and we are already compiling this data. We wish to request for about a month where we shall have gotten all the information from all the districts to be able to lay it on the Table and discuss this matter comprehensively.

The Ministry of Education and Sports has adopted guidelines on re-entry of child-mothers into schools. This will give a chance to the child-mothers to go back to schools after giving birth. However, we are also sensitising and supporting child-mothers as they continue with their studies.

Plans to re-open schools are being implemented so that we keep more children in schools. Indeed, some families are overwhelmed. A family where children will return to school, if the family has around 17 children, maybe five boys and nine girls, keeping under the watch of one mother is not also easy. These are energetic young children in puberty. Therefore, keeping them in school is much safer and that is why we are happy that at least there is a plan to re-open schools for all children. They will be there safely under the watch of the care givers in the schools. 

Under the EU Spotlight Initiative, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is coordinating with other government agencies on strengthening the enforcement of laws against defilement, child marriages and other forms of child and sexual abuses and exploitation.
 
Our efforts are undermined by some prevailing negative social norms and practises in our cultures, but during this lockdown, we organised a cultural organisation and traditional leaders – we have a forum now and we have met the traditional leaders twice. We are now working at laying down all the bad practises in our different cultures so that they can support us to outlaw all of them. 

The National School Healthy Policy is implemented. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is working with other line ministries, particularly the Ministries of Health and Education and Sports to fast-track the finalisation of the school health policy to ensure that all the children’s corners that have been talked about are catered for. 

On resource to police, local councils and probation officers - to protect girls and teenage pregnancies and child marriages; we have plans to ensure that we form a strong taskforce where all those agencies are lined together. In the National Development Plan 3, we have five ministries that will be working closely to coordinate this, including the Ministry of Local Government and the Ministry of Education and Sports, and other agencies. They will work on humanities to ensure that we closely work together to end teenage pregnancies and child marriages. 

This year, Kasese has taken the lead in developing an action plan to end child marriages. Kasese has around 3,545 girls that got pregnant within only this one year. So, we supported them together with the UN-Women; the ministry provided technical support. 

We developed an action plan and we want to roll it out to the other districts. This particular week and the next week to come, we are moving towards South Western Uganda and Eastern Uganda to ensure that we conduct training for our machinery; the women councils, the LC1 chairpersons and the vice chairpersons. We will ensure that we empower them with information and skills to take more serious care to end child marriages. 

The Ministry of Gender, in close collaboration with the development partners and civil society organisations, such as Action Aid International, MIFUMI and Centre for Domestic Violence Prevention are coordinating delivery of support services for the GBV survivors through 14 GBV shelters located in the districts of Gulu, Lira, Masaka, Mbarara, Kumi, Katakwi, Amuru, Pallisa, Nebbi, Mubende, Kween, Moroto and Kampala. 

Through these shelters, survivors of gender-based violence access temporary shelters for protection, security and legal aid services. It involves an assessment of each case to determine whether it is of a criminal or civil nature and whether it needs medication, committal to court of law or alternative dispute resolution, psychosocial support and counselling for gender-based violence survivors and their immediate family members and medical support and first aid services before seeking treatment and health facilities. 

The Ministry of Gender has stepped up efforts on media engagements to sensitise the public on dangers of teenage pregnancy and child marriages and also encourage women and girls to seek support from the existing services. 

We have developed parenting guidelines and disseminated them to the different districts and also supplied to the activists and the media houses so that at any opportune time, the caregivers are briefed and empowered with necessary information to dispense so that we can sensitise the minds and build the mind-set that is resilient against child marriages and teenage pregnancies. 

The Judiciary has also launched a mechanism to reduce the backlog of cases concerning gender-based violence. There is also a report on human rights abuses that is being prepared within the next two weeks. The Ministry of Internal Affairs will be laying this report on the Floor. 

In regards to UWEP funds, we have done our best in the four years of its implementation and we could do better if we are given sufficient resources. However, all these wealth creation funds are now being merged to create a new parish development model that has been adopted by Cabinet. We may not possibly continue with UWEP because all the funds will be pooled into one basket to operationalise the parish model that will go to all the parishes in the country to improve on livelihood holistically –(Interruption) 

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, the honourable minister admitted that UWEP did well in the four years. They are the same people who sit in Cabinet. How do you now tell us that UWEP is not going to continue? Honourable minister, are you saying that UWEP is not going to continue and this money is going to be merged into the parish model? You know very well that, that parish model might have the money we saw in the campaigns, for example, the Emyooga, where there are very many groups competing for little money.

Madam Speaker, we are saying that we want improvement. We want these mothers to be able to fend for the girl child. Is this the way we are going to go about it; by taking away the little money they have been getting? 

I think, as Parliament, we need to engage Government and make sure that not only does UWEP remain but we add them more money because the women need it. They do not need it for only themselves but for the stable home and for the good of the girl child, as we have seen. 

This is the clarification I am trying to seek. Is the Government doing away with UWEP and only proceeding with the parish model knowing very well that the parish model will not be as effective as UWEP. 

In our request, we want more credit funds to go to women organisations because they have had more effect on the social economic development of the country. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am one of those who are concerned about the news that the UWEP might be mixed up with Operation Wealth Creation and I do not know what else. It is a matter that we need to engage and try to convince the Government that it is important that the UWEP funds remain so that they support the women. 

Minister, I do not want you to just give up like that. You might give up but we shall not. Please conclude because we have another motion. 

MS MUTUUZO: Madam Speaker, I have listened to the concerns that you have raised and I do salute them. 

Hon. Kamateeka, as women, that is also our concern but because of the financial constraints that the Government is undergoing, Cabinet has so far adopted a parish model, which needs to be supported with resources and all wealth creation resources were pulled together in one basket – 

THE SPEAKER: Is there no piloting? Did they just go straight into it? 

MS MUTUUZO: Madam Speaker, we can continue engaging and discussing because the budget will still come to this House but so far, that is where we could mostly mobilise from; the most available resources, the Youth Livelihood Fund, Operation Wealth Creation funds, the Women Fund, the UWEP Fund, the Luwero Triangle and others were pooled together into one basket.

Madam Speaker, as I conclude, I wish to request that we all continuously continue to sensitize the parents, the caregivers, and the citizens to be on the watch for teenage pregnancy, child abuse, and immorality. We cannot do it alone; we need to have a concerted effort by everybody. All caregivers including the police need to be on this but so far, at least we have the data and the strategy. 

The Ministry of Gender will do more than this but we need financial resources; all these matters are not financially supported. We work more with development partners, civil society organizations, and faith-based organization especially in things to do with culture. There is no financial allocation and many of these are emanating from our social cultural practices and norms. 

I would like to appeal very strongly that as soon as the budget comes to this House, we should look into this matter to ensure that we support the Ministry of Gender’s budget so that we can be able to do more than this and not leave our works on paper, but ensure that we implement them to the letter. Thank you, Madam Speaker and the House.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Let us go to item 18.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO CONGRATULATE HON. ABBAS AGABA, UPON ATTAINING THE AWARD OF THE HONORARY DOCTORATE DEGREE IN BUSINESS AND LEADERSHIP FROM THE SWITZERLAND UNIVERSITY BUSINESS SCHOOL IN RECOGNITION OF HIS CONTRIBUTION TO THE COMMUNITY

THE SPEAKER: Is there a delegate for Hon. Amongin?

7.07
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Madam Speaker, I rise under Rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to congratulate Hon. Abbas Agaba, upon attaining the award of the Honorary Doctorate Degree of Business and Leadership from the Switzerland University Business School, in recognition of his contribution to the community.

“WHEREAS Hon. Abbas Agaba is the Member of Parliament for Kitagwenda County, Kamwenge District in the Tenth Parliament;

AND WHEREAS in the month of June 2020, Hon. Abbas Agaba was nominated and awarded the honorary Doctoral Degree of Business and Leadership by the Switzerland University Business School (Honororis Causa);

RECOGNISING that Hon. Abbas Agaba duly become the first Ugandan to receive the said honorary doctorate, premised on his sound academic background and demonstrable contribution to the community and the country at large through the various leadership positions he has held within Uganda;

AWARE THAT in the period between 2005 and 2010, Hon. Abbas Agaba was appointed to various leadership positions including the position of the National Chairman Youth League, of the National Resistance Movement, the Vice Chairperson of the National Youth Council under the Ministry of Gender Labour and Social Development, as well as the Chairperson Great Lakes Region Youth
Forum;

FURTHER AWARE that as the Chairman of the National Youth League, Hon. Abbas Agaba was deeply involved in the provision of education opportunities to academically gifted but financially less privileged young Ugandans through the creation of synergies with embassies of various countries including Cuba, China, Egypt, India and Algeria among others which extended to the said Ugandans scholarship opportunities, air tickets and settlement allowances;

ACKNOWLEDGING that in the said period of 2005-2010, Hon. Abbas Agaba made various strides to uplift the youth agenda in leadership and wealth creation through the training in microfinance and SACCO formation, reproductive health, agricultural projects for the rural youth, brick laying initiatives and poultry projects for financial enhancement;

FURTHER AWARE that Hon. Abbas Agaba was a founder leader and Vice Chairperson of the African and Arab Youth Council; a specialised organisation on youth advocacy and participation in leadership, bringing together youth from Africa and the Arab world to solve common problems and design common approaches to improve democracy and governance, with membership of forty four countries including Uganda, Libya, Morocco, Tanzania, Somalia, Senegal, Egypt among others, through which Uganda hosted the Afro-Arab Youth Festivals 2008 with over 5000 delegates;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that;

1. 	The Parliament of Uganda formally recognises and congratulates Hon. Abbas Agaba for the great achievement of becoming the first Ugandan to be awarded the Honorary Doctorate Degree of Business and Leadership by the Switzerland University Business School;

2. 	Parliament recognises and appreciates Hon. Abbas Agaba's exceptional dedication in the closing of the educational and financial opportunities' gap in Uganda through his sourcing for scholarship opportunities, as well as his support for agricultural and other initiatives among the youth.”

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Seconded, justify briefly.

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, the motion really speaks for its self. In order for anyone to attain this degree, he or she must have a master’s degree, which Hon. Abbas Agaba has - in fact, he has two master’s degrees. He has a Master of Public Administration and a Master of Leadership and International Relations from Makerere University.

They also required someone who is active and genuine in society, leadership and Government or NGO. Of course, Hon. Abbas Agaba, being a Member of Parliament, is active in Government and so, he highly qualifies.

He has made a great contribution to society as a youth leader and also as a Member of Parliament by working for the wellbeing of his people. He is the first Ugandan to be awarded this doctorate degree of the Switzerland University. We do congratulate him for that and we do hope other Ugandans will be able to qualify.

There is value for the doctorate degree of course. We will now call him Hon. Dr. Abbas Agaba. He moves a step higher and this recognition comes with the ability to be able to assist, coordinate and interact with others for the benefit of the country. 

Madam Speaker, you are aware that in this Tenth Parliament, Hon. Jovah Kamateeka, Woman Member of Parliament for Mitooma and also Hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, Woman Member of Parliament for Kiboga District attained the Honorary Doctorate Degree of the Commonwealth University. So, we are proud to have Hon. Abbas Agaba joining us. We hope that others will be able to emulate. 

This award comes with recognition of one’s commitment and dedication to whatever work you are doing and how that work benefits the communities, especially when you are a Member of Parliament. We cannot say this without recognising your contribution in our lives because we would not be recognised if it was not for you and your being a role model. Everything that we do, we do it under the auspices of your leadership. We are so grateful.

With those few words, I congratulate Hon. Abbas Agaba, and I call upon the Members to do the same. With your permission, I will lay the certificate on Table. 

THE SPEAKER: You can lay it. 

MS KAMATEEKA: I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: We have the seconder, Hon. Anywarach, and after him, we will have Hon. Olanya. 

Honourable members, I also have two honorary doctorates from Busoga University and Nkumba University. 

7.17
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to congratulate you on your honorary doctorate awards.

As I second this motion, I would like to make it clear that Hon. Abbas Agaba has been known to me for quite a long period of time. Hon. Abbas Agaba, together with Hon. Songa, by then were not Members of Parliament, yet they got us into a youth movement that was attached to the then President of Libya, Muhammad Gadhafi. At that time, I was in Naguru and they would move all the way to Naguru Go-Down to talk to me about Pan-Africanism. 

In 2010, when the likes of Hon. Abbas Agaba, Hon. Angella and I were appointed as RDCs, I opted to run for Parliament. Hon. Agaba told me I was making a mistake. I was supposed to go to Apac as an RDC to be deputised by my uncle, who had served in that rank for the last 23 years. I told the President that I could not take that appointment and that I would run for Parliament instead. 

When I told Hon. Abbas Agaba about my decision, he asked me on the phone, “What if you lose?” and I told him I would not lose. So, Hon. Abbas Agaba is so dear to me. 

I need to second this motion without fear or favour because when Hon. Abbas Agaba became RDC, he was posted to Serere. The urge to serve the community pushed Hon. Abbas Agaba to teach in two secondary schools for free. Imagine an RDC that would not concentrate on grabbing land but building the community through teaching. 

More importantly, these students would also stay at his house. At one point, we asked him why he was doing this and he said, “What do we do? There is no food at school. These people come from very far.” It is just like most of our secondary schools where students walk for over 20 kilometres. So, Hon. Abbas Agaba would host them in his house for the period of the term.

I think that gives me great reason to say that this honorary doctorate award has never been in vain. It is as if they knew exactly the person they are dealing with. 

At Kabojja Junior School here, Hon. Abbas Agaba started an anti-AIDs club. You know, to advise the young people in school to abstain, you sometimes would risk being hated. Hon. Abbas Agaba started that anti-AIDs club and it is right now one of the strongest clubs in all these schools. Kabojja Junior School is just here on Acacia Avenue.

Madam Speaker, you invited us to a trip to Morocco and when we reached there, Hon. Abbas Agaba that we are recognising today arrived late. I saw Hon. Abbas Agaba having meetings with some Arabs and I wondered why. You continued to Egypt but we went via Charles De Gaulle Airport in Paris and back here. I asked Hon. Abbas Agaba what the meeting was for.

Because of the meeting Hon. Abbas Agaba had with these people, we closed a deal where over 20 students are now enjoying free scholarships in Morocco. Sometimes, I do not know how the magic of voting works. Those of us who will not join you here, this is my maiden speech after I lost the election. I actually did not lose the election but I was completely murdered out of the elections by the military. 

Sometimes you get surprised that the very right people that we thought should have come back and contributed more are getting out. The good news is, if you are a statesman, you never focus on the next election but you will focus on the next generation. Hon. Abbas Agaba is a statesman, and I thank him.

I second this motion, and I encourage Members that the motion moved by Hon. Jovah Kamateeka, for a resolution of Parliament to congratulate Hon. Abbas Agaba is a motion not in vain. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker. May God bless you, and may you win the election. Although they said there is no campaign, but I will pray for you to win the election. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

7.22 
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank Hon. Jovah Kamateeka, once again, for moving a very important motion congratulating our brother, Hon. Abbas Agaba, on his honorary doctorate award.

It is so rare to have this title and the title is not given for the sake of it. It is given after critically analysing and knowing that the recipient of the award is merited. 

To have this title is a tug of war. That is why in a special way, I would like to congratulate Hon. Abbas Agaba, for attaining this very important title. Very few people on earth do have it. If this rare title was to be given anyhow, Uganda, as a country, would have so many people with it. We, however, have very few people with it. 

In the same vein, let me also congratulate you for attaining two honorary doctorates. This is so great and encouraging. I have known Hon. Abbas Agaba for many years and we have been together. Looking at his lobbying capacity, I think the man is gifted and God knows why he brought him on earth; God knows why he is using him in that.

To lobby and get more scholarships whereby many Ugandans - as stated by Hon. Anywarach - to have more than 20 students studying outside the country on scholarship is quite serious. Honourable Member, we appreciate you so much for that. 
Madam Speaker, hard work pays; you may be working, unaware that one day one time, God will pay you at a very rare opportunity.

The honourable member used to work in his area, mobilise communities, work with the youth and he did not know that one day and one time, God would award him for what he has been doing and is still doing.

On this occasion, I have taken a very serious lesson from Hon. Abbas Agaba. You need to work for the people and mobilise for them - when you are working, do not mind what kind of payment you will get; God always knows how to reward you.

On a special note, my brother, I would like to congratulate and encourage you, since you are still young, to consider enrolling for the academic PHD; it is very possible. Now that you have the honorary doctorate degree, enroll for a doctorate in business studies in any university. 

I pray for the good Lord to bless you; I congratulate you in a special way. Thank you.

7.26
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving us the opportunity to congratulate our own, Hon. Agaba. I would like to congratulate him personally and I can only say two things: One is that when we talk about securing the future of Uganda, this is an assured way of realising that. Prepare them in terms of education; you will secure their future. 

I urge you to do two things:	to ensure that in the scholarships you mobilise, you consider the girl child. Do not only take care of the boy child. Make sure both the boys and girls go together so that you prepare their future together.

Two, I would want you to take a closer look at the plight of brilliant children in Northern Uganda, who do not have the opportunity to join any institution of higher learning. It is very important that Hon. Olanya or any of us take you to the north so you can have a look at the situation there and also give them opportunity.

I appreciate particularly your power of lobbying and I think you are the kind of person we need in order to help us enrich education in our society. May God bless you!

7.28
MR LAWRENCE AKUGIZIBWE (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in congratulating Hon. Dr Abbas Agaba upon this achievement. Hon. Agaba is the Vice Chairperson of the Tooro MPs Forum, for which I am the Secretary. We have achieved a lot together with his leadership.

He is a hard-working person. No wonder he achieved this. Hon. Agaba, I would like congratulate and also thank you for joining our class because I also hold a PhD in Agriculture and Rural Innovations, which I attained last year.

I also encourage you to take up an academic course, which can lead you into having an academic PhD and I thank you for helping the financially disadvantaged children because I know how hard it is for some students to get tuition to go to school. I, myself, went through hardships to be able to go to school because I come from a very humble family. So, I thank you for helping the financially disadvantaged children.

I request that you do not stop there. Continue helping and by doing so, you will also be helping the community, the nation and more blessings will come from God to you; you will achieve greater heights.

It is also very important to us as Ugandans to have you as the first person to achieve this kind of recognition. It gives us a lot of pride; we are proud of you and pray for you to achieve more and more for this country. Thank you.

7.30
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also join my colleagues to congratulate Hon. Abbas Agaba upon attaining this level, which has come due to his hard work.

I knew Hon. Abbas Agaba when I was a youth councillor then and he was also the Vice Chairperson of the National Youth League for the National Resistance Movement. So, his work had started a long time ago because at the time we elected him, we realised he could manage. It is hard work that has taken him to this level. 

I would like to thank the university that recognised him. I do not know whether our Government also has this kind of arrangement. We have so many people who have done great things but only see recognition in terms of medals; I do not hear them saying or talking about somebody.

The other day we were recognising Dr Epodoi and according to what people said about him, he had done so many other nice things only that this broke the record.

Hon. Abbas Agaba has been hardworking, very humble and takes time to look at things. I remember he used to help in mobilising us to organise the youth in our districts to make sure they make bricks, encouraging us to do fish farming and helping us to connect and get the people who could fund us, doing carpentry and so on.

I am happy that we met again in this House and I have been watching him; he deserved this. 

Getting scholarships for these many students - I remember from Gulu, Bugiri and other places - though he did not get for us in Kanungu, he did a great job because these are all Ugandans. It is not easy at that level and up to now, you are still doing the same. May the good Lord bless you very much.

I pray that you continue helping Ugandans. You are out of Parliament now but I know you will have a lot of time to do other things to help and connect, for the sake of our people. So, I urge you, Hon. Dr Abbas Agaba Mugisha to continue lobbying since you have the time and connections. Continue to lobby for our children for the pride of Uganda. I congratulate you. I thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, let me also give my testimony that I have known Hon. Abbas Agaba in many capacities but firstly, as a leader among the youth. He was very active within our party. 

I want to also give testimony that he has been hard at work together with his colleagues to sustain the momentum of the Africa Arab Youth Council. It was started with two pillars. One pillar was President Museveni, the other pillar was President Gadhafi. One pillar is there; the other pillar is not there. 

That notwithstanding, Hon. Abbas Agaba worked very hard with his colleagues to sustain the momentum and ensure that the organisation continues running. I have worked with him to promote participation to ensure that the Head of State remembers the obligations. I think this was a well-deserved accolade and we wish him well in his other endeavours. 

7.35
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kamwenge): Thank you very much. I thought I should say one or two words. One is to express thanks to you, Madam Speaker, for first of all, allowing Parliament to recognise and congratulate me for this achievement.

Secondly, I thank you, for the journey we have walked with you so far. As a mentor, we are walking in your footsteps and I thank you, for guiding us through this. 

I would like to thank my colleagues for the kind words you have spoken. It is a new experience I am getting. We have had experiences, where we sit to eulogise our colleagues when they have passed on. We have not had very many to applaud our colleagues when they have succeeded. I am very grateful for this gesture.

Madam Speaker, how did this award come? Many people there – The other day, I was with Hon. Kulaigye and he asked me, “How did you end up there because I think there are many deserving Ugandans who are not there? How do they end up there?” I received a call from a Professor friend of mine, who is a Nigerian, called Prof. Anumaka Ijeoma, who asked me a few questions; whether I had a Master’s degree and I answered in the positive. 

She knew I was a Member of Parliament and then said, “Send me your Curriculum vitae (CV). I want to nominate you for this award.” I sent her my CV, which she sent to the Switzerland School of Business and Management and the Senate perused through. They teleconferenced with me and asked me a few questions. I thought I should share those questions with the House. 

Firstly, they asked me about my time as RDC because I had indicated it in the CV. In the CV, you put so many things that you think are of value and then you add a few things for the sake. I said that I used to offer classes to students, when I was RDC. They asked me, “Was this an obligation of the office?” I said, “No”. “So, how did you end up doing it?” 

When I went to Serere as RDC, they transferred teachers from Kampala to village schools to go and teach. The one who was supposed to teach Chemistry in St Elizabeth Kidetok in Serere refused to come because he did not want to go to the village. Here I was in the village, where the teacher did not want to go to. I was an RDC but I am a trained teacher of Chemistry and Biology.

When I went to inspect the school to know how they were doing, I discovered that the class was not attended because the teacher had not accepted to go to the village. I spoke to the head teacher and they gave me some lessons. Within my time as RDC, I fixed some few classes to deal with Senior Three and Senior Four students.

I was happy at the time I left because they were very happy about that contribution. That is why Hon. Anywarach is talking of those who even used to come home to stay with me because they used to come from far places. That is the interaction they had with me.

The second interaction they had with me was about some of the students we helped to get scholarships outside Uganda. They studied in China, Cuba and Algeria. They asked me how I did this. I engaged with the embassies because at that time, Madam Speaker, I remember I was chairman of the NRM Youth League at national level.

While I spoke to the embassies, in negotiating with them, they asked me to identify some of those bright students but financially unable and we got many of those who would not get Government scholarships in public universities. 

What we did was to take them there. They would do interviews and if they passed, then they would go to study in those countries for free. Some of them have come back here. Some are doctors, others are engineers. The fact that we would spot an opportunity for them, take it up and use it, was a great opportunity. I thank them for that.

Finally, while I was RDC in Butaleja, I one time stopped around Nakaloke and went for my prayers in one of the mosques. I prayed on Friday. After prayers, I found somebody who knew me as RDC for Butaleja and introduced me to the congregation. When I spoke, I had nothing to offer. I did not have to offer anything but asked them if they had a girl child who had finished senior six and had done sciences.

They found one. I took her to the Cuban embassy to do interviews. She did not pass well but I tried to make sure that I at least did something for her. So, I negotiated with the leadership of Kampala International University to give her a full scholarship and they gave her a nursing course. The other day, she completed her studies and they invited me for a party. I am very happy that I was able to do something for her and the community.

I am grateful, Madam Speaker. Thank you for honouring me. I thank the people of Kitagwenda, who gave me the opportunity to be a Member of Parliament because these people needed a person active in community service and being a Member of Parliament meant that I am dealing with the community. I think it is one of the reasons I made it through and they considered me. I thank the people of Kitagwenda for this term that they gave me to serve them.

I also thank the President for mentoring me, giving me opportunity and exposing me. Of course, I have been telling you the story of teaching while I was RDC. If the President had not appointed me as RDC, maybe I would be somewhere doing something else; maybe I would not have got this.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I thank the Senate of the Swiss School of Business and Management for finding me worthy of this honour; the first Ugandan. I am grateful. I hope and pray that other Ugandans will be able to get it. 

I would like to also thank Prof. Anumaka Ijeoma, who was able to spot me and nominated me. May this achievement add value to our young people in this country for their future. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. You can see it is very inspiring. I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that this House do recognise and congratulate Hon. Abbas Agaba upon this achievement.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion, adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Members, I think we have done quite a bit today. I thank you very much, especially for staying up to this time. House adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.43 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 13 April 2021 at 2.00 p.m.) 

