
Wednesday, 20 April 2016

Parliament met at 2.43 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you all to this afternoon sitting. I will begin by amending the Order Paper slightly to permit the Minister of Finance, to lay the corrigendum of the draft budget estimates for Financial Year 2016/2017.

I also would like to inform members-elect, who will be sworn-in on the 16th, 17th and 18 May 2016, that they will only be accompanied by a maximum of five people. They should, therefore, not bring buses of voters from their constituencies – only five will be allowed to come to the podium. That is for all of them to note and definitely for Parliament to prepare.

I have noted that we have been receiving annual reports from a number of commissions and many of them have not been considered. I, therefore, would like to advise that the clerks assist by including them in the system, so that when the new committees commence, they will be considered in their work plan. These annual reports need to be considered despite the fact that their concentration may be on the budget and the Bills. 

It is important to note that there are important things that come out of those annual reports of these commissions. Therefore, the clerks should note that they need to be considered in the Tenth Parliament.

2.46
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an important issue related to Ugandans that end up abroad because of companies or individuals, who have recruited them and facilitated them to travel to different countries, especially in the Middle East and end up in detention centres.

Some of them end up conscripted as prostitutes and their passports confiscated. One of the incidents that have just come to the attention of the women’s caucus and also raised to you, Madam Speaker, is that about the 12 girls who are in detention in Saudi Arabia.

Ugandan girls have been held in detention in Saudi Arabia and we require urgent attention and intervention from Government. I am praying that the Prime Minister – I can see the two deputy prime ministers present. The ones we have managed to get their names are: Kagoya Sawuya, Naigaga Sharua, Namuyiga Teopista, Kyabagangye Hadijah, Nakamya Latifah, Nakku Zam Zam, Nabukalu Aisha, Nakitto Rebecca, Sarah and Shadia Namayanja. Beyond these, we have been told that 12 others are also in some detention and they cannot access medical services.

Experiences from other countries have indicated that in circumstance like these, in countries where you cannot have legal representation, it would be through the engagement of state to state, through the foreign embassy and our embassy that can lead to some kind of arrangement where they can be deported.

These people are ready to come back. We are, therefore, asking for Government intervention urgently on this issue and others that still remain unattended to. I beg to request that your Chair requests Government to pledge before this House on when they can take action and what action they are able to take to rescue these girls. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable prime ministers and the members of the Cabinet and colleagues, I received two phone calls from those girls and they told me that the ambassador of Ghana went and took away his people and returned them to Ghana. The one of Kenya did the same and it is only ours who are still there at large.

I know that we did not budget for this but I think that there are too many incidents of this kind. I do not know what we are going to do because they have to come back. They need tickets and other such facilities to bring them back. I, therefore, would like to appeal to the Government that these are our citizens – I do not know but we may have to create a fund for rescuing distressed Ugandans. They are really in distress. They have called twice in two days, asking for help. I hope the Prime Minister will be able to say something.

2.48
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the supply of salt in the market. Our communities are eating salt that may not be good for their health.

Some days back, we did an experiment after receiving the information from the community that the salt that they are buying from the market, if put it in water, it has some particles that do not dissolve. This means that our people’s lives are in a terrible risk.

I have a sample of the salt and I would like to lay it on the Table. We need to investigate, examine and experiments will be done. If you look at the names of the salt, we have one written on “Pure Refined Salt”. This is packed by Malindi Salt Work Limited, Mombasa, Kenya.

We also have one called “Bahari Refined Iodinated Salt Premium Sea Salt”. I experimented it myself. I put it in water and afterwards, I found very many hard and stiff particles remaining undissolved. We failed to understand the cause of this. This means that our people’s lives are at risk. I, therefore, would like to lay on the Table the sample of the packet of salt written on, “Bahari Iodinated Edible Salt” from Mombasa. I beg to lay.

Another one that we have is “Pure Refined Salt” packed by Malindi Salt Work Limited, Mombasa. I beg to lay. These are the three different types of salt that we managed to get and if you move in various shops in different districts, this is the kind of salt our people normally survive on. I am very sure that even us the Members of Parliament also eat this type of salt. We need a serious investigation into this matter. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Fortunately, the Minister of Trade and Industry is here. She might want to say something.

2.53
THE MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker, I have taken note. I pray that I get a sample from hon. Olanya and take it for testing to UNBS. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister.

2.55
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. This regards the validation exercise of civil servants that is ongoing in Kololo. This process started last week and is supposed to end by the end of this month. 

Madam Speaker, I have received complaints since this process started from people who come from Arua; who have had to spent more than four days, with little budget for accommodation in Kampala. By yesterday, the pavilion at Kololo Airstrip had been turned into a lodge - our teachers and some of our districts civil servants spent the night at Kololo Pavilion.

The situation is getting out of hand; there is no properly laid out programme indicating whether people are supposed to report by district or by region. The whole country was just invited and yet the manpower on ground cannot handle the crowd that has descended on Kololo – recently, that place had been turned into a barracks. 

The situation in Kololo, if Government does not do something, will degenerate into a catastrophe that we will not be able to contain as a country; bear in mind that those people are our civil servants, who have to deliver services back home. I call upon the Government and particularly the Leader of Government Business to see to it that something is done to address the situation in Kololo. I thank you.

2.58
MR HATWIB KATOTO (NRM, Katerera County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance.  During this time last year, the people of Katerera County, in Katanda Sub County, Rubirizi District were hit by hailstorm which broke down scores of buildings and destroyed gardens. 

When I reported the incidence to the Minister of Relief and Disaster Preparedness, he told me to write a letter. Madam Speaker, I wrote to the minister a letter and he assured me that the goods, including iron sheets and maize flour, would be delivered. But when I demanded for them, he informed that the President had directed him to send these things to Soroti.

It looks as if the people of Katerera are not Ugandans given the way they are suffering. Even surviving these elections was not easy as that particular incidence affected me. I had to buy iron sheets using my own money and give to the people.

Madam Speaker, in the same month, last week, the people of Kyabakara were also hit by hailstorm. The police post which we had constructed with the help of the community also went down. Another primary school was also destroyed by the hailstorm. The pupils of the destroyed primary school are now studying under trees. I would like to inquire whether people from certain regions are more important than others. We have talked time and again, but people say, “It is because Museveni comes from those areas” and our people continue to suffer.

Therefore, I would like to inquire from the minister whether the people of Katerera and other areas in western Uganda are not Ugandans; my people are suffering. When you report it to the concerned people, they say they will deliver yet the next day, they say things are being taken to Soroti, to their constituencies after you have applied for them. We would like to know, whether the people of Katerera and the Rubirizi District as a whole are considered Ugandans? 

This is a serious issue because people are now sleeping outside. As I talk – you also know that we were hit by the previous elections.  We do not have anything to offer them and yet people are dying. Should I go and borrow from banks so that I can save my people? Government should do something to that effect. I would like to task the Government and the Minister of Relief and Disaster Preparedness to come to the rescue of the people of Katerera. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I direct the Minister of Relief and Disaster Preparedness to go to Katerera, establish the state of damage and assist the people.

3.00
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the Ugandan traders whose trucks and goods were looted and burnt during the political violence in Kenya.

When these people approached the Kenyan Government, they were requested to compute the loss that was occasioned to them. They computed the loss and it came up to $ 47 million. The Kenyan Government promised to pay the Ugandan traders and they have, since 2010, been moving from office to office looking for the payment but up to date, no one has come to their rescue. 

These Ugandan transporters had mortgaged their assets in a bid to secure trucks for transport. Their assets are threatened to be sold by banks in order to recover the amount of money that was lend to them. They are requesting your Chair, Madam Speaker, to come to their rescue so that the Kenyan Government, as it had promised, can be able to pay them so that they can also be able to pay the banks and rescue their assets. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. I see the Minister for Regional Cooperation. I do not know if they can say something about the traders who have not been compensated for many years. 

3.00
THE MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker, I pray that I dig out that report and we hold bilateral talks with my colleagues in Kenya and see whether we can pave the way forward with the Ministry of East African Affairs.

THE SPEAKER: In the meantime, what do you do about the banks which are threatening their assets?

MS KYAMBADDE: Can you give me one week? I will get back to you Madam Speaker – (Interjection) - yes, to get the report. We have to first get the report and we review it.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mawanda, can you give the honourable minister the names of the companies?

MR MAWANDA: I can give her the report even today.

MS KYAMBADDE: Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. On the issue of the enrolment at Kololo, I do not see the internal affairs people here.

3.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Ms Sezi Mbaguta): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The question is about the exercise that is being undertaken in Kololo, regarding those who were not registered when we were registering civil servants for the pay roll cleaning. 

The exercise was conducted by the Auditor-General and 95 per cent of it was done. We came to realise that there were civil servants that were not registered. They did not turn up when the auditor staff were in the districts.

We have opened up a window for those civil servants that did not register at that time for the validation exercise. We anticipated that the numbers were not going to be as overwhelming as it is today. 

The exercise is supposed to end on the 29th April in preparation for cleaning the payroll and removing those who will not have registered. That registration did take the facial picture as well as a thumb print. 

Also liaising with the identification exercise we have established that some of them did not go for ID registration. And we requested the Ministry of Internal Affairs to open up a window for them to also take that registration.

We have worked with the CAOs of districts - the CAOs have been sending their staff who were not validated with their own transport to Kampala. On our part as a ministry, we have expanded the staff that will do that work.

Secondly, we have asked Face Technology which did the exercise before to increase the kits that are being used to take those pictures of individuals and also validate them for the payroll.

The numbers increased as of yesterday and we have had to increase the number of staff that is taking the exercise. In that particular group of civil servants, there are the disabled, the nursing mothers, those who are expecting and I would like to assure you that those categories are being given priority in the exercise.

We are reviewing the deadline and we have asked our officers to work into the wee hours of the night to complete those who may have reported at the centre in the day.

We shall look at the progress and we may be able to review and extend it for those who may not have been captured because it is a very important exercise for removing ghosts from our payroll.

Any person, who will not have registered and linked up with the national identity card, possibly shall be removed on 1st July for the new financial year. We shall make that assumption that they are not in the civil service. The exercise is for cleaning our payroll. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LABOUR, EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL Relations (Mr Kamanda Bataringaya): Madam Speaker, on the issue of the 12 Ugandan girls who are being detained and also whose passports have been taken away in Saudi Arabia, first of all, I am very grateful that my colleague hon. Betty Amongi, has brought this to our attention. A few months ago, we had a similar problem but we brought these girls back. And I would like to assure you that once you give me those details, we shall work hand in hand with Ambassador Semuddu to make sure that the 12 girls are brought back home.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE DATA PROTECTION AND PRIVACY BILL, 2015

3.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Data Protection and Privacy Bill, 2015” be read for the first time. And it is accompanied by the Certificate of Financial Implications from the Ministry of Finance.


THE SPEAKER: The Bill will be sent to the committee of ICT but it is coming in the closing stages of this Parliament- but it will go to the committee and they should report back.

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a request by Government to borrow up to $ 11.32 million from the Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development to finance the construction of the 33 KV and 11KV distribution projects in six districts of Uganda, namely Kiryandongo, Kibaale, Nebbi, Bushenyi, Kasese and Rukungiri. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee of National Economy for perusal and report back.  

3.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay the corrigenda to the draft budget estimates for the financial year 2016/2017.

THE SPEAKER: I send it to the committee on finance for perusal and report back. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I have a procedural issue. A corrigendum means you are amending the budget. Now committees have finished and if you bring the corrigenda it means it must go back to all committees. How are we going to handle it now?

THE SPEAKER: I have not looked at the details. Let it go to the committee then they will advise us. If they are not able to include it, they tell us and we stay with the old figures. The chairperson of the committee of ICT, please give us only the highlights in a few minutes.

3.13
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County West, Kibaale): Madam Speaker, I am standing in for the chairperson of the committee. And I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Committee of Information and Communication Technology on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the Financial Year 2016/2017. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: You have no highlights for us? Is there anything you want us to take an interest in? Okay, it is sent to the committee on budget.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Speaker, we presented to the committee of budget and we were told that the procedure was amended-because in the interest to catch-up with the remaining time that we shall just come and lay on the Table the report. Those who are interested can read the report and raise issues later. However, for the benefit of the House, I will just run through small summaries that are contained in the report. 

THE SPEAKER: You have 10 minutes. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

The committee of ICT examined the budget estimates and the ministerial policy statements for the five spending agencies which are vote 020, vote 126 and three other parastatals: Uganda Communications Commission, Uganda Institute of ICT and Uganda Posta Limited. The committee made the following observations which spread from page 8 and we begin with the Bill, which has been laid on the Table; the Data Protection and Privacy Bill.

The committee recommended that a Bill be laid before Parliament and it has been laid. On the communications tribunal, ICT under UCC recommended that the minister should liaise with the President and Judicial Service Commission to make sure that a judge is appointed who will head the UCC tribunal.

On a national post code and addressing system, we recommended as a committee that ICT establishes a legal framework for the implementation of a national post code and addressing system that is explicit in terms of roles of the key stakeholders. This legal framework will be specific on which entities will implement the national post code and address system.

On internet governance; we recommended that Shs 200 million be reallocated from the non-wage recurrent category of National Information Technology Authority (NITAU) vote 126 to non-wage recurrent budget category of vote 020. The Ministry of ICT should ensure that the activities regarding the country’s top-level domain are fully implemented.

Madam Speaker, the observations and the recommendations continue up to – those who are interested can read further, because we have little time -(Interjection)- do not say, “Ah” I am saving your time. 

Term Agenda 

Madam Speaker, the committee calls upon Government to consider ICT as a priority in stimulating the socioeconomic transformation. The ICT sector continues to be one of the fast growing key primary growth sectors and, therefore, adequate funding of the sector will spa economic transformation and development in the country. I now move that considering the observations and recommendations of this committee, Parliament appropriates the following estimates for the respective ministries, departments and spending agencies.
 
Madam Speaker, allow me to read our proposals. Vote 020: Ministry of ICT and Communication Technology; our committee proposed that for the recurrent budget expenditure, this House approves Shs 6,900,621,000. And for the development budget expenditure, which is on page 36, for those who have their iPads, the committee proposes that this House appropriates Shs 2,772,403,000. 

Vote 126: National Information Technology Authority (NITAU), our committee proposes that this House appropriates recurrent expenditure of Shs 46,230,505,000. It also proposes that this House appropriates development expenditure of Shs 23,792,953,000.

Parastatals:
Uganda Communications Commissions, the Committee of ICT proposes to this House to appropriate recurrent expenditure of Shs 44,700,000,000. Development expenditure, we propose that this House appropriates Shs 48,700,000,000. 

Posta Uganda: recurrent expenditure, the Committee of ICT proposes that this House appropriates Shs 20,053,000,000. On development expenditure, the committee proposes that this House appropriates Shs 19,733,000,000. Madam Speaker, I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much honourable chairperson. That report will be sent to the Budget Committee to facilitate appropriation on the 28 April 2016 as we had planned.

REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2016/2017

3.25
MS GRACE KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Madam Speaker, I stand to give a report of the committee of Public Service and Local Government on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the Financial Year 2016/2017. With me, I have a copy and minutes of the above and I beg to lay them on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Read the highlights, but not the whole report.

MS KWIYUCWINY: Madam Speaker, I would like to give some highlights and I will start with the Ministry of Public Service which to date does not have a strategic plan aligned to NDP II and we recommended that this should be urgently done.

Secondly, we also have concern about acting and vacant positions in local governments and I would like to highlight that there are 32 positions for chief administrative officers, 20 for town clerks, 1,175 vacant positions for agriculture extension workers at district level and 2,847 vacant positions at sub county level.

We recommend that Ministry of Public Service lifts the ban on recruitment and provide money for local governments to ensure that these positions are filled and confirmed. They should also review the hard-to-reach and pay allowance policy should not be taxed.

We were concerned about the outstanding payments of Public Service in regard to salary arrears, pension and outstanding payments to former leaders. We recommended payment of Shs 47,134,634,661 billion to clear salary outstanding arrears. We further recommended Shs 103 billion for the former leaders.

We recommend that the Ministry of Public Service should continue with the establishment of salary and remuneration commission because this is the only way to attract and retain competent, and motivated workers and to also promote fairness and equity in pay in the service. 

Concerning Public Service Commission, there is no space for working; they share everything like washrooms and we have been for the last three years requesting Government to provide money for them to construct their own houses. However, having failed for the last three years, we recommended that Government engages a contractor under preferably Public Private Partnership to construct offices for all commissions throughout the country.

The Public Service Commission requested Shs 800 million to train district service commissions, but honourabale members, this may sound interesting to you; the following district service commissions are not paid - Luweero, Kibaale, Lyantonde and Wakiso - a retainer fee of between Shs 200,000 to 210,000. Agago, Amuru, Bukedea, Bukomansimbi, Bulambuli, Ibanda, Kabale, Kalangala, Kalungu, Lira, Luka, Mitooma, Toronto, Ssembabule and Buvuma do not pay the district service commission at all.

This is breeding corruption and inefficiency in the district service commission. We recommended that all commissions be paid Shs 250,000 as retainer fee and the chairperson should be paid Shs 2 million as salary.

For the local governments, we found that the core function of routine inspection and supervision is not funded at all; they left it as an unfunded priority. We see this as being unfair; the ministry of finance should provide funds to local governments for inspection.

We also got concerned that the LCI and II elections have not been conducted and there is no mention about it. This shows lack of commitment to decentralization and democracy.
We have just been informed from the Electoral Commission that they only have Shs 7.3 billion and so they cannot –(Interjection)- that is the balance of the money they have to carry out elections. 

We recommended that Government should immediately pronounce itself on the timeline of LCI and II elections, and also benchmark on political grassroots leadership around the world in order to avoid high cost of conducting LC elections.

Concerning creation of cities, municipalities and town councils, we are eagerly waiting for the study on cities; but we note with concern that out of 24 town councils created, 13 come from western, three from eastern, four from central and zero from northern Uganda.

We recommended that this move should have been halted until a criterion is presented and regionally balanced.

We also recommended that the study report on town councils which were promoted to municipalities should be brought to Parliament so that we can scrutinize it. Out of the municipalities that were created, eight town councils qualified; these include: Adjumani, Kyotera, Kihihi, Luweero, Paidha, Sironko, Kyenjojo and Lyantonde. We think the above also qualify and should be promoted.

Unfunded priorities: Madam Speaker, we think unfunded priorities have become a wish list and we have a long list of unfunded priorities. However, concerning this, we recommended that any unfunded priority must be a critical activity which should be immediately absorbed into the main budget within two years or else it ceases to be a priority.

Nonetheless, we recommended the unfunded priorities for funding; physical planning in urban council, VAT for markets for MATIP (Markets, Agriculture and Trade Improvement Project) and CAIIP, additional chairpersons bicycles LCI and II, routine inspection in local governments and monthly payments to sub county and town council councillors and induction of newly elected local government councillors. 

We discovered that local revenue enhancement is being given a new face by funds from USAID and World Bank. We recommended that this move be expedited.

However, we did not understand why Government committed itself to transfer funds accruing from one per cent of Value Added Tax to local government. To date, no funds similar to that have been given to local government. We would like to ask Government to revisit its decision or explain to us why it is not respecting its own decision.

Concerning local government finance commission, we noted that Government revoked the following licenses: Annual bicycle licenses, purchased produce and fish licenses. This used to bring in some income to local governments and on average it used to collect Shs 58,731,676 million. 

After analysis, we found that over the years the local governments have been denied an amount to the tune of Shs 54,91,873,374 billion and we requested Government to allocate that. Government should also plan and ensure that there is compensation for all local revenue sources that have been abolished.

We were also concerned that the Local Government Finance Commission always asks for fund for study. A recent study was done in 2012 to conduct a review on physical decentralization strategy, make recommendations and design Uganda’s inter-governmental physical decentralization architecture and propose measures to enhance the significance of local revenues.

However, they had asked for another study but we said this study report should first be urgently laid before Parliament for scrutiny before they can go for another study. 

The Local Government Finance Commission staff or salary structure is weak compared to other commissions and Government institutions. They are asking for Shs 1,718,586,736 to improve on their salaries.

The local government funding is still skewed towards expenditures of wages and wage recurrent to the tune of 85 per cent and only 14.8 per cent for development. We think this should change but above all, Government should fix 38 per cent of the national budget to be provided to the local governments.

In conclusion, I would like to summarise the following and recommend to this House for approval:

Vote 005: Ministry of Public Service, a total of Shs 27,241,887,000

Vote 146: Public Service Commission, a total of Shs 5,736,644,000

Vote 011: Ministry of Local Government, a total of Shs 232,273,616,000

Vote 147: Local Government Finance Commission, a total of Shs 5,183,375,000

Votes 501-778: All local governments, a total of Shs 2,696,400,000,000

I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson and the Committee on Public Service and Local Government. We send it to the Committee on Budget for perusal and report back.

MR KWIZERA: Madam Speaker, we have the Order Paper and item no.4 is laying of papers. I do not know if laying of papers would require that these reports be read. We need to be guided properly, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Are you not interested in the contents of the reports? You are interested in the routine of laying?

MR KWIZERA: Madam Speaker, we do not know if what they are laying calls for some clarification. Could I seek some clarification after they have presented?

THE SPEAKER: I thought that is what we are doing. Seek the clarification. If they just lay and go away, you will not know what they have said in those reports. That is why I said, “Give some highlights.”

3.36
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to make a brief comment on the Public Service report. 

This country has deliberately refused to listen to the civil servants and as a result, all MDAs; ministries, departments and agencies of Government have what we call “hidden pay”. Of recent, this Parliament has suffered “hidden pay” and they have attracted taxation.

If Government had realised what appropriate pay is, people would not be having conflicts. An example is in the Electoral Commission. Since staff are paid poorly, the accounting officer decided to give 29 days out-of-station allowance to each staff. When he appeared before the Public Accounts Committee, we said, “You are giving an enhanced pay in form of days out of station. When do they work?” 

The Ministry of Public Service and Government should not condone “hidden pay” in Public Service because if you encourage “hidden pay”, you will attract taxes. In this case, Article 21 of the Constitution talks about equality before the law in economy and other spheres of life. Therefore, I do not know how some people are going to dodge paying tax. Others will pay tax when some ministries can create fear or build influence. 

For example, judges can create fear and they are exempted from pay. They are then paid while hiding their pay and when Members of Parliament say, “Let us also hide our pay,” they are attacked by the public.

That is why I think that Government should take this up and make sure that they pay people adequately and that they stop condoning “hidden pay”. Thank you.

3.40
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee on Local Government and Public Service. 

I would like to address myself to the creation of the new town councils. In eastern Uganda, I can only see two districts and Mbale is asking for two town councils. Like the committee observed, in my new constituency I have two big town councils, which are coming up. I know that the chairman LCV and the council of Katakwi wrote to the Ministry of Local Government. I wonder why Katakwi’s new town councils, which were recommended to the ministry, are not included on the list.

I would like to know what criteria were used to choose Busiu, Nabumali and Magamaga as the only town councils to be created in the entire eastern region. There are also other areas within the eastern region, which I know are more developed.

Secondly, in line with the existing town councils, for example, Katakwi Town Council, I have failed to know how the Ministry of Local Government is planning to address the issue of enhancement of this town council to have better services within its areas of jurisdiction. A case in point is that the town council does not even have an abattoir or a garbage truck. What is the Ministry of Local Government doing to address the capacity of the already existing town councils?

Another area is that of water facilities and I am addressing myself particularly to Katakwi. A jerrycan of water within Katakwi Town Council costs Shs 200; it costs more than in urban areas. My question is, if Government connects this water and these are poor people, why should Government allow its service providers to charge these poor people Shs 200 per jerrycan?

I really want the Ministry of Local Government to help me understand that. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable Prime Minister – I think he is busy. (Laughter) Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you have three minutes.

3.43
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I did not know that the procedure had changed. Otherwise, I had some issues on ICT because it is the backbone of any country now but we are still lagging behind. Maybe at the budget committee time we shall look at it.

On the Public Service Commission and the district service commissions, we have a problem of people selling jobs. Recently, a woman approached me. She is a graduate with an upper second degree and had applied to a certain district for the post of a parish chief. She was asked for Shs 2 million. How much will that person earn to be able to pay back Shs 2 million? The moment the job is sold, it means that the moment the person gets the job, he or she must steal to compensate for the lost money and in the process, the stealing becomes bigger and is re-institutionalised.

Who vets these people at the district service commissions? If it is only the district, I think that the Public Service Commission should interest itself in the functions of the district service commissions. After people have sat interviews, there should be another clearing level like the Public Service Commission. There are so many districts with un-filled vacancies because people are still looking for money to have them filled and yet we are crying over unemployment. This should be taken up by Government as a serious issue.

My second point is on the remuneration board or commission. I think that this is overdue. Recently, I met somebody in a ministry who sits with another colleague. He told me, “The colleague I am sitting with, who is my junior, has a salary that is person-to-holder.” He earns Shs 8 million and yet this person, who is under the public service, earns Shs 700,000. Can you believe this? 

Who are these people whose salary is person-to-holder? I think that if a person is a permanent secretary let the public service pay them well instead of having situations of person-to-holder. We cannot have commissioners who are person-to-holder and others who are not.

I think that this board should be established by this financial year to ensure that the remuneration for civil servants is streamlined as quickly as possible because it will reduce corruption. As it is, those who are underpaid find a way of paying themselves so that they can bridge the gap of missing resources.

Finally, there is poor service delivery because of the public service. Unless the public service institutes mechanisms to deal with service delivery, we are in problems. 

I listened to my honourable brother from Katakwi talking about water and garbage trucks. This is service delivery. If the Public Service does not do an assessment to know how services are supposed to be delivered, who is supposed to deliver them and how to evaluate staff - Even those in the Ministry of Water, still fall under the public service. 

The public service must have a mechanism of evaluating staff, which would depend on how services are delivered. If we fail to do that, I can tell you that we shall continue singing about poor service delivery – (Member timed out.)  

THE SPEAKER: I thank you. Honourable members, the main debate will take place when the Committee on Budget reports. This time is for comments.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The chairperson clearly articulated the concerns of the committee, which I share where out of 24 town councils, in the case of the northern region, there is not even one town council and yet we have very many proposed town councils submitted as far back as five years ago.

I would like clarification from the chairperson on the proposed approval he read asking for the total amounts that we should approve for the ministry. However, I am sure that the ministry had already contextualised the 24 town councils, which we feel is not equally balanced. 

Does that figure include the 24? If it does, I would like to move that in tandem with your recommendation, it is halted until a thorough investigation is done and the balance is brought. You should have been able to exclude the figure that would be in tandem with the 26. May I know whether the figure you read included the 24, as proposed by the ministry or you excluded it?

MS KWIYUCWINY: I thank you, Madam Speaker, and hon. Betty Amongi. The figures that I read for local government include the 24 newly created town councils.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if we have objections to those 24, when we come for appropriation – today is not appropriation, they are just telling us what they have requested for. Keep your figures in mind and on 28 April, you can move for a reduction. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, the programme that we were supposed to follow originally has now changed and yet we have a fixed calendar as to when we have to present the figures for supply.

Today I think only four sectoral reports are being laid on the Table and yet we have about 14 sectoral committees. Tomorrow is Thursday and I do not think that we are returning here on Friday and yet the Committee on Budget is required to report back on 25th April, which is a Monday. 

I have just realised that we have a crisis of time and I am wondering how the Committee on Budget is going to do miracles to harmonise reports that are not even there yet. I have done some investigations and established that a number of committees are not yet ready. If they are ready then the reports have not been signed. Moreover, there are a lot of inconsistencies between the Budget, as laid on the Table, and what the law says. 

The law says that the Budget shall be consistent with the National Development Plan, the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility and the Budget Framework Paper. You will recall that this House approved the Budget Framework Paper. We have already noted a lot of inconsistencies between the figures we approved and the figures that have been brought here with a number of Votes being terribly disadvantaged.

In view of that, I would like to request the House to allow that the Committee on Budget presents that consolidated report and the harmonised figures for supply on Thursday and Friday. We are, therefore, requesting for an extension of time because we do not have the information from the sectoral committees and considering the procedure that we are going through, it might require three more days for us to get the reports endorsed by the House.   

Secondly, I would like to seek the leave of this House to present a report on the certificates of compliance on gender and equity issues and secondly, the certificate of compliance of NDP-II. 

The Committee on Budget has held meetings with the concerned institutions: the Gender and Equity Commission and the National Planning Authority and realised that there are a number of issues that we need to recommend to the House for the House to pronounce itself on.

Therefore, I am requesting that we present a report to the House tomorrow on these two issues. I thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The power to extend the time lies with us but all I would like to ask is that the committees expedite their activities and report back. We shall give you time except that we are working on a very tight programme. We have just learnt that the Budget will be read on 2nd June so we must have the State of the Nation Address by 31st May. We might have to dissolve the House earlier so there are a lot of things, which are problematic.

3.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I just want to make clarification on the statement you have made regarding the date for reading the Budget. 

It is true that there is some communication that came to your office but I wanted to say that the ministers of finance in East Africa are still consulting so that we agree on the actual date when the Budget will be read. Therefore, 2nd June is not the date that they have agreed upon and we apologise that that communication came to you. It shouldn’t have. 

THE SPEAKER: You have now caused me to write wrong things to the President. It came from you. We had set our programmes and then suddenly we got communication from you people that the Budget was on 2nd June so we made arrangements to move things. What is the right date?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, the final negotiations on when it should be read by the ministers of finance in the East African region will be held on the day after tomorrow during the summit. It is at that time that we shall communicate the actual date. As I said, we apologise about that communication that came to you, it shouldn’t have come before they finish the consultations.

THE SPEAKER: The jeopardy is the official opening of Parliament but anyway, these are all your businesses.

Honourable members, in the gallery we have a delegation of staff from the Parliament of Ghana. There they are, you are welcome. (Applause) They are attached to the Department of Communication and Public Affairs. They are here to observe our proceedings.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I would like to raise a matter of procedure based on the information given to us by the Chairman of the Budget Committee.

This is the moment that we could guide the committees that have not yet laid their reports on the Table that they must ensure that the figures they are bringing to us are actually aligned to the two important documents that we approved prior to the ministerial policy statement being scrutinised by the various committees. If we do not do that, we will be throwing overboard our own decision to guide the various sectors. 

It appears that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, in their final exercise, completely ignored, in many areas, the guidelines given by Parliament through the Budget Framework Paper. It is important that we look at it because if we do not then we are not in compliance with what we have laid as a procedural matter to follow.

Secondly, the Budget Committee has also raised another issue, which is important and that is the issue of compliance to gender parity. That compliance is equally important. I was extremely nervous about some sectors, including Parliament, which was cited as not being complaint when actually, the compliance was done but the report was given to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which did not issue the certificates.

Therefore, we need to understand the procedure to follow. We are leaving everything to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which is deliberately misguiding us and sometimes, we also do not take the time to scrutinise the law. We are passing some of these documents without understanding the legal implications. 

I think that at this material time, we should guide the committees that have not yet submitted their reports to make sure that they comply with the points raised by the chairman of the Budget Committee and also the issue of compliance with gender equity. It is important that we look at the two documents to make things to move faster. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: So you are in support of the proposal by the budget chairman that he reports first and then we continue with the laying of papers? Is that what you wanted, hon. Lugoloobi?

MR MAGYEZI: Madam Speaker, I do not see how the chairman’s proposal will actually work because he is talking of a consolidated report but that report comes from the reports of the committees. Rule 138 requires that the committees report here and then we send the reports to the Budget Committee. That would be inconsistent with the rules.

What we can do is to give a deadline to the committee chairpersons. They should do what the committees of ICT and Public Service have done today; the bare minimum of laying the report on the Table. We should not go beyond this week so that the Committee on Budget can then proceed to give us a consolidated report next week. Otherwise, it would be inconsistent with our rules.

THE SPEAKER: But you also mentioned compliance with the National Development Plan and you wanted to align that. I do not know what you have to say about that.

MR MAGYEZI: I think that is the responsibility of the committees. They must make sure that the reports they present here are aligned to the NDP and the Budget Framework Paper, as approved. The work of the Chairperson of the Budget Committee is where we have inconsistencies that require realigning to the Budget Framework Paper, as approved.

THE SPEAKER: Let us ask the committees to burn the midnight oil and ensure that all the reports are in by tomorrow.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, what I requested for, which is getting all the sectoral reports by tomorrow, has been responded to. However, secondly we are requesting that we report back on Thursday 27th April. 

THE SPEAKER: But I told you earlier that the power to extend time is here.

MR LUGOLOOBI: But there will still be more time.

THE SPEAKER: If they report tomorrow then you can report next week.

MR LUGOLOOBI: I do not think that I can convene the committee on Saturday and Sunday.

THE SPEAKER: Why not?

MR LUGOLOOBI: They are here; they will let me sit in the committee alone.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have a lot of urgent work. Parliament is closing and we must finish this Budget before the next Parliament is sworn-in. Therefore, I am directing you to work during the weekend.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I would like to get clarification from what the Chairman of the Budget Committee has raised regarding the certificate for compliance to the National Development Plan(NDP) and also the certificate for gender equity. He says that he wants either a report or the certificates to be laid on the Table. I do not understand.

THE SPEAKER: He wants to report to the House on how the ministries have conducted themselves; whether they have complied or not.

MR BAHATI: But those are ready in the certificate.

4.05
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (Buyaga County West, Kibaale): Madam Speaker, when we were scrutinising the ministerial policy statement, I found a major problem with the new system that we passed of considering the Budget before the State of the Nation Address and the Budget Speech. Particularly looking at the fifth year of our term of office, where do we base ourselves, for instance, to do appropriation? 

I thought that when the President reads the State of the Nation Address, it is what he has told Ugandans that he intends to do that particular financial year that we look for in the ministerial policy statement. We also see whether they are in line with what he promised Ugandans. I find the whole procedure a big problem.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you find areas of the law that are not working, we shall amend them but for now, if that is the law then that is what we shall use.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I think the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has misguided the House. He is saying that certificates of compliance have already been issued but that is not true. I think we need to get it clear. There are some sectors, for example works, which are big spenders. They do not have certificates of compliance and the minister knows it.

Now for the minister to stand here and say that certificates of compliance have been given out is not true. We are worried because these are very big spenders, we are putting a lot of money there and they are not complying with our own prescriptions.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, it is very hard to put Mama Cecilia on a point of order and I am not going to do that but I am going to make a clarification.

The National Planning Authority issued a certificate of compliance to the National Development Plan by different sectors and in that, there are institutions, which have not complied and we have them. 

I was looking at the time available to us and whether it would be wise for the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget to come and we discuss those who have not complied or whether we can discuss as we discuss the entire Budget. However, if we have the time, we can do that. I was just looking at the time we have and the procedures. I have not misguided the House whatsoever. I know what I am saying, Madam Cecilia Ogwal. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We shall use the time available to do what we can. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, on the issue of local government, I have given medical leave to the Minister of Local Government as well as the minister of state. You might want to appoint someone to take charge of the affairs here in the House for the rest of this session. Please find time to do it because there is no one to speak for them in this House.

4.13
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): The honourable Minister of State for Public Service is in charge of local government. I do not know why she wants to stay there. I had directed her to sit near me - (Laughter) - but she prefers to stay there. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. We have now noted that there is a minister handling the portfolio of local government.

LAYING OF PAPERS

4.15
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the sectoral Committee on East African Community Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the Ministry of East African Community Affairs for the Financial Year 2016/2017.

I also beg to lay on the Table four sets of the minutes of the meetings of the Committee on East African Community Affairs while considering the Ministry of East African Community Affairs policy statement for the Financial Year 2016/ 2017.

The committee, while scrutinising the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of East African Community Affairs, made recommendations and observations and I wish to highlight a few of them.

Capacity building for MDAs, private sectors on EAC integration
The committee observes that whereas capacity building mechanisms were in place, the ministry has not effectively engaged MDAs and private sectors to enable them mainstream their operations to include aspects of the East African Community integration process.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the ministry should enhance its capacity building programmes with a view of enabling MDAs and private sectors to institutionalise aspects of EAC integration in their operations.

The committee further recommends that MDAs should take the initiative to mainstream their activities to be in conformity with the objectives of the EAC integration process.

Sensitisation
The committee observes that the ministry has not effectively played this role to sensitise and build awareness among different categories of people in the society.

The committee further observes that the ministry has not involved local political leadership structures in its sensitisation and awareness campaign drives. This has kept a large section of the society unaware of the EAC integration process, hence undermining streaming of EAC issues in the routine operations of local communities.

The committee recommends that for effective results, the ministry should enhance its community sensitisation and awareness drive. In addition, the ministry should involve political leadership structures across the country so as to fast track the EAC integration.

The committee further recommends that the ministry should generate information tailored to meet the needs and interests of different actors in the society.

The legal instruments to strengthen the Ministry of East African Community Affairs’ (MEACA) output
The committee was informed that the ministry did not intend to initiate any Bill in the Financial Year 2016/2017 for consideration by Parliament.

The committee noted that MEACA was not clear on which laws to initiate so as to strengthen its mandates and operations.

The committee further noted that the ministry’s mandate was only hinged on the EAC Treaty. This was considered inadequate given that there was need for domestic laws to strengthen the ministry’s mandate and operations.

The committee observes that without a comprehensive legal framework, MEACA’s mission and objectives would not be fully attained.

The ministry has also not been proactive enough to initiate legislation to back up its mandate and demand for compliance from MDAs.

Madam Speaker, I would like to make an amendment that the recommendation for this observation was not included but it is in the minutes. I therefore wish to read it since it had been made in the meeting. 

The committee recommends that the ministry should initiate Bills for legislation in order to strengthen its operations in monitoring, coordination and demand for compliance from MDAs.

High labour turnover in the ministry

The committee observes that the high labour turnover in the ministry was indicative of managerial challenges such as job dissatisfaction, lack of career growth prospects and demotivation, which could not be linked to staff competitiveness.

The committee recommends that:
    a) the ministry should conduct inquiries into the causes of high labour turnover; 
    b) the vacant positions within the ministry should be filled immediately and 
    c) the accounting officer should ensure that staff welfare, motivation and participation in MEACA’s activities are enhanced.

Reduction in wage bill

The committee observed that vacant positions in the ministry had existed for the last four years, thereby giving rise to low absorption capacity of the wage bill. The limited wage bill will not be sufficient to remunerate the yet-to-be-appointed staff. This will automatically demotivate them and give rise to salary arrears.

The committee recommends that:
    a) The ministry should fill up the vacant positions by close of Financial Year 2016/2017, following the Public Service regulations. 
    b) The Ministry of Public Service should also offer explanations for failure to recruit staff for MEACA yet funds for the exercise were released by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Madam Speaker, I would like to highlight one observation on Uganda’s contribution to the EAC Secretariat, organs and institutions.

The committee observed that Uganda’s position and interests in East African integration process were bound to be compromised given the accumulated arrears. Uganda has ranked at the bottom among all EAC partner states with $3,399,699.88 in contribution to EAC Secretariat, organs and institutions. I refer Members to look at the table therein.

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has failed to comply with Parliament’s recommendations contained in the report of the EAC committee of Financial Year 2015/2016 ministerial policy statements that, “Accumulated arrears form part of the key priority areas for funding in the Financial Year 2015/2016 because Uganda was duty-bound to make these contributions”.

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government should increase the ministry’s ceiling to cater for adequate funding as Uganda’s contribution to the EAC Secretariat, organs and institutions.

The committee also reiterates its earlier recommendation in the report of the Financial Year 2014/2015 ministerial policy statement that, “The ministry sets an annual schedule for payments to clear the arrears in a phased manner within the next three financial years.”

Madam Speaker, these are among the observations that Members will look into.

In conclusion, the East African Community Affairs committee proposes that the budgetary proposals in the table below be provided to the ministry for the Financial Year 2016/2017:

Vote 021: Ministry of East African Community Affairs
Recurrent expenditure; wage allocation
In the draft estimate, the ministry was provided with Shs 568,812,000. The committee recommends Shs 841,000,000.

Non-wage allocation
The ministry was offered Shs 26,281,277,000. The committee recommends the same amount.

Pensions and gratuity allocation
The committee recommends Shs 2,929,965,000.

Pension and gratuity arrears allocation
We recommend Shs 8,410,114,000

Development expenditure
We recommend Shs 621,686,000

The committee, therefore, recommends that Parliament provides Shs 51,098,928,000. 
Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable Chairperson and the Committee on the East African Community Affairs. The report is sent to the Budget Committee to prepare for appropriation later next week.

MOTION THAT THE HOUSE RESOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY TO CONSIDER THE ADDENDUM ON SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULES 1, 2 AND 3 OF THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As you may recall, the reason why we had an issue was that there would be an audit by the Auditor-General or a report to deal with the issues we had stood over.

Don’t you think it would be procedurally right to have the Auditor-General’s report first and then we can decide whether to go to the committee or not?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when we requested for that audit, we were at the committee stage. Therefore, we can receive it from there.

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

Vote 130 – Treasury Operations

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, before we adjourned last week, I informed you that a document had come to me, which I had not read. I found out that it was that audit report and therefore, it is available. I gave copies to hon. Ogwal and hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, before making my comments on the Auditor-General’s report, I would have wanted the Chairman of the Budget Committee to make a comment on Vote 130. This is because the committee has very serious concerns over Vote 130. His comments would guide these issues, which are coming out on the orders of mandamus. I do not know whether you can allow him to make clarification on that before I come in.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is it that you want him to address?

MS CECILIA OGWAL: The committee made observations and I thought that, that matter would have been better put by the Chairman of the Budget Committee; that Vote 130 is being abused. 

Parliament does not know the issues, which are handled by Vote 130. Vote 130 does not have a ministerial policy statement yet out of this current Budget, it is going to absorb almost Shs 7 trillion. It is that vote that handles debts and some of them are of dubious nature.

Therefore, it is important that we come up with a clear policy on how that particular vote is going to be managed by Parliament. If we do not, then we would be allowing Vote 130 to continue to operate in connivance with Parliament when some of us are passing votes without knowing the background information.

It is important, Madam Chairperson, maybe from now on, that we must make sure Vote 130 complies with all other votes. We must have a ministerial policy statement, work plan and policy guidelines on how the money which we put in that vote is used and how it is accounted for.

That is why the day I raised the concern on the order of mandamus - the order of mandamus is being catered for through Vote 130. You can just pass it without asking questions.

Madam Chairperson, if you are comfortable, I can continue to make comments on the order of mandamus.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I have spent a bit of time since last week studying these issues, reading the Auditor-General’s report. I also had a meeting with the Secretary to the Treasury and he brought me documents where warrants of arrest had been issued against him for failing to meet decrees from the courts. He also informed me that all judgements against Government are charged on the Consolidated Fund and they are due on demand but the problem he has is that sometimes he does not have the money when the decrees come.

On the issues you called “dubious”, they are not dubious. The explanation was that like these ones which were mentioned, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has a negotiation team, which speaks to the beneficiaries and discuss with them whether they can give up the interests.

Therefore, the payments, which were made, according to him, were of large groups of 300, 500, 1,000 people and so on and those are the ones who had agreed to surrender part of their interests. They will get the principal sum which, I am told, is being paid over three years.

Honourable members, I do not know whether we are going to start calling judges here to find out how they came to those damages. That is not our work. Our work is to ensure Government provides money so that as many claimants as possible are paid. However, we cannot inquire into how the judges sat to issued that. It is not our work and we cannot do it.

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, thank you very much. You are pointing out the fact that the Auditor-General’s report on this particular issue is available and it seems to be in the hands of a few Members. I do not know whether it is procedurally okay that the rest of us will follow when only the two Members, including you, have the report because that report was meant to be a vital piece of information to help the entire House make an informed decision. 

I have been trying to check on the iPad, the report is not there. I hear hon. Ogwal and hon. Nandala-Mafabi are the only ones with it. The rest of us are having faith that there is a report and yet we do not see it.

Madam Chairperson, whatever the final outcome, it is healthy for us to be educated on a very significant aspect. Compensations constitute a very huge haemorrhage in the resources of this country.

It does not matter. We can decide now to appropriate and okay the supplementary schedule but what lessons are we learning out of it? Experience from the committee that looks at the Auditor-General’s report over the years, every other year shows that there is more money going into compensations. The other day, hon. Kwizera pointed out to the possibility of suspicion in those compensations - who is paid and all that. This particular vote is very difficult.

I would like to be assisted to first get the report so that I also participate along with you. Otherwise, I am lost in this House.

Therefore, is it procedurally okay that I don’t benefit from the report that the rest of the House is talking about?

THE CHAIRPERSON: It was not uploaded but you can get a copy. However, I do not know why they are saying before people are paid, Parliament should establish the veracity of the payment.

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, it is actually both and it is very important. This, plus 2013/2014, the biggest chunk of the queries had to do with that compensation raised by the Auditor-General.

Therefore, it reaches a point where Parliament must interest itself in the details of those compensations. It is not a nice thing to come here and just say, “The Secretary to the Treasury was taken to court”. There is an order; let him pay. He will pay but we should learn some lessons.

We should be interested in the detail as well- (Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, hon. Alaso, for giving way. There are two different items: compensations and court awards.
For court awards, that is where mandamus orders come from. However, for compensation, I remember when we were debating the Public Accounts Committee report concerning payment to Haba Groups Uganda Limited, Parliament resolved that we should never approve moneys for the purpose of compensations until a law is tabled here and passed to determine how these compensations are arrived at because compensations are paid in secret.

However, we cannot really question court awards and the order of mandamus arising from court awards. We can, however, question compensations because they have no specific basis. They are determined by a few people and nobody knows until payment has been made.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is hon. Alaso still on the Floor?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, she has allowed me to give information. 
To begin with, when I got the report, I never knew that the whole Parliament had not got it because I had been away for a while. I thought, like others, I was also getting a copy. When I got it, I went and met hon. Cecilia Ogwal and we went through it. However, colleagues, the report is even here. We would be happier if Members got a copy. Even in the copy we have, the Auditor-General -  

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is being uploaded. Check your iPads. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the report is about 13 pages and it would need people to go through it.  I am raising this because we need to avoid this problem. We all would like to approve something we believe in.

Even in one of the documents the Auditor-General gave me, Madam Chairperson, the Principal Judge was saying even if they had given you an order of mandamus, you should go to court and argue it out and say “Well, I have no money now, can you give me time?” Because you may take the Secretary to the Treasury to prison and there is no money in Government; will he stay there until infinity? That is in one of the letters he gave me.

Madam Chairperson, even the Auditor-General is still raising some issues but I have not got this information. I cannot reliably inform. Why I am not worried that these people will not be paid is because they have been paid since we are talking of 2014. Therefore, while we are trying to approve this money, the people have already eaten it. We should tell them they ate the money wrongly.

Madam Chairperson, Members are right if they want to read it. I am privy to this information because I got it, and I am sure hon. Cecilia Ogwal got it too, therefore, I can debate from an informed point of view. However, if hon. Alaso, who is even the chairperson of PAC - When I got this, I looked for the Auditor-General’s report so that I could harmonise this. The Auditor-General said that he had not been availed all the information- this is the Auditor-General’s report of 2014. He suspected there might have been dubious payments. That is the report I read after getting this. If he had not said this, I would have done that. 

In addition to that, he has raised the issue that for those few cases, there had already been Shs 1.4 trillion over payment. If we total all the trillions, how much shall we get? That is the information I wanted to give. 

MS ALASO: Thank you very much. I would like to thank my colleagues for educating me. I think I have been greatly helped. I do not even know for which particular order we are appropriating money. I hope the details are in the report the Auditor-General has made. He has audited each particular order and shown the amount of money. So, unless I have the report- I am just being a good Christian and follower of the House by believing that you are talking about things that you have seen, but I have not seen anything. Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chairperson, as the chairperson of the Budget Committee, I would like to say that we actually recommended the figures for supply and there was controversy concerning this particular figure. I thought that when the report of the Auditor-General came to the House, I would have been one of the first people to receive a copy. Unfortunately, I have not seen a copy of the report. I do not know whether the figure that is being recommended for supply is consistent with what we recommended. Therefore, I do not know what to tell the members of my committee. 

A member as well as a non-member of the committee received a copy of this report, but as the chairperson of the committee, who would share the report with the Members, I do not have a copy. I do not know how we are going to proceed but I thought that we should all proceed together on this matter. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, if you recall, we approved the bulk of the figures and there was only one vote remaining. Nothing has changed. That is the same vote 130, which we are dealing with. There is no new vote. What you submitted is what we are dealing with. Only one vote was left in abeyance.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. If that is the only vote we are dealing with and it is the same vote for which we were complaining about not having the information that we required at that time, I wonder how we are proceeding. We are not any better than we were at that time to proceed even today because of lack of information. I do not know how we are going to decide on this. 

MS NTABAZI: Madam Chairperson, I think it is not right for the chairperson, who provided this in the first place and is in charge, to publically deny that he has no information about this. He is the one who submitted the report. In fact, he is the one who has submitted it to the Chairperson, unless he denies that. 

What the Chairperson is talking about comes from the chairman of the committee. You cannot say that we are going to deny responsibility here because things are going wrong. If there is something to put right, then we need to put it right rather than publically denying it. Is he, therefore, in order? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No; these are figures from his report. He is out of order. Honourable members, I have directed the Clerk to upload the document. It is a few pages. You can read it while we do other work.  

MOTION FOR HOUSE TO RESUME

4.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY
4.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered supplementary schedules 1, 2 and 3 of the Financial Year 2014/2015 and deferred the debate. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

4.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of Supply be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE PROPOSAL BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO SDR 71.1 MILLION ($ 100 MILLION EQUIVALENT) FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) TO SUPPORT THE SKILLS DEVELOPMENT PROJECT

4.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion for Government to borrow up to US$ 100 million from the International Development Association to support the Skills Development Project.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded. Where is the Chairperson of the Committee on National Economy? 

4.44
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Evelyn Kaabule): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is a report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow up to SDR 71.1 million, which is equivalent to $100 million, from the International Development Association to support the Skills Development Project. 

Madam Speaker, before I report, I beg to lay on the Table the minutes of the committee meeting. I also beg to lay these documents on the Table: a brief to Parliament; project appraisal documents; minutes of negotiations; financing agreements; and the project agreement between IDA and Private Sector Foundation.

The Committee on National Economy considered the request by Government to borrow SDR 71.1 million, an equivalent of US$ 100 million, from IDA to support the Skills Development Project in accordance with rule 166 (2) (b) of the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure. The request was presented to this House by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 14 July 2015 and accordingly referred to our committee for consideration. 

Background to the Loan 
Uganda’s strategic vision focuses on transforming the country to what its National Development Plan 2015/2016 to 2019/2020 terms as, “a transformed Ugandan society from a peasant to a modern and prosperous country within 30 years”, and whose theme is to strengthen Uganda’s competitiveness for sustainable wealth creation, employment and inclusive growth.

The education and sports sector is responsible for the delivery of equitable, relevant and quality education, training and sports services for all. The sector comprises of seven subsectors. The skills development subsector is responsible for provision of employable skills that are critical for socioeconomic transformation of the country. The subsector comprises of public and private training institutions as well as farm-based training programmes. 

While progress has been made towards skilling the Ugandan labour force, the economy still faces substantial skills gaps in key sectors as indicated in figure 1. Over the last five years, progress has been made mainly in formal areas of Business, Technical, Vocational Education and Training (BTVET), registering a 73 per cent increase in enrolment from 24,598 in 2009 to 42,674 in 2013, and 66 per cent of that are male while 34 per cent are female. However, the number of vacancies available in BTVET institutions compared to demand from primary and senior one to senior four leavers still falls short by 60 per cent. 

This project is linked to the country’s Vision 2040 and the Skilling Uganda Programme of 2012, which aims to transform the BTVET system from an educational subsector into a comprehensive system of skills development for employment, enhanced productivity and growth. The overall objective of this project is to enhance the capacity of institutions to deliver high quality, demand-driven training programmes in target sectors. 

The beneficiaries of this project will be both new entrants into the labour market and those who are already employed or self-employed. Training will be focused on the artisan, craftsmen and technician levels and will be delivered through competency-based training programmes with recognition of prior learning. The beneficiaries will be those who are working or who will work in the target sectors, which are expected to be construction, manufacturing and agriculture.

The colleges selected to become centres of excellence have been chosen to ensure that each geographical region- north, southwest, central and east- have a centre of excellence that is economically relevant to the country. These include: 
    a) Uganda Technical College, Lira 
    b) Uganda Technical College, Bushenyi 
    c) Bukalasa Agricultural College and Kalungu 
    d) Uganda Technical College, Elgon.

Up to 12 vocational institutions will also be selected in a competitive manner to benefit from the support. The selection will be done according to a set of eligibility and selection criteria. Each centre of excellence will be connected to vocational training institutes, both public and private, that are dispersed so that externalities from the centre of excellence are felt across the whole country. 

Individual beneficiaries will equal to approximately 45,000 trainees across the targeted institutions during the life of the project. These will gain from a more market relevant menu of programmes. In the short and medium term, the project will benefit employers and employees of target sectors, that is, construction, manufacturing and agriculture, who will gain additional skills that will improve competitiveness of respective firms. 

I will skip the indicators and the project component, which you already have as the report was uploaded to your iPads. 

Loan Terms and Conditions

The terms of this loan are as follows: the loan amount is US$ 100 million; the loan period is 38 years; the commitment charge is 0.5 per cent per annum on the unwithdrawn financing balance; and a service charge of 0.75 per annum on the withdrawn credit balance. A commitment charge of 0.5 per cent per annum on the unwithdrawn financing balance, that is, on undisbursed loan, and a service charge will be applied over the five-year disbursement period.

Observations and Recommendations

1. Skilling Uganda Strategy 

The committee observed that Skilling Uganda strategy does articulate a paradigm shift towards developing demand-driven responsive, employable skills and competencies rather than simply providing education certificates that may or may not be relevant to the needs of the labour market. A reform taskforce was established as an interim management unit for the establishment of a skills development authority. Other reforms within the Skilling Uganda strategy have by and large stalled due to lack of funding.

The committee recommends active engagement of the private sector employers in the entire process of skills development in order to mobilise adequate resources for the implementation of the Skilling Uganda plan.

2. Lack of Practical Skills Required in the Job Market at a Higher Level of Education
 
The committee noted that at the higher level of education, total enrolment increased by 18 per cent from 169,476 in 2009 to 201,376 in 2013, with a significant increase in female enrolment. Universities continue to enrol the majority of the post-secondary students, which is at 67.5 per cent university enrolment against 32.5 per cent at other tertiary institutions in 2006. 

Despite this increase, the majority of the graduates from universities and other higher institutions of learning do not have the practical skills required in the job market. This is largely attributed to inappropriate curricula in these institutions and lack of linkage between the training institutions and potential employers. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports should set up a strategy to have even more female students enrol for higher education courses. Further, the ministry should tailor the higher education curriculum to suit the current requirements of the job market in order to equip students with practical skills that will enable them to sustain their livelihood.

3. Budgetary Implications of the Loan

The committee noted that this project is included in the approved budget for the Financial Year 2015/2016 under vote 103- Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports- with external financing of Shs 16.663 billion from IDA and counterpart funding of Shs 0.3 billion to support implementation of policies, laws, guidelines, plans and strategies. However, the project does not entail counterpart funding and this expenditure needs to be clarified. 

In addition, the committee noted the fiscal constraints currently faced by the education sector. Its budget share is declining, leading to a smaller budget share to the BTVET subsector, which will undermine the fiscal sustainability of this project. The committee, therefore, recommends that in order for the public sector to continue playing a significant role in BTVET subsector, Government should ensure that the budget allocated to the subsector is substantially increased. 

The budget will have to account for an increase in the unit cost per trainee, to reflect Government intentions of implementing the Skills Uganda strategy and further make development financing available to the BTVET subsector every 10 years. This will upgrade infrastructure/equipment in line with the needs of the economy to ensure sustainability.

4. Impact of the Project to the Economy

The committee noted that the NDP projects labour productivity improvement (GDP per worker in US dollars) by 61 per cent for the agriculture and industries sectors combined, which this project is targeting. The project’s contribution towards the NDP II target of promoting activities that are labour intensive to absorb unskilled workers, especially in the industrial and services sector, will be met partially. Based on the committee’s assessment, this project will contribute towards improving the country’s productivity gains by increasing labour productivity in 2019 by one per cent. 

The committee, therefore, welcomes the Government’s efforts of improving the productivity of its labour force in order to bring down the country’s high unemployment rate. However, additional employment cannot be attained with a productivity increase of one per cent after the project. This implies that the Government should scale up all the required efforts/interventions to significantly raise productivity levels of its labour force to fully benefit from the ongoing skills intervention.

5. Sustainability of the Project Infrastructure Investment

The committee noted that adequate and regular maintenance of the infrastructure of the project will be important to its sustainability. Investments in the beneficiary districts will depend on regular maintenance by the local governments.

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government should ensure that the recurrent costs associated with the implementation of the project infrastructure investments are timely absorbed into the subsequent national and local budgets of the implementing agencies of this project, in order to guarantee the availability of adequate funding for the maintenance of the project infrastructure investments.

6. Obsolete Training Equipment 

The centres of excellence have obsolete equipment, which are still in use since their inception decades ago. This is in light of the current advancement in technology globally and the need for the students to be up to date with modern methods of production.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the ministry should ensure that the centres of excellence are equipped with up-to-date equipment that will enable the students to benefit and compete effectively while keeping up with global trends.

7. Gender Concerns

The committee noted that each centre of excellence, with the support from partner institutions, will prepare a project funded gender action plan alongside its institutional development plan. The Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports will extend its existing financing schemes such as the student loan scheme to women to enable them to attend the target institutions.

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government should check that all centres of excellence, in order to benefit from this project, comply with the requirement of a gender action plan in order to have a balanced outlook.

8. Selection Criteria for Vocational Institutes

The committee noted that 12 public vocational institutes will be selected in a competitive manner as beneficiaries for support from the project. The support will be in terms of strengthening their capacity to respond to the needs and opportunities of the labour market.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the selection criteria should apply to regions, and vocational institutes should be regionally distributed throughout the country.

In conclusion, the committee recommends that subject to the above recommendations, the request by Government to borrow SDR 71.1 million, equivalent to $100 million, from the IDA to support the Skills Development Project be approved by this House. I beg to move. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and members of the committee. Before Members come in, I wonder why we are still training people in the same old industries- building houses, working in industries, agriculture. What are we doing about the oil industry? Are we going to import Kenyans to come and work in that industry? What are we doing about the maritime industry? All those are areas which are lacking completely. I do not know, but it is up to the Members.

5.00
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the committee for evaluating the necessity for this loan. However, I would like to address myself to three issues, which I consider extremely important.

The chairperson of the committee has told this House that the vocational institutions to benefit from this loan have not been identified. I hope the committee appreciates the fact that in this country, we borrow money and we subject it to non-performance because of lack of early preparation. I expected that the eligibility criteria, the identification of the vocational institutions that would participate, would have been part of the needs assessments leading to the desire for this particular loan. However, as it is, we are just guessing our way and we are borrowing money on the assumption that there will be some vocational institution somewhere that will fit into this particular criterion.

The chairperson of the Committee on National Economy might know that we have previously borrowed lots of money in this country and we are paying interest yet the loans are not performing. That is not good for our future and common destiny.

The second issue that I would like to address concerning this particular loan is the mind-set of we, Ugandans; the mind-set that we are going to borrow money to work out reforms - what we need and what we do not need. What is the work of all the experts in the Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports? It would look like one-third of this money is being borrowed to get consultancies. What has happened to the Directorate of Technical Education? Can’t they propose the reforms and then the bulk of the money goes into equipping the institutions? However, as it is now, what the committee is proposing is that there will be reforms. This mind-set of getting consultants to do work and yet we have civil servants who are paid a salary is unfair to this country. 

I would have expected the committee to have reorganised this money and taken the bulk of it to directly benefit more vocational institutions that do not have laboratories, equipment and many other items. The idea of consultancies is unacceptable. Otherwise, we will need to sit down one of these days and disband the directorates and Government departments and then we are run by consultants in the entire country.

Madam Speaker, while I support this loan request, I strongly believe that we need to re-organise where the money is going. Nobody wants to commit the children of this country, 40 years down the road, to the work that someone who is a public servant, sitting in Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports, should have done for this country. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.04
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for the good report and I would like to address myself to two or three issues.

Skilling Uganda or skills development is in line with what is now referred to as the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). These are the goals that replaced the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). Therefore, we are going the right way in as far as preparing our people is concerned. What we are thinking of doing now was done by Japan in 1956, and the workforce of Japan is now very competitive in the market because of the quality of the population that Japan has. If emphasis is paid on skilling Ugandans with proper vocational and technical skills, we shall go a long way in solving the problem of unemployment in the market.

Secondly, on the issue of counterpart funding, we have procured various loans but some of these loans have failed to take off because of the failure of Government to secure counterpart funding. Madam Speaker, you will recall one or two years ago, we passed a very good loan request here - Project for Financial Inclusion in Rural Areas (PROFIRA) - for loans going to rural women and rural people. It has failed to take off up to now because of failure by Government to raise its part of the contribution to this funding.

We shall continue borrowing but the projects or loans will not take off because of failure by Government to raise its counterpart funding. Even from the presentation of the chairperson, she was worried that there are no clear indications that Government will fulfil its part in as far as counterpart funding is concerned.

Thirdly, there is the issue of sustainability of these projects. I will give the example of the Community Agriculture Infrastructure Improvement Programme (CAIIP) roads. These are very good roads that have been put up in rural areas and have been handed over to local governments, which do not have the capacity to maintain them. Very soon, we are going to lose very many roads. Many roads in my district were handed over to the local government, which does not have the capacity to maintain them. The chairperson has also expressed fears that after this project, there are no clear policies as to who, at the end of the day, will be able to maintain these good infrastructure that will be put up. 

Otherwise, I support this motion and I hope the loan will go a long way in solving the quality of employment and skills in Uganda. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.06
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Members who have come up with a report on this motion. The motion we are talking about is a request for Government to borrow $100 million, which is equivalent to about Shs 350 billion. It is such a huge amount that we require thorough analysis of its efficacy and how, at the end of the day, we are going to repay it, and what our dividends as a country are going to be.  

I think chairpersons of committees of this House should help the House. They bring out very critical and fundamental issues in their reports but when it comes to the conclusion, it is as if they have cut the conclusion from elsewhere and not from their own reports. You cannot give such a sad and grim situation and then at the end, you surrender and say, “We recommend the approval of the loan”. 

You have just told us about the fundamentals. What are the project’s objectives and who are the project beneficiaries, for example? The project development objective is to enhance the capacity of institutions to deliver high quality, demand-driven training programmes in target sectors. According to the committee’s own report, what are these target sectors? Just on page 3, they give the education and skills status of the total working population and these are their figures: at secondary - 21 per cent; post-primary specialised training - 1.5 per cent; post-secondary specialised training - 3.1 per cent; degree and above - 1.4 per cent; no formal schooling, a whopping 16.1 per cent; and the primary level – 54.4 per cent. 

I would like to seek clarification from the chairperson; where is this loan we are borrowing targeting? Who are the targeted beneficiaries of this loan? It is true we have the Vision 2040 but how is this money being embedded into attaining and achieving Vision 2040? 

Madam Speaker, the chairperson has told us that the institutions and beneficiaries are yet to be identified. Are we borrowing in anticipation? (Interjections) No, I understand you, honourable minister. My position is: why don’t we reach the stage when we need this money and then borrow? You are setting a target, and I must tell you, throughout this report, where exactly you want to focus on. Read your page 5; where exactly do you see your intervention with this loan? (Interruption)

MS KAABULE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We have two categories of beneficiaries. We have the centres of excellence, which are four as we have already mentioned -

THE SPEAKER: Which are the centres?

MS KAABULE: Uganda Technical College, Lira; Uganda Technical College, Bushenyi; Bukalasa Agricultural College, Kalungu; and Uganda Technical College Elgon. Those are the four targeted institutions. In addition, we have up to 12 vocational institutions, which will be selected across the country based on criterion that is going to be formulated by the ministry.

MR SSEKIKUBO: You are talking about page 9, where you mention public vocational institutions to strengthen their capacity. Madam Speaker, unless we are told which these are, where is our demand? You do not just go out to say that you have set up institutions and you are training because the labour market is demand driven. Can you specify and say, “We are training this category of labour because they are needed in this sector at this point in time”? (Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION, SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Dr Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you very much, my colleague and friend, for giving way. The centres of excellence have already been presented. They are in four regions as indicated- Lira, Elgon, Bukalasa and Bushenyi. Those ones you appreciate. 

However, we also have a policy in place for the technical institutes. For a start, we are going to provide a technical institute per district. So far, we have covered quite a number of districts; those that are not yet captured are the ones that will be captured next. Otherwise, the idea behind Skilling Uganda is to capture at least a technical institute in every district in Uganda.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I think this was not the stage yet; they are still in preparatory stages. Why are you shy to tell us that out of this money, you are going to construct a, b, c, d - (Interjections)- You had all the time. You would have told us. You are saying each constituency is supposed to have a technical institute but this is not captured anywhere in your report. What this report is saying precisely is that you want to have the money and then embark on planning for what you intend to do. (Interruption)

THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Mr Ali Kirunda Kivejinja): Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I would like to inform my colleague about the running of Government. We come up with policies and those policies are implemented by the ministries. We have already decided that each and every constituency will have a technical institute but because of our resource envelope, we may not be able to have the money to fully implement our policy.

Now, this loan comes in to fill in for what we are missing. So, we do not need to plan for each and every loan we get and say that it is going to a particular item. It is already laid out and once we get the money, it will just fall in place.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I really appreciate and imbibe from the wisdom of the Third Deputy Prime Minister. However, I would like to inform him and Members of the House that the problem we have suffered as a country is because we borrow ahead of implementation. Rt Hon. Third Deputy Prime Minister, your Government has hundreds of millions - and you are the Prime Minister - of undisbursed loans that we have acquired, and these attract costs on the taxpayers. 

Under one of the components on page 7, for example, you are talking of looking for a consultancy firm with relevant experience to provide technical assistance to actively rebrand the subsector through enhanced media communication, direct engagement with stakeholders, etcetera. I would like to support you but you are giving us a burden that you are not yet ready for. If at this stage you are thinking of acquiring a consultant, must this come from the borrowed money? As a country, must we have to borrow to seek for a consultant to advise us on what we need?    

I would like to be on your side, and you know this. I would like to accompany you when we are borrowing this amount of money. However, the way it is being packaged shows that we want money to put somewhere but we are not ready for the education and multiskilling. Madam Speaker gave you a hint; are you telling us that you are going to train technical people to handle, for instance, the pipeline? How about the standard gauge railway? How about the oil refinery? Is it anywhere here? You are just talking in abstract. Where is the difference between this and your usual ministerial policy statements on education? This is the same song you have been singing. 

We would like that once you go to borrow, bring us on board. Tell us, “Members of Parliament, dear Ugandans, we must get this money because our interest is here”. Lead us and tell us that you are making a thrust in this new area of technical skills because you want to reinvigorate our industries- the textile industry, the palm oil industry- and you are strategizing and multiskilling Ugandans by giving them the necessary skills. Short of this, Ugandans are being relegated to the background. The companies that are here involve Ugandans at the low level like welding, which is even not yet proper. That is how you came up with Masindi Polytechnic College, which is not even being mentioned here. 

Madam Speaker, yes, we all want this money for Ugandans, but from the chairperson’s own information, unless she wants to run away from her page 5 where she told us exactly how Ugandans stand- This is the pie-chart you have given us –(Interjection)– No, unless you want to run away from it. You have 55.4 per cent at primary level; these are the people you want to train – you have 16.1 per cent who are illiterates, without any formal education. So, where is your intervention?  

5.20
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern): Madam Speaker, I am going to be brief. I would like to address myself to project beneficiaries. I am happy that the colleges have been listed here. However, to begin with, is Bukalasa in Kalungu or Luweero? The minister will have to clarify on that.

Secondly, on the vocational institutes, if you read the statement here, it says that vocational institutes will be selected in a competitive manner. I would like to pose one question - It will be archaic for us to begin approving a loan without even knowing the institutes we are talking about. It might be like the case I discussed earlier on here during the report of the Committee on Local Government, where many of the town councils mentioned are from one particular area. So, we should be fair. 

This is now for the chairperson and her committee; how did they come up with this? Why didn’t they ask the ministries responsible, more so the Ministry of Education, to tell them the story about these 12 vocational institutes? Irrespective of them saying that they are going to be selected in a competitive manner, have they built capacities for all of them to compete or they will use that as a basis to side-line some, because that is what happens in Uganda? I have one in Ongongoja, for example, and it is not complete. You constructed it there; is it going to benefit from this money or not? What if it does not, what will you say? I thank you very much.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give my brother, hon. Peter Ogwang, is that in the Seventh Parliament we approved 39 vocational institutes. We got a loan from BADEA and the money was released and given to the Government but out of the 39 institutes, we have only six that have been completed; the rest have never. Therefore, when we see such loans, we need people to guarantee them because first of all, they are very expensive. So, what you are raising is very important.

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, I am sorry for coming in late but I feel very bad that the honourable member over there is misinforming the House about the BADEA money. We got all the money and we shall be commissioning 25 technical institutes next month. Go to Kamuli, Nakasongola, Pader –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I would have not liked to raise a point of order against a whole Minister of Education. However, the Seventh Parliament started in 2001 and ended in 2006; this loan was approved in 2002 and money came immediately. How do you take 14 years, and now you say you are going to commission only 25? Where did the money get stuck? Was it in the air? We are paying penalties! 

Therefore, is the Minister of State for Primary Education in order to come and inform us that the money he got in 2002 is now completing the project in 2016 and only 25 out of the 39 technical institutes are complete? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am not in a position to rule on that. I have not received the report on the first loan but the one he is talking about was a subsequent loan that built the technical institutes he is talking about.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The bank’s conditions on this loan, regarding the selection of the 12 institutions to benefit, were that they should be selected competitively. The Ministry of Education is already conducting an assessment of these institutions –(Interjection)- just a second. 

The second aspect is that for us to select these institutions competitively, we have to put out an advert to encourage institutions to apply and benefit from this loan. When institutions apply, we will use assessments and other criteria that also include looking at the whole country to select the 12 institutions to benefit from this loan.

Madam Speaker, the four centres of excellence have been identified. The 12 institutions will also benefit from this loan and we said that the principle on these 12 institutions has been agreed on between Government and the bank. These institutions will be selected through a competitive process, which has already started, by placing adverts in the newspapers for them to apply.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, the minister and Government are not ready. You are not ready.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is hon. Ssekikubo in order to mislead this House? When you apply for a loan, the money does not come immediately. The ministry has outlined how the money will be used. The specific institutions have been identified and the other procedures will follow as we wait for the money. So, is hon. Ssekikubo in order to mislead the House that the ministry is not ready, yet we have the time to gain readiness to utilise the loan?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know how ready they are; I have not seen the adverts. However, it is also a fact that we have passed loans and they have not been implemented, yet we are paying sanctions. I think there was a paper laid on the Table here concerning those, and that is the concern of the Members.

MS KAABULE: I also would like to give information because it looks like the honourable members did not read the summary of the project costs and subcomponents. The four vocational institutes that I mentioned will use $62.2 million for the centres of excellence.

I would like you to take keen interest on page 12 where we have the project cost, subcomponent by subcomponent. Component 1 will cost $62.2 million. There is component 3, which will focus on the 12 vocational institutions that will be selected after a thorough assessment of all the institutions that we have in the country. That is why the advert is out for them to compete. We will advertise for institutions to be competitively selected and we shall use the assessment results, which will be done by the Ministry of Education, to select those that are best suited. That is one of the conditions that – (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform my friend, the honourable chairperson of the committee, that this House, for the same sector - Ministry of Education - previously in the Seventh Parliament, authorised borrowing from the ADB to build seed schools. However, when the money was finally availed, we had issues with the performance of that loan on small matters like this one. One of them was simply securing land titles where the schools were supposed to be built. It took this country many years, as we paid interest, on small matters like securing land titles. 

If this issue of identifying the beneficiary vocational schools looks too small to you, it will become big at some point when it delays implementation. This is because we will pay interest while we will be having redundant money, which money will be diverted and we will get into all sorts of problems. 

Therefore, when we raise such matters, they are not small things. We are raising them out of experience. Actually, it reached a point where some seed schools, probably up to now 10 years down the project line, had not been constructed simply because there were no land titles. At preparatory level, the Ministry of Education should have secured the land titles, ownership of the land, and when the money would be availed, we would just start construction. That is the information. I hope it will help you understand the background we are coming from.

5.30
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for presenting their report. 

Not everybody in this country has the ability to get to higher levels of education due to various problems. You may have learners who may pass very well in senior four and/or senior six but will fail to find higher institutions of learning to attend. Although we have Government scholarship programmes, there are other requirements that they have and some of them are not able to afford those. As a result, they hope to go for training where they can get skills and are able to earn a living and later upgrade after they have earned a living.

Madam Speaker, in 2012 I was a member of the Committee of Science and Technology. We visited the colleges indicated in the report; we went to Uganda technical colleges in Lira, Bushenyi, Elgon and the one in Masindi. The conditions in which we found those colleges are so pathetic. We need to do something for those institutions. 

In Lira, most of the roofs had asbestos. We were told that one of the lecturers had died of cancer caused by water he used to use from the asbesto roofs. In Bushenyi, the lorry was just parked there. In Elgon, we found that Mt Elgon Labour Based Training Centre (MELTECH) had taken over one of their structures; the principal and his deputy had offered their houses for the students to use for accommodation – (Interruption)

MS NAKAYENZE: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. I think that the Member is speaking from an uninformed point of view as of now. Right now, the Elgon technical college is well built. It has very magnificent buildings and it is functioning well. They are even still constructing more buildings. If she saw the old buildings, right now it is in a different shape. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Are there already new interventions at UTC Elgon?

MS NAUWAT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is good I was very specific with the year – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I know why my sister is raising that issue. There are two parts at that Elgon technical institute. There is the labour-based project, which is under Ministry of Works and Transport. 

What she is saying about Elgon technical is true because it is in a bad state. If you go to the dining hall when the students are having their lunch or supper – I was there three weeks ago – and it starts raining, the students eat while standing and they keep running from corner to corner. You are a leader there and so you better go and see Elgon technical institute. What she is saying is a true story. 

MS NAUWAT: Thank you for that information, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. It is good the Members are saying there is some improvement, but there is still a lot that is desired in that institution.

Madam Speaker, in all those institutions, the equipment is obsolete. If we have to train the learners and skill them, we need to have up-to-date equipment. Therefore, I would like to support this motion. This loan will help us to revamp these colleges and ensure that we get products that will qualify for the labour market.

Finally, Madam Speaker, on the centres of excellence and distribution that the committee is talking about, I am worried. They are telling us that they have already advertised and that it will be competitive. However, some regions like Karamoja may not qualify because as I speak, a few districts have these institutes; my neighbour, Nakapiripirit, has a vocational school and Moroto has one which is a private institution.

Madam Speaker, I request that as government plans to extend this, they should make a deliberate effort so that some of these sub-regions like Karamoja can benefit. If at least we can have one in Moroto, that would be fine; those of us in Amudat and Nakapiripirit would still access those facilities. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: That was actually my worry; how will you regionally balance those 12? You will let us know later.

5.35
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to add my voice to those who have thanked the committee for giving us the report. I just have a few points that I want the chairperson to clarify.

One is on the sustainability of these institutions. I will give you an example from Gulu. We have a very good Commonwealth training school in Labora. It is well built and has all the facilities, but right now it is not operational because funds are lacking. My worry is that while it is easy for us to get this money to revamp these institutions, what sustainability levels do we have? 

We really need to plan for this very well. As I speak, there are very many young people who would want to develop their skills in Labora but they are not able to because the resources to maintain the centre are not there. This centre is very important because it serves the greater Acholi or greater north, especially the people who have not gone far in education. 

Secondly, I want to know how similar Skilling Uganda and the green jobs programme under the Ministry of Gender are, and this is something that is being discussed. I know that it is more or less similar to development and training. My worry is about duplication of activities and putting money into the same activities while wasting resources. Those are my worries. Thank you.

5.37
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson for the report. However, I would like to get a few clarifications from the ministry. 

When they talk of the beneficiaries, have they scanned the environment? When you talk about training the artisans, the craftsmen - in which area? This is because when you talk of skilling Uganda, anybody comes up with any course to give to the people that we are talking about. If we are talking about mechanics, for example, in which area are they skilled; is it electrical, mechanical or another? Is it going to be training “fwaa”? I am sorry to use that word but you know it because it is commonly used. (Laughter) Is it about just training and then we later see people on the streets looking for what to do without real skills? Has a skills needs assessment been done or you want to do it after getting the loan? 

Further, is there any curriculum that is going to be followed or anybody in those institutions will come up with what they want and excite the public so that people just rush in? Those are some of the things I want to know. Thank you.

5.39
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising to also speak about skills development because it is very important. 

My only problem is that we had already implemented some of these projects earlier on. Where is the report on the first, second and third phases? When I was talking about the 39 institutions, the districts at that time were 39 and the proposal was that each district was to get a vocational institute. I come from Sironko and I was the chairman of the Committee on National Economy which approved that loan. Where is the institute in Sironko? Even if it is in heaven, you should show it to me. I need to know where the one of Sironko is because I have evidence that there is no institute in Sironko, yet we approved the money for it in 2002.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, when did Sironko come into effect?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: In the year 2000, Madam Speaker. When I came here in 2001, we had 39 districts.

THE SPEAKER: Sironko is new; it was not one of the 39. You were still under Mbale at that time.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, no, no, Madam Speaker; check and you will see that Sironko was among them. Even if you say it was not there, if you see the report and the money you got from BADEA at that time, Sironko was among the districts to benefit but Sironko has not seen its vocational institute. We want to know where the one in Sironko is. Is it still on the way? Is it stuck somewhere? That will help us understand what happened.

Madam Speaker, we approve money here but we never follow up. I think this is the third project in this area. If we cannot get reports on the first and second and see what they did, we do not see how we are going to get these. 

I have been looking at the figures for four institutions and I have just used a rate of Shs 3,500 to convert to Ugandan shillings; $64 million multiplied by Shs 3,500 comes to about Shs 250 billion – (Interruption)

MR BAHATI: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. I think we need to put this in the context of how we operate as a House. We passed loan requests here, and we agreed during one of the sittings that the Committee on National Economy should follow up on some of these loans that have been approved. We also agreed that the sectoral committees are allowed to play an oversight role over these sectors so that Parliament continues to be informed on their performance, through the policy statements; for example, we can question a ministry as to why they have not done this or that, or ask for progress on projects so that the House can be informed.

It would be a bit procedurally difficult to bring the performance for every loan that we have approved here in this House. That is the work of the sectoral committees - to play an oversight role. Actually, it is the work of the Committee on National Economy to follow up and inform the House and then appropriate action is taken. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I thought you would agree to that procedure. If that procedure is followed, we would know whether Sironko District was created in the year you are talking about or not. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, maybe for your information, in 2001 when I came here, the Woman MP was hon. Beatrice Wabudeya. The Woman MP for Mbale was this lady who is now the Ambassador, hon. Oliver Wonekha. So, Madam Speaker, by the time I came here in 2001, Sironko was in existence. I am raising this because truly, it was one of the beneficiaries of the vocational institutes.

You are right on the fact that the committees should assess, but maybe they have not got the right information. The ministry may have given them papers showing that the one in Sironko was built. I am coming with a report from Sironko showing that the technical institute has never been built there. If this is what they are saying, then I want the committee to agree with me that one of them should go and check to find out if the technical school for Sironko exists.

DR BAYIGGA: I thank you very much, my brother and also former boss, the former Leader of the Opposition, in whose cabinet I served as the shadow minister for health. 

The information that I wish to give hon. Nandala-Mafabi is that now that one of the centres of excellence that has been identified is in Mbale and Mbale is near Sironko, would that one not be helpful as we continue to look for where the Sironko money went? Now that we are considering this one, we would want those outdated – (Interjections) - Madam Speaker, we also take cognisance of these outdated institutions, which were training a few students and which we want to expand in response to the new population that we have. I meant those with outdated equipment that do not match the current status of equipment – (Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I think that I have got enough information.

DR BAYIGGA: That is the information that I wanted to give.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, he has reminded me of something. When we were approving the Northern Uganda Social Action Fund, Members of Parliament from the north said that the money should be approved but we said it would be “eaten” in the name of the people of northern Uganda. They were the first people to come here and cry that the US$ 100 million that they had got had been “eaten” by people from other regions and none from northern Uganda. So, please, do not use this case of Mbale to hoodwink me into believing that it is coming. You may want to “eat” it again in the name of the people of Bugisu, yet I have seen that you have already “eaten” one. 

I want us to go systematically. First, let us provide answers for the one that was approved in 2002. I must get assurance that this will be done because they can put it on paper and it is not done. This is the reason I am arguing; it is not just for the sake of arguing. If they can hide the one for Sironko, I am not so sure if the others have not been hidden too.

We approved money for landing sites and, Madam Speaker, you recall that the report was brought with one of the sites falling in your area; but have they built them? The money was “eaten” in the name of the people who stay at the landing sites.

Therefore, before this skills project can come, I would be very glad if you gave us a report because we want to know who steals this money. We would like to know who “ate” money in the first and second phases and who is going to “eat” money in the third phase before we approve. Otherwise, Madam Speaker, I would like to move a motion that we stand over this until the Committee on National Economy brings a report on the ones we approved earlier before we move on.

Minister of State for Higher Education, you only recently joined the Ministry of Education. You have not been around. What we are talking about are old things. I am very worried about the new Parliament because the institutional memory is gone. The other time I was saying that people were going to lose but I am now regretting. With only 13 per cent, things are going to pass here without knowledge. Institutional memory is very expensive. At an appropriate time, we should move a motion to amend the Parliamentary Act to state that only 50 per cent of Members can go and 50 per cent must remain –(Laughter)– for purposes of institutional memory. Madam Speaker, if I had not been here, for example, some Members would not have known about the 2002 loans and the money approved for landing sites.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like to plead with the House that the committee goes back, looks at the first and second phases and the way that they have proceeded, and reports back. Without that, we are passing a motion - and they are aware we are going away, so they hope that we will not remember and they can do what they want. I thank you.

5.50
MS KEVINAH TAAKA (FDC, Busia Municipality, Busia): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The point of information that the hon. Dr Bayigga was giving to hon. Nandala-Mafabi was a medical one whereas hon. Nandala-Mafabi was talking about accountability for the previous loans.

Madam Speaker, I would like to add onto this. Much as the ministry of education is going to handle this money, when all other things are settled they should also consider private institutions. This is because there are people who have private institutions and they have been doing exams from Directorate of Industrial Training (DTI), BTVET, which are all under the ministry of education. In fact, we have private schools that run UPE and USE programmes. That is why they should also consider Skilling Uganda under private institutions for sustainability purposes. I thank you.

5.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION, SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Dr John Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to correct one error; Bukalasa Agricultural College is in Luweero District. 

Secondly, I would like to thank the Members for accepting to pass this motion. Since this Skilling Uganda programme was launched by His Excellency the President in 2012, there has been a lot of excitement in the country. Almost everybody out there in the districts is asking for their technical institute. A lot of information has already been provided and quite a number of technical institutions have been put up. Madam Speaker, perhaps at an appropriate time, I will be allowed to bring a report showing what exactly has happened. As I said before, 25 brand new technical institutions will be commissioned next month – (Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: I thank you, Madam Speaker. Yes, the honourable minister could be right that there are those that were worked on using previous financing. However, what we are talking about - and from a summary of what Members have said- is the skills gap you have identified. It is true that you have been doing some work but we are interested in knowing what skills gaps you are trying to address by this.

Secondly, the report itself refers to you as being unprepared as we stand now. Adverts are going to come out where competition among the beneficiary institutions is going to start and you will identify those to benefit. The reason we are raising this is because in your report, under loan terms and conditions on page 13, the loan amount is US$ 100, the loan period is 38 years, the commitment charge is 0.5 per annum on the unwithdrawn financing balance, and the service charge is 0.75 per cent on the withdrawn credit balance. This is something that we are trying to grapple with, not that we wish to stand in your way.

If you may wish to look further down on page 15, the date indicators of this loan show a repayment period of 32 years. This is not for eternity –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: May I give him more information?

THE SPEAKER: But he was giving information to the minister. 

DR MUYINGO: I am sorry, my sister, but I got the information – (Interruption) 

MR SSEKIKUBO: There is this that you also need to have: the grace period is six years, present value of the loan is US$ 38.62 million, and the debt service of the loan is US$ 102.1 million – (Interruption)

DR MUYINGO: I already have that information, Madam Speaker.

MR SSEKIKUBO: That is why I am raising it, so that you do not take this House for granted. Already with our approval here, Ugandans will start to bear the cost of this loan. That is why we are saying, if you are not prepared, if you are still waiting on adverts, why don’t you first put your house in order and then you can come to the House and we do the needful? Rather than put the cart before the horse, why don’t you move appropriately?

THE SPEAKER: I would like to understand this grace period of six years from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Does it affect the annual balance or we have the six years and then – What is the grace period and what does it cover for those six years?

DR MUYINGO: The grace period is six years. That is the time given to you before you start actual payment on the principal.

THE SPEAKER: Does the interest start earlier? 

DR MUYINGO: Yes. I would like to thank Members for the information. (Interruption)

MS ALASO: I just want to give the honourable minister information but most importantly, to assure the minister that we are not against Skilling Uganda. If you are in this House and you really know which constituency you represent, this is a very good development. However, the honourable minister should appreciate the challenge we have. Your own sector - maybe you have not looked at it but this is from the last update on the external debt performance of this country; the report that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development then, hon. Maria Kiwanuka, brought to this House was to the effect that for the education sector, which you are representing here, the loan disbursement out of the 100 per cent that was given to your sector was only 11 per cent; only 11 per cent was disbursed. That is a very dismal performance. 

It is extremely worrying for those of us who are going to carry the interest and pass it on to our great grandchildren. It is not good. Therefore, when we ask the honourable minister on the basis of that information, please go and get some more work done so that by the time this money is available, we go straight and implement Skilling Uganda. It is not that we hate the sector; we actually want the education sector to do very well.

5.58
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, the debate is worrying because it seems that colleagues’ understanding is fading out -(Interjections)- I will say this deliberately because you cannot say, “account for all that has been borrowed in order to get this loan.” That is an impossible question. This work must be done by everybody. These committees are not just formed; they must do the supervisory work. If you give a loan, follow it up; and it should not be only in education but also in all the ministries. 

We, in Parliament, have not done enough in these five years. We want a loan for Skilling Uganda, which is the most urgent and demanding, and we all know the importance of skilling Uganda. Hence, to peg this loan onto a report of previous performance is just impossible. Colleagues should allow this loan request to go through and then you begin to play your role and find out how the previous loans are performing. That is my advice.

DR MUYINGO: Dear colleagues, honourable members of Parliament, I thank you very much for all the information that has been provided. I would like to assure you that that information is going to help me put things right wherever things went wrong.

Secondly, for those who have been asking who the beneficiaries are, the idea here is to give skills to all Ugandans at whatever level. We want to skill Ugandans who are not skilled. We have come up with the curricula. The difference this time is that we are in touch with the employers, those who are going to take them up. A number of studies have been done. We have involved the private sector when drawing up the curricula, even from quite a number of trades. When we were presenting this, I remember we presented trades or areas, which are going to be involved - agriculture, business, technical- where the employment world needs skills that have been lacking from our Ugandans.

This is not static. The needs of the employment world keep changing and we are also open to this. However, the most important thing to note here is that we have the curricula and we have the people to implement this curricula. Our only problem has been underfunding as was stated. Some of the money we have been able to get in the recent past has been properly used. As I said, I will present a report to you very soon.

Of course, with the information you have given us, if you can pass this motion tonight I want to assure you, Madam Speaker, this money will be put to the best use and we will have all the Ugandans skilled. Thank you very much.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, the initial position, if we are to drive that hard, would have been that you prepare and make the necessary consultations, prepare yourself well, and then we pass the loan request once you are ready.

However, can we maybe sever the areas that are not yet needed, because it is implemented in phases? Can we get the amount of money that you require now rather than us passing the entire amount that is going to lie there idle and you are not ready?  Can we reconsider, so that we modify the motion to the exact amount - I think it is about $64 million? Can we halt the $36 million; when you are ready, then you can always come back. 

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, I just would like to tell my honourable colleague here that my ministry is ready to utilise this money. I am ready because this is something we have been doing already. We have just told you that we are commissioning some technical institutions; some have just been completed and lectures are taking place. It is just a continuation of what we have been doing. We have districts and constituencies where some of these institutions are going to be constructed. 

We have an activity on institutionalising the system reforms in skills development- that should take a lot of money – and even the training itself. Those who are going to be trained have been identified. We have supporting vocational training institutes with new modern machines; we know where these machines are going. There are many others. Even management and evaluation includes staffing, technical evaluation of the constituencies, etcetera. All these are activities that have been identified and costed. The only thing we needed to do is to get the money and that is it -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I would like to tell the minister that he could be ready in words but not in action. Hon. Alaso has just said that the Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports had 11 per cent performance of its loans. We have a report, which says that every subcounty must have a seed secondary school. You brought a document here stating clearly the secondary schools that were going to be built and even advertised, I think in 2010/2011, but this has not been done. 

Madam Speaker, is this project far different from those that performed at 11 per cent so that this one will be implemented immediately? What made you fail on the others and how sure are you that you will implement this one? 
	
MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me make it clear that I do support the motion, but I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister. 

If we get this money and we take up the centres of excellence and the institutions that will have qualified through a competitive process, what would happen to the others? Some of us are worried about those less qualified institutions that are handling the bulk of our youth, who require the skills that maybe you are not looking at.

Therefore, I would propose that you promise to bring us a comprehensive statement on Skilling Uganda and the stage at which you are. How many technical institutions are involved and at what stage are they? What are you planning to do to ensure that the plan of having a technical institute per constituency is achieved? We want to see that plan implemented so that we are able to see the phasing of this process and that soon, we will get where we are going.

MR SSEMUGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister. I am convinced that the Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports is ready to use that money mainly because they have put up over 25 technical schools. However, many of them are not operational because they do not have machines and staff. These are catered for under this loan. 

Therefore, it is not only for the four institutions indicated now. In Kiboga, there is a fully completed institution but it is not training students because it has no staff and some machines, which are relevant to the courses to be taught there. Madam Speaker, I would request my fellow Members of Parliament to support the motion so that these other institutions, the technical schools we have put up, become operational.

THE SPEAKER: What hon. Ssemugaba is saying is important. In Kamuli, I organised with the people from Turkey to equip the institutions so that people could start training. Otherwise, there were no machines. Therefore, let us support the sector.

MS KWIYUCWINY: I would like clarification from the Minister of Education, Science, Technology and Sports. I see emphasis on the establishment of four centres of excellence, which have been allocated a lot of money- $64 million. However, I also think that the support to the other 12 public vocational training institutes is important. Much as we have emphasis on the four centres of excellence, the 12 public vocational training institutes are taking only $12 million. I do not know what this money will support in the 12 institutions. 

Besides, these courses you are providing in the four centres of excellence are for people who have dropped out of school because of fees and other complications. I look at a youth from Zombo having to go up to Lira; that is already complicated, even if Lira is going to be a centre of excellence. Why don’t you equip all our technical schools so that this youth goes to the nearest centre and gets the same skills as if they had gone to Lira? Is it very hard to re-adjust this budget to support the 12 institutions?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not want to annoy the Langi people but we just gave them a university recently. I hope you recollect. 

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for the information provided. To my colleague, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, if there were mistakes made in the past, we are sorry about them. I would like to assure you that today, whatever is being done is being done according to a plan.

However, what we are asking you to do is to approve this loan request so that we put in place those centres of excellence that will be twined with the other 12 technical institutes –(Interruption)

MR KWIZERA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable minister. You know, there is a problem in ministries between the people who prepare documents and the political heads who are actually not in touch with what is happening.

The disbursement schedule of the loan and how these institutions are distributed is very important for this House in order to pass this loan request. We are passing a loan request without knowing how the distribution will be done. I am very sure that they have not selected yet. From their summary, which is on page 12, improving quality and relevance of skills development takes 62 per cent of the loan, and this is not the core output. The core output should be establishment of centres of excellence, which is taking about two per cent.

When you look at the way the loan is going to be spent, where is the core, honourable minister? Look at what you have provided to this House. Operational issues are taking more than 50 per cent; can you borrow money for capacity building or you are going for institutional building? Can you show us the distribution of those centres you want to develop?

DR MUYINGO: Maybe the honourable member has not understood this. There is institutionalising systematic reforms in curriculum development; that is five –(Interjections)- It is not five per cent. I think that is an error. It is $5 million.

MR KWIZERA: So, why would you want Parliament to pass an error? The paper is yours.

DR MUYINGO: It is $5 million. Madam Speaker, what we are requesting for is, give us this money -(Interjections)- We have already told you about these centres of excellence. At Elgon, for example, the machines are all outdated and we want to replace them. We need to retrain the tutors who are there, and this is urgent because there are children on the campus. Even after we have improved and refurbished the centres of excellence, we shall be going to these other technical institutes, which are going to be twinned with the centres of excellence.

The centres of excellence are already known to you and you have been there and seen the obsolete machines. This is what we want to handle so that after we have worked on the centres of excellence, then we work on the training and developing the curricula. All these are indicated in the report. It is funds that have been failing us and that is what we are asking for.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know that not everybody is satisfied. I still do not have a girls’ dormitory at the institute in Kamuli. However, the issue of youth unemployment and lack of skills is now a security risk to this country. That is why they are in the betting houses, breweries, etcetera.

From my Committee on Appointments, we had proposed a committee on implementation to follow up but you rejected it. This is what we wanted to address. Now, we are just there. Let us help the young people of this country but monitor the construction and implementation better. I have been to Elgon and everything is very obsolete.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me an opportunity. I wanted to make a correction. The loan we talked about was passed on 1 November 2001. Luckily enough, the person who was in the Chair was the Deputy Speaker then, Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga. 

What I am trying to raise is that we are all aware that we want jobs. I can tell you that if they wanted us to sell Parliament to create jobs, we would do it. However, if we are going to do something because we are looking for a solution, which is not well thought-out, we are going to make even more mistakes. We would rather get this money, put it in the bank and allow these youth to borrow and eat. That is one of the alternatives but I am not proposing it for now.

I know all of us must go to school and apply the knowledge we get from there. The current Deputy Leader of Government Business, hon. Gen. Moses Ali, went to do law but he is not using it. He is sitting with it here. Therefore, not every qualification we get is for employment; some of it is for enjoyment. (Interruption)

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform hon. Nandala-Mafabi that the knowledge of law by the Rt Hon. Moses Ali is well utilised in Cabinet. (Laughter)

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Since I am the custodian of the knowledge of law, I can give evidence of how I use it and how it is helpful to me. One of the ways in which it is helpful is by making me able to understand the way this argument is going. This is the law. (Laughter) If I did not go for the law course, I would not have understood the presentation of the honourable member. 

We must save this country, Madam Speaker. We must bring back the proposal of creating the implementation committee. That is the only solution for the past and future. If we do not form that committee, even if you have a degree in taxation or whatever for a hundred years, it will not help us. Even if you delay this argument for two years, it will not help us. We should form a committee and let it follow these loans. That is when we shall have a correct way of saving this country. (Applause) That is how law is used. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I am very happy that the law is being used, though there is no legality here now. You were using knowledge got from school.

Since we want money for vocational institutions and they are necessary, it should not take long for the minister to say by tomorrow that from the three stages, this is what they approved and this is what they built; we never built these because of these reasons and we returned the money to the bank. This is because it was borrowed money. For the second stage, he can say “we borrowed money, built 25 institutions and these are the remaining ones”. We will understand. He can then come up and say “for the loan we are getting now, we are going to do X and Y” and maybe, “we have learnt from our mistakes”. When we approved the loan on 1 November 2001 –(Interruption)

DR MUYINGO: What you are talking about are not stages. These are components. These are conditions of the bank. Once we change anything, it means we have to go back again.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I am sorry if I used the word “stages”. I am saying we in Government have decided to build the institutions in phases. When we are borrowing, we borrow for a different phase. We started with 39, came to 25 and now we are borrowing for four. Those are the phases I am referring to. I do not mean that we are borrowing money in phases to do the work –(Interruption)

MR KWIZERA: Thank you for giving way. I think the honourable minister should be informed that the loan they are asking for should have mainly two components – the tangible and intangible. In that regard, where are we putting the money mainly? When you look at page 12, there is nothing tangible. What we are supposed to borrow for is getting a very small percentage.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Madam Speaker, I had opted not to speak because I come from Lango where the Lira institute is and it is in the committee report, and hon. Nandala-Mafabi would have assumed that I have conflict of interest. However, I also do not represent Lira; I represent Oyam South.

Madam Speaker, I would like to first support the motion. This is because, in the case of Lira the money is for continuing where the bank left the institution. There was a loan before and what they did was to rehabilitate Lira Technical Institute. After the rehabilitation, there is supposed to be capacity building and infrastructural development. Therefore, it is not that this loan is the beginning. If we do not pass this loan request - The bank had agreed with Government on completion of each of these institutions up to a certain level to make them centres of excellence. Therefore, if you stop at this stage, I would like to know from the minister what the implications would be. 

I have been following the Lira institution and they have done the first phase, which was rehabilitation. The second phase is now supposed to go into capacity building and infrastructure development, to bring it up to the level of a centre of excellence. I appeal to the House; in order to make these institutions centres of excellence, the four institutions should be supported so that they are completed. 

What we can do is to look at what hon. Kwizera has critiqued. If it is true that you are putting much of the money on administration, we can refocus it on ensuring that we now complete the original vision the bank had envisaged for those centres of excellence.

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, I wanted to give Members information. First of all, establishing and equipping the four centres of excellence with modern equipment requires $62 million. That includes civil works. That is the stage at which Lira, Elgon and Bukalasa are at. We will also give them training materials and train the instructors. The students in Lira, Elgon and the other institutions have to also go for internship. This figure will also take care of internship and others. That is why we need the $62.2 million. 

Once that is done, then we will support the 12 public vocational training institutes. They are going to be identified competitively, but each region will have an institute to twin up with the centre of excellence. The centres of excellence are going to take the bulk of the money. It is not for administration as hon. Kwizera was saying; the first one was for the reforms. It is taking very little money and that is $5 million. That is the information that I wanted to give.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I have now got another idea. I would like to use my law. When you say $62.2 million, it means you are exact. The moment you put a decimal point somewhere, it means you know exactly what you are going for. How did you come to $62.2 million? That means you have already identified the items you are going to pay for. You should tell us. Alter those items in your vote - You have got even procurement-(Interruption)

DR MUYINGO: Please, check on your reports on page 12. Do you see those details? That is how the $62.2 million is going to be spent- For the centres of excellence, civil works are going to take $20 million, equipment is going to take $10.5 million, training materials are going to take $3.8 million, training of instructors is going take $2.8 million, internship is going to take $2 million-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to remind this House that in the second session, our Committee on Science and Technology went around the country, especially to visit these technical institutes. They came here with a report and we were all frightened about the state of those institutions. We supported them and we even resolved that we wanted a ministry of science and technology. This came out of their report. Therefore, honourable members, let us support this loan request and improve those facilities so that the children study. (Applause) 

I put the question that the loan request be approved. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Chairpersons of committees, members and the clerks, can we have all the reports from the sectoral committees tomorrow? I am really begging, so that we can move. Honourable members, the House is adjourned to 2 o’clock tomorrow. Thank you and have a good evening.

(The House rose at 6.30 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 21 April 2016 at 2.00 p.m.)

