Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.




Tuesday, 23 April 2019

Parliament met at 2.09 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. As you remember, I had suspended plenary to allow the committees finish with all they needed to do to facilitate the work of the plenary.

You will also recall that this is the first time we are making an attempt to handle the ministerial policy statements separate from the budget so that we can have a debate on the ministerial policy statements, reports of the committees, including the report after examining the alternative policy statements from the Opposition. I hope that has been done. We had a few extra days because of Easter and I hope that by today, 23rd of April, all these matters have been resolved. I will be speaking on that shortly.

We have an invitation from the Ministry of Health to the Uganda Parliamentary Forum on Malaria on the Mass Action against Malaria Campaign. You are requested, through the Office of the Speaker, by the Ministry of Health, as members of the Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Malaria (UPFM), to attend a sensitisation retreat on malaria, the UPFM strategic plan and work plan. It will take place on 2nd and 3rd of May at Laico Hotel, Entebbe. The retreat starts at 8.30 a.m. every day.

This invitation will stand on condition that we have finished everything to do with Members involved in this UPFM. If you have reports that are pending and unfinished business, you might have difficulty getting the individual clearance to go and attend this particular retreat. This invitation is signed by the Minister of Health, Dr Ruth Jane Aceng. Please endeavour to attend, on the conditions I have already stated.

I sincerely hope you had a fruitful Easter season. The essence of Easter for the Christians is that whatever seemed dead in life resurrects and is alive because of the resurrection of Jesus Christ who suffered for us. I hope, therefore, that your potential interests, commitments and conduct of life have resurrected during this period. I do further hope that the short break has rejuvenated your spirit and commitment to execute the mandate of Parliament and more especially at this time when the budget process has to be completed.

On a sad note, I wish to remember the families and friends who have been affected by death and destruction. My heart goes out to the families of the 310 persons who have so far been reported to have perished in bomb blasts in churches and hotels in Sri Lanka. 

I wish to remember the families of Ugandans across the country who have passed on as a result of destruction of homes and other properties caused by violent hailstorms and turbulent winds. The last reported cases have been in Kiruhura and Buyende districts.

I wish to remember the family of Dr Catherine Agaba who was a medical practitioner at International Hospital Kampala, whose life was cut short reportedly by a security guard.

The death of Prof. Roy Mugerwa has also occurred. Prof. Mugerwa was a medical doctor who has had an illustrious career in Uganda and abroad. He was a former director of the Uganda Heart Institute, a professor of medicine in Mulago Medical School and other universities abroad as well as a researcher. His services will be greatly missed in Uganda and the world at large. 

Let us rise and observe a moment of silence for all these.

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: May their souls rest in eternal peace.

Honourable members, as already indicated, lives and property have been lost in the recent past due to violent hailstorms largely caused by the destruction of tree cover. Homesteads, schools, churches and the countryside are totally bare and exposed. There is no tree cover. This is a wakeup call to all of us to sensitise our population to plant trees as well as protect swamps for the good of the environment. Trees are vital as they act as wind breaks and calm down winds which would otherwise be very destructive. 

This is the onset of the rainy season. I urge honourable members to set an example for their communities by planting trees in their compounds, the compounds of schools, religious institutions and along major roads to help protect the environment. On my part, I have scheduled the 29th to go and commission tree planting in seven schools and the children will be participating with me. Please, do the same.

I also call upon the Ministry of Water and Environment and its agencies to set up sensitisation campaigns to the communities on the safe management of the environment and, where possible, mobilise tree seedlings which can be distributed to the populace for planting. We have to take serious and planned action on our environment; otherwise, posterity will judge us very harshly and climate change will wipe out this nation and the continent. 

As regards the processing of the budget, I have received reports that sectoral committees are concluding with the exercise of processing the budget. However, we must note that the process has been slow. 

Relatedly, it has been brought to my attention that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has in a way been delaying the authorisation of the adjustments in allocation of indicative planning figures, which in turn delays the ministries, departments and agencies in completing with the submission of the ministerial policy statements. A case in point is that of the Ministry of Education and Sports, which could not make headway because of the said hiccup. I, therefore, call upon the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development henceforth to clean up its house and meet its obligation as spelt out in the Public Finance Management Act and the Budget Act. Without addressing such concerns, Parliament will continue to have difficulties in meeting the timelines for processing the budget spelt out in the statutes. 

I note that we have exactly four parliamentary working days to consider the sectoral committee reports and refer the approved recommendations to the Budget Committee. We should bear in mind that there are 16 sectoral committees to handle. Due to the great task before us, compared to the time available, I am proposing the following to enable Parliament to complete the consideration of ministerial policy statement reports:

Schedule of sittings 

    1. Parliament to sit on Monday and Friday for the budget period. Further, Parliament to sit from tomorrow, Wednesday, 24 April 2019, in the morning and afternoon.
    2. Parliament to sit on Thursday, 25 April 2019 in the morning and afternoon.
    3. Parliament to sit on Friday, 26 April 2019 in the morning.
    4. Parliament to sit on Monday, 29 April 2019 in the afternoon. 
    5. Parliament to sit on Tuesday, 30 April 2019 in the morning and afternoon.

As you recall, that will be the last day when the House is supposed to be considering the reports on the ministerial policy statements from the sectoral committees. Thereafter, we will be forwarding these reports to the Budget Committee for harmonisation so that we can be on track with the rest of the budget issues.

During the consideration of the ministerial policy statements, a Member is requested to prioritise and choose to speak on only one sector, as there will be no time. A Member will only be allowed to speak for three minutes and therefore, a precise and concise presentation will be the only course of action advisable to the honourable members.

Members are requested to identify the choice of one committee they would like to speak on and submit their names to the Clerk for enlisting. The first 15 Members, who will have registered with the Clerk, will be allowed to speak during the debate on that sector.

I wish to draw the attention of Members to rule 148(2) and (3) on the consideration of reports on policy statements and the proposed annual budget. It provides thus: “(2) The House shall consider the sectoral committee reports and refer the approved recommendations to the Budget Committee for reconciliation, harmonisation and consolidation, not later than the 30th day of April each financial year. 
(3) The Budget Committee shall present its report to the House, not later than the 15th day of May each financial year.” 

I call for your indulgence and cooperation regarding changes instituted to enable Parliament to expedite the budget process. 

Honourable members, I wish all of you a very fruitful and productive week. It is a heavy week but we are up to the task and we shall deliver. Let us deliver this budget in time. Thank you very much.

There are some urgent matters that Members requested to raise. I will start with the Member representing Kagadi District.

2.23
MS JANEPHER MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kagadi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On 26 March and 6 April 2019, heavy rainstorms struck seven subcounties in Kagadi District, causing the death of one person and injuring many, with seven in critical condition. These storms destroyed a number of homes, leaving 189 families homeless. Crops and animals were also destroyed, which has caused food shortage in these subcounties. Mugalike Health Centre II had its roof blown off and all the drugs and medical equipment were destroyed.

Mr Speaker, I have approached the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees on a number of occasions but nothing has been done to help my people. The district committee on disaster sent a report to the ministry but all in vain. My people and I are very devastated; we are in a state of need but we have not got any help from the Government. 

My prayers are that the Government intervenes and provides a quick response regarding the basic needs of the people, which includes providing temporary accommodation, medical services, food plus helping them with iron sheets as they start building a new life.

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. Thank you.

2.25
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, this morning in our coordination meeting in the Prime Minister’s Office, we were informed that the meteorological department has informed the Office of the Prime Minister and the country that the ongoing rains are going to be very stormy and will definitely be destructive. 

Secondly, we were also informed that the Office of the Prime Minister is working very hard to collect information throughout the country on these destructions that have been caused by the rains so far. Very soon, the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees will come to the House and give comprehensive information about what has happened as a result of the destruction caused by the rains and what is oncoming. Right now, the Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness and two other ministers are in Busoga to see what the rain did yesterday.  

Otherwise, we are aware and we are preparing to inform the House about whatever steps we intend to take. However, most of the issues involve destruction and destruction means repair and repair means money. Probably, the only way will be for us to come to request for more funds to do the repairs. We shall also provide food for those areas that need it. We have some rice from China, which will be given out very soon. The House should bear with us; we will soon inform the House because we are aware of what is happening. Thank you.

2.28
MR PAUL AKAMBA (Independent, Busiki County, Namutumba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On 12 April this year, a one Mubarak Mugeni, a businessman aged 48 years and residing in Namutumba Town Council, was shot dead by Namutumba police officers without a clear explanation. Up to now, the relatives of the deceased and the public have not received any explanation from police or the Ministry of Internal Affairs about the circumstances under which Mubarak was shot. 

Mr Speaker, the shooting took place at 9.00 p.m. within the town council. We do not know why the police decided to take the law in their hands. Otherwise, the criminal justice system of our country is well established in the Constitution. Even when the police had suspected him to have committed a crime, the appropriate thing should have been to arrest him, arraign him before court and prosecute him.

Mr Speaker, this young man was killed in an extrajudicial manner. He left behind six helpless children and two wives. He was the sole breadwinner of the home and they are now suffering.

My prayer is that Government should come up with a statement clearly explaining the circumstances under which a one Mubarak Mugeni was shot dead. The statement should also give details of the police officer who shot him, cordoned off the scene of crime and hid the body for almost a day. From the time he was shot at 9.00.p.m, the body was hidden in the police barracks up to 3.00.p.m the following day. We have failed to understand this and the public needs to know the motive behind that shooting.  

My second prayer is: What plan does the Government have to take care of these innocent children and the wives that are already suffering because a reckless police officer shot dead Mugeni Mubarak? Thank you.

2.31
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): First of all, on behalf of the Government, I would like to convey sincere condolences to the family upon the untimely demise of the deceased. Indeed, the police must find out what happened and the law must take its course. However, for the details as he requested, we shall ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to come and make a comprehensive report to this House on this issue. Thank you.

2.32
THE DEPUTY OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Roland Mugume): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on an urgent matter of national importance concerning the mistreatment, brutal and illegal arrests by police of opposition leaders in this country.

Mr Speaker, it has come to our notice that the police and the army are under instructions to disperse any political meeting organised by the Opposition and arrest any organisers, despite the notifications given to the police early enough, as the law prescribes.

On 4 April 2019, police denied Forum for Democratic Change (FDC) party the right to hold their meetings in Kabale District, despite the party officially writing to the police, indicating the venues and the officials that the FDC party leadership was coming to meet. Police barricaded the vehicle of Col (Rtd) Dr Kizza Besigye. In the evening, while appearing on some radio station programme, the police switched the radio station off air and arrested the former FDC presidential flag bearer.

On 10 April 2019, police in Tororo stormed an FDC meeting, arrested the party president, beat up supporters and injured many and yet the FDC had written to police informing them of the intended meeting. On 13 April 2019, police stormed the studios of some radio station in Jinja, where the former party president, Dr Kizza Besigye, was being hosted together with the party leaders. They switched the station off air under the orders of the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) and they detained Dr Besigye for more than 10 hours.

On 18 April 2019, Dr Kizza Besigye was removed from the studios of some radio station in Mubende, bungled on a police pickup truck and he was illegally held for the entire day and later released without any charges. In Mubende, police vandalised the radio station and infrastructure. 
 
Mr Speaker, these events of harassment and torture of our supporters have affected the operations of registered parties. Also, the Democratic Party (DP) was denied access to Jinja, despite having written to the Inspector General of Police (IGP) about the reunion meetings. Instead, police ended up teargassing their supporters and arresting some.   

Mr Speaker, relatedly, hon. Kyagulanyi has had running battles over practicing his profession and trade guaranteed by the Constitution. He cannot hold concerts even at his premises in Busabala, which were condoned off recently with revellers being denied access, yet he had written to the police a month before, although the police never gave him feedback.

Mr Speaker, my prayers are: One, can Government explain why they are harassing opposition political parties by denying them the opportunity to operate and access the population yet the NRM party is busy campaigning for sole candidature? This is evidenced recently when Gen. Kahinda Otafiire officiated at a function in Mbarara and on 27th, there is going to be another function for the NRM party in Kabale District; they are mobilising in the Kigezi region.

Secondly, why is the Government continuing to deny hon. Kyagulanyi the right to do his trade that he is well known for? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.36
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to supplement on the matter of national importance raised by my colleague. 

On Good Friday, Bishop Christopher Kakooza, the Bishop of Mukono Diocese, Bishop Ssebaggala and I visited inmates at Mukono-Kawuga Remand Prison. When we reached there, we found out that the number of prisoners in that small prison had grown so big and the prison authorities told us that they do not have anywhere to accommodate those prisoners.

Mr Speaker, we later discovered that over 50 of the remanded prisoners in that prison are young men, who have been rounded up from Mukono Municipality and the neighbouring areas. They have been charged with the offence of being vagabonds simply because they were found with paraphernalia related to the People Power political pressure group.

Mr Speaker, the deployment of the soldiers in Mukono has brought about patrols where soldiers arrest any young person they find dressed in red and any person dressed in a red cap. Therefore, we would like to request the Government to tell us whether it is an offense for anyone to be dressed in red, so that we can tell our people to stop doing so to avoid being arrested.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, you are supposed to assist us to do work here in Parliament. However, as we sit here right now, the people of Kyadondo East cannot be represented because their Member of Parliament has been detained at his home together with his children.

Mr Speaker, I am supplementing on the matter raised by my honourable colleague, hon. Roland Mugume, on those two issues - the fact that an MP cannot leave his house to come to Parliament and that so many young men are being imprisoned just because they have dressed in red. I beg that the Government comes out to clearly tell us what we should tell our people - whether it is an offence these days to dress in red and to pronounce that power belongs to the people by publically declaring “people power”, which means that power belongs to the people. Is it an offence that people should be imprisoned in Mukono and other areas especially in Buganda region? Thank you.

2.40
MR MOHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, I thank you. I have only one issue to emphasise. The law is extremely clear. Much as we have attempted to appeal this law in the Constitutional Court, all organisers are endeavouring to do their best to obey the law and fulfil every condition that is stipulated in the Public Order Management Act. What is left for us and for other organisers, who have recourse to constitutional means, is to obey the law as stipulated.  However, with impunity, and not on one, two or three occasions, the police simply ignore what the law states. 

This morning, I visited hon. Robert Kyagulanyi, who is my neighbour, at his home at about midday to encourage him that even if everything has happened, we can still go to Parliament and do the work he was elected to do. I was shocked that there were truckloads of policemen at his gate and a conversation ensued, which I listened to. He told them that he was going to Parliament to represent the people of Kyadondo. They said, “You have only two choices; either go back to your house or we arrest you”. Those are the only choices that were given to him - either he goes back to his house or they arrest him. Later on, he said, “Let me go and do my work”. They said, “You are under arrest”. 

He had been through this with his family. I advised him that arrest is not the best thing possible. He went back to his house. For how long will he stay inside his house and fail to represent the people of Kyadondo?  Therefore, what we would like to know from Government are two things: One, whether they suspended the Public Order Management Act and it is no longer applicable because recourse to it does not help; two, whether hon. Robert Kyagulanyi Ssentamu can do his job, for which the people elected him to do. 

They have stopped him from practising his profession. They are also stopping him from being a representative of the people of Kyadondo for one simple crime - they perceive he wants to be the President of the Republic of Uganda. Is it criminal in this country for any Ugandan to declare that he intends to contest for the presidency of the Republic of Uganda? Does the resolution of sole candidature of 2021 and beyond stop others from vying for the same seat? We did not interfere with Kyankwanzi; why are they interfering with the rest? 

Those are the simple issues we want Government to commit to. If they are suspending the Public Order Management Act, let them tell us. We will find another way of engaging in this struggle because the struggle that ushered in NRM was not through the streets or Parliament. The people of Uganda know how to change governments. If that is what they want, they will do so.

2.43
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, I have heard all the complaints raised by various Members of Parliament. I also watched television yesterday – I think NTV – and heard the police spokesperson saying that what happened was because hon. Kyagulanyi and his team did not follow the guidelines given to them that would govern their shows. That is why that thing happened at the beach yesterday. This is what I heard and saw on TV.

Secondly –(Interruption)

MR ZAAKE: Mr Speaker, is the Prime Minister in order to misinform the House by basing on what he saw on television - that he heard. He is basing on hearsay; he does not have the information.

Mr Speaker, I was with hon. Kyagulanyi and we followed the guidelines. What I can inform you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, is that we followed the guidelines but they still cancelled our show. We organised a press conference at hon. Kyagulanyi’s premises but they informed us that we could not access hon. Kyagulanyi’s property; something which we think is not good. Therefore, is the Rt Hon. Prime Minister in order to misinform the House basing on hearsay? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know whether I heard properly. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister said he watched on NTV and was quoting what he heard. That is what he heard on the television. I do not know whether it is not proper to listen to televisions these days –(Laughter)– but I thought that is a source of information for many of us. You gave the Prime Minister information on the rest of it but I cannot rule him out of order for watching television and quoting what he saw and heard. (Laughter) 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the issue of the series of events that have happened against members of the Opposition in the country, I think, without saying I have heard from the police headquarters or not, there are two types of people, the Opposition and the police. Therefore, there must be some deliberate defiance against the order of the police, otherwise why are there a series of problems? 

Without speculating, we will find out what is happening with the police; otherwise, the primary work of the police is to maintain law and order in the country –(Interjection)– No, I think I am clear and have clarified -(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification on two issues from the Rt Hon. First Deputy Prime Minister. 

First, he mentioned that hon. Ssentamu was blocked from accessing the beach. I would like to seek clarification why his home, up to today, is being blocked. He is under house arrest and police is stopping him from leaving his home to come to Parliament to do his work. Why is that so?

Secondly, you did mention that it seems there is some clash between the opposition leader, Dr Kizza Besigye, and the police. I would like to find out from you - when Dr Kizza Besigye was invited to speak on the radio programme in Jinja, there were no police there. When he was peacefully communicating to the public on the radio programme, why did the RDC give the police the order to switch off the radio station and cause arrest? Why is that happening?

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I was still explaining but the Member insisted he wanted to clarify, so I gave him a chance to clarify. However, I think he has even confused the situation more rather than clarifying it. Therefore, I do not know how to answer him because the issue he has presented has not been raised at all. 

Nevertheless, I was saying it seems there is a conflict of interest between the police and the Opposition. Otherwise, why don’t they agree? The law has not changed and this country is run on the basis of multi-partyism. Therefore, that means people must talk within the guidelines. You cannot just talk as you wish. This is according to the spokesperson of the police who said the Opposition did not follow the guidelines –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, I did not want to interrupt Gen. Moses Ali who was in prison for treason and who also formed the rebel group, the West Nile Bank Front. That is how he had wanted to remove Government. 

Mr Speaker, we raised this matter a couple of weeks ago. The Government made an undertaking that the Minister of Internal Affairs, who I guess we will not have to listen to on radio and TV programmes, would come here and explain why these series of events are taking place. The former rebel of West Nile Bank Front says he does not know that there is a conflict of interest. 

The procedural issue I am raising, therefore, is whether it would not be correct for Government to honour its commitment of presenting a coherent statement on events that are already on the record of Parliament, maybe including the ones that are being raised today relating to Dr Kizza Besigye and hon. Robert Kyagulanyi. The former Uganda National Rescue Front (UNRF) rebel commander is wasting parliamentary time in generalities when these matters are specific. He should explain which event on a particular day was called off by police and the reasons why. That is the procedural issue.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I was actually hoping the Prime Minister was going to conclude that way or ask for a statement to be brought to explain the circumstances.

2.50
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I am giving information after I asked for permission from the Prime Minister. 

I have witnessed incidences where the Opposition leaders have worked very well with the leaders in the districts with the assistance of police. On 11 April 2019, for example, we hosted People Power leaders in Kiboga. Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, hon. Zaake and some top leaders visited me in Kiboga. Hon. Ssewanyana might not have been there but the leaders were invited. They went to the RDC’s office and offered an explanation and as a result, their function went on very well. Police were there and I was also in Kiboga to make sure their function goes on very well. 

Therefore, there might be a problem in some districts where either the people are overzealous or there is something that Government has to intervene in and find out why we encounter such. There could be people who want to create scenes unnecessarily. Let people go and address their supporters as long as they will not abuse Government. 

I was provoked when I was coming from Nkumba where my brother, hon. Kyagulanyi, and my friend, Dr Besigye, were. On the way back at Abaita Ababiri, the roads were closed. The people could not allow other road users to use the road and there were no police to guide the people. However, where there is understanding with the leaders to stop – I am not lying, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. This happened in Kiboga on 11 April 2019. 

The isolated cases must be investigated to find out what exactly the problem is between the police and the people who go to address their supporters who sent them to Parliament. I was bringing out a picture which was not brought out when hon. Muwanga Kivumbi stood up. I thought he was going to talk about it. We have incidences where we have run functions smoothly with the Opposition. For that matter, I could not sit with this information, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, since it is relevant to what we are discussing.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Mr Speaker, I would like to conclude this matter but before I do so, let me correct two wrongs that were made so that the Hansard is corrected for the future generation. The first one is, I am not and I was not a leader of West Nile Bank Front. This must also be corrected in some people’s heads. The group I led is homework for some people to find out. (Laughter) It is because if up to now you do not know what I was, then I do not think you will ever know. Anyway, I will help the colleague; I was a leader of the Uganda National Rescue Front - UNRF in short. 

Secondly, I was indeed charged with treason but I was acquitted. Therefore, it means my record is clean. When I was in prison –(Interjection)– I was cleared. Therefore, I do not think I have any record to say that I was convicted because I was not. Those are the two big errors I would like to correct.

Finally, I would like to say sorry for all that has happened. However, I am going to ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to come and make a comprehensive report on this issue. I would like to also appeal that we should follow the law which we passed here together. If you provoke police whose primary duty is to maintain law and order, then you will have some problems with the police. Otherwise, everybody is moving and speaking of no problem. I suggest you should adjust your deliberate means of defiance. You seem to have a lot of energy for defiance. Thank you.

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, I beg for your indulgence. Our being here is your responsibility – for our welfare and ensuring that we are safe while coming here and while here. Would it not be procedurally okay if this House would pronounce itself, through you, on the right of Members of Parliament to be here and represent their people and to request the security organs not to bar Members of Parliament from attending Parliament? It is being done; as we are proceeding, the people of Kyadondo East are not represented. Their Member of Parliament wishes not to be away from this House. However, they are not being represented today because their Member of Parliament has been stopped from attending Parliament. Tomorrow, it will be me and nobody will be here to speak on my behalf. 

Is it not procedurally okay for this House, through you, to pronounce itself on that privilege Members of Parliament should always enjoy – being able to come here and represent their people?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the subject of parliamentary privileges and immunities has been discussed. Issues have been tested in the supreme courts in some countries and they have made decisions on them. Parliament is not a haven or a place of safety for criminal conduct. If you commit a crime outside Parliament, the privileges and immunities of Parliament cannot protect you. Parliament is not a haven for criminality. Please, remember this when you conduct your affairs outside Parliament.

Secondly, let me inform you that five British Members of Parliament have been prosecuted and sent to jail. They tried to raise parliamentary immunity and privileges but the court rejected this and sent them to jail. A former minister of the British Government lied in court and was prosecuted and sent to jail; he served a jail sentence. 

Let us make a distinction; parliamentary privileges and immunities relate to what you say and do in Parliament. They do not relate to what you say and do outside Parliament. Please, remember this for it might help you in the future. If you go outside Parliament and start beating up people or stealing things and you come and say, “I am Member of Parliament with privileges”, you will not have the protection of Parliament. There are procedures for dealing with these things; so let us be honourable in the way we do things.

There is no way the Speaker or this House can go and say that we are defending every Member of Parliament for whatever they do anywhere else outside this House. It cannot be possible for us to do that. Therefore, let us heed that first of all, we are law observers as Members of Parliament - that is why we are honourable Members of Parliament – and then the rest of the things follow. 

If you have cases, we have signed warrants that have been forwarded to the Speaker’s office to be forwarded to the Members for execution; we have signed them. Yes, it is there. When they request that they use the parliamentary system to go and arrest someone, they bring the warrant and we sign it and Members of Parliament go and answer those questions. However, where you are in flagrante delicto as they say – you are found in the course of committing an offence – you may not have recourse to those procedures. Therefore, let us learn to distinguish these things because it will help all of us. It does not matter – the Attorney-General is here; maybe you can help speak on this subject.

Let us respect these immunities and privileges because they relate to what we do and they are supposed to facilitate our engagement in Parliament. You are protected when you are doing Parliament work. Therefore, nothing you say or do here can be used against you in court. However, if you start beating up people here, you may not be protected. Let us observe these things.

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, I agree with your guidance but until someone has been told that they are prevented from attending Parliament because of a, b, c, d - In the case of hon. Kyagulanyi, he has only been confined in his house and cannot come to attend Parliament and no explanation has been given to him and this Parliament. Therefore, what we are pleading for is for Government to allow him to come and attend Parliament or tell him why they are not allowing him to come to Parliament. 

We say these things with a lot of pain. I personally wrote to the police when I wanted to have a rally in my constituency and I saw a regional police commander on camera lying that I did not write to them when he personally had acknowledged receipt of my letter. In the end, they kept me in my house the whole day and walked away laughing in the evening.

We are talking about these things that have happened to us individually. The gravity is not the same but the matter of hon. Kyagulanyi is that he cannot be allowed to come and attend Parliament. The reason they choose to confine him in his house – which is not a prison – is because they know he has done nothing.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why I would be very happy to receive the statement from the Minister of Internal Affairs tomorrow on these circumstances. On the basis of that, I can make directions because I will have known the facts. Facts tend to come from different sides in this House and relying on one and not the other could cause me problems more than I intend to be in at the moment. Thank you. 

3.07
MR JAMES NIRINGIYIMANA (NRM, Kinkiizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, the 22nd of April at around 3.00 p.m., two boys, Ronald Nuwagaba and Dan Tweheyo, both sons of Enos Bilimo in Rukarara village, Kihembe Parish, Kanyantorogo Subcounty, were abducted by unknown people and were taken to Congo. The kidnappers are calling the people of Kihembe to give $3,000 as a ransom.

This follows another case where a US tourist and guide were kidnapped early this month. This incident required Government forces to go and rescue these people. Prior to this, other people had been kidnapped. It was not until the US tourist was kidnapped that we saw Government going to rescue these people. What is surprising me is that since yesterday, there is little or no response from Government to have these people rescued. I pray that Government tells us whether it only gets concerned when non-citizens of Uganda are kidnapped, like the US tourist. 

Secondly, can we get a report on how the Government intends to secure this place so that our people can also enjoy the peace that we talk about, which peace was ushered in by the NRM Government in 1986? We need a report, especially by a joint team comprising of the Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Internal Affairs, in order for our people to have hope. I so pray.

3.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, we recognise the difficulties that the parents of the two children that have been mentioned are in. The Minister of Internal Affairs and all our security agencies will pursue this case to see to it that those two Ugandans are rescued and the House will be informed accordingly. 

3.11
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. About a week and a half ago, some people, purportedly from Amita Prisons, went and surveyed land two kilometres into Agago District, running all the way from Labwa Parish up to Lacekoto P7 School, westward to the areas of Kiwet and covering two kilometres all the way into Adilang Subcounty and they put mark stones.

The people of Lapyem Parish and Labwa Parish in Adilang Subcounty are so worried because mark stones have been planted on their land. It has started raining and they are wondering where these people who surveyed their land came from. Inquiries have been addressed to the prisons officials by the leadership of the district but these officials are not willing to give us information in as far as what has made them enter two kilometres into Agago District.

Therefore, I would like to call upon the Minister of Internal Affairs to stop Amita Prisons forthwith from conducting illegal activities by planting mark stones in areas that do not belong to them. We demand for an immediate explanation so that the district leadership gets to know that their land is safe and that the people in those areas are free and their land is secure. 

As we speak, the Officer in Charge (OC) of Amita Prisons indicated that he got an order from the Commissioner of Prisons in Kampala and up to now, we have not gotten any clear explanation as to why this activity is being conducted. That is why we need an explanation today, Mr Speaker. Thank you very much.

3.14
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As the Member of Agago has said, I think the right person to answer that question would be the Minister of Internal Affairs, perhaps together with the Minister of Lands, both of whom are not here. We will ensure that they come here tomorrow and respond to that question.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the revised certificate of gender and equity compliance for the financial year 2019/2020.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you may recall that it is revised because it had earlier been given by the responsible institution but some sectors had not been covered, because of the delay in the submission of ministerial policy statements so this is the revised certificate. Let the records capture it and it stands referred to all the committees to look at and advise us on how to proceed.

RESPONSES TO URGENT QUESTIONS UNDER RULE 46 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On (a) and (b), I got information this morning that both ministers are not in; they have been deployed. 

RESPONSE TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. GEORGE ABOTT OUMA ON THE FIRE THAT GUTTED PROPERTIES AT SIBARE BEACH IN BUTANIRA VILLAGE, SIGULU ISLANDS 

3.16
THE MINISTER OF RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Mr Hilary Onek): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I should have been presenting one paper with respect to the fires that gutted Sigulu Island Beach. However, we have realised that matters to do with disaster have become so vast. We have hundreds of applications and complaints from Members of Parliament regarding the various disasters in their constituencies.

As I speak, yesterday there was a big storm in Sigulu constituency, represented by hon. Kizige, where we lost 20 people. We, therefore, realise that we should present a more comprehensive paper that will address how we tackle this prolonged problem beyond the current case in Sigulu Island.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I request that you give us one week to come up with a comprehensive report that covers most of the problems raised by the MPs. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Ok, we give you one week.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FY 2019/2020 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as a recap to my earlier communication - while the chairperson prepares to present his report on the ministerial policy statement of that sector - I communicated that we will be structuring our debate on the policy statements. I will be repeating this at the end of the sitting today.

Each Member will debate for three minutes because the time is short. We have to finish this by 30 April and submit to the Budget Committee. Further, each Member will speak to only one report. Therefore, you are requested to select a particular sector that you would like to speak to; do your research and come and deal with that. You will not be allowed to speak to two reports. It is to enable us share the time properly.

I also requested that Members register and submit the list to the Clerk in regard to which sector they would like to debate. The first 15 Members will be the ones to speak on each sector and each Member will take three minutes. I will be repeating this at the end of this sitting. Otherwise, right now, the rules are not applying because they have just been announced but the one of three minutes will apply. Let us now allow the chairperson to present the report in five to seven minutes and then we will debate it.

3.20
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION (Mr Fred Bwino): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before I proceed, allow me to lay on the Table the original copy of the report, minutes of the committee meetings and other appendices. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR BWINO: Mr Speaker, in accordance with Articles 90 and 155 (4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and rule 148 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda, the Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation considered the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the two votes under its mandate and now presents its report.

The committee considered the ministerial policy statements for vote 023, which is the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation, together with three subventions under it. These are: 

    i) The Uganda National Council for Science and Technology; 
    ii) The Presidential Initiative on Banana Industrial Development (PIBID); and
    iii) Kiira Motors Corporation Limited (KMC).

The second is vote 110 - Uganda Industrial Research Institute (UIRI)

Mr Speaker, in the interest of time, I will not go through the methodology and other parts. Instead, allow me go straight to the observations and recommendations. Let me start with observations and recommendations regarding an overview of the entire Science, Technology and Innovation (STI) Sector.

The first observation is on the science, technology and innovation budget share in the national budget. The committee observed that the proposed total allocation to the sector for both recurrent and developments expenditures for the financial year 2019/2020 is Shs 159.74 billion. The overall share for the financial year 2019/2020 declined from 0.6 per cent in the last financial year to only 0.4 in the next financial year.

From the above analysis, it is certainly clear that the sector is not being given the attention it deserves. The reduction in the share of the budget allocation to the Science, Technology and Innovation sector is not reflective of Government’s commitment to strengthening the sector, considering its importance in the growth of the economy as envisaged in the National Development Plan II (NDP II).

In countries where science, technology and innovation have led to economic transformation, there is strong commitment to funding innovations from both Government and the private sector.

The committee also observed that science, technology and innovation are important means of promoting Uganda's development agenda because of their potential to drive innovative entrepreneurship that delivers growth and productive employment. 

Dynamic and innovative firms are also a key feature to successful industrialisation strategies. Therefore, the development of science, technology and innovation capabilities among firms should be a focus of attention for Government.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the share of the sector is increased to at least one per cent of the national budget, which is still below the target set by the African Union member states of funding for research and development being a minimum of one per cent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP).

The second observation is about the inadequate sector legal framework. The committee observed that the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation is constrained by inadequate legal frameworks that limit proper performance of the sector.

It is, therefore, the committee’s recommendation that its earlier recommendation that the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation tables Bills to put in place legal provisions to enhance the performance of the sector in the country be brought to Parliament for consideration.

In regard to vote 023, which is the ministry headquarters, the committee made the following observations and recommendations:

The Innovation Fund 

The fund was established in the financial year 2003/2004 as a mechanism to strengthen scientific research and innovation to support commercialisation of products, adaptation and transfer of technologies among others. However, since financial year 2018/2019 the fund has not been provided for in the budget as Parliament halted its provision of funds owing to absence of a legal framework to support its application. The lack of guidelines for the fund retarded the commercialisation and support to different innovations. The projects that were being supported stalled leading to loss of previous investments in these projects. 

Following advice from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the fund has since been changed in a number of ways. For example, it has been transformed to a programme under the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation. This programme is called the National Research and Innovation Programme.

Accordingly, a regulatory framework for this programme was developed by the ministry and approved by Cabinet. It qualifies for a number of areas including governance, sources and applications of resources, application and selection processes, disbursement protocols, funded project performance monitoring and evaluation, termination conditions, guidelines for ownership and use of equipment purchased under the National Research and Innovation Programme; intellectual property rights management for intellectual property generated using the National Research and Innovation Programme (NRIP); and implementation arrangements outlining roles and responsibilities of the key stakeholders.

The National Research and Innovation Programme is an instrument that has been developed by the ministry with its focus being on funding support for research and innovation. It sets a clear basis for the nature of support Government provides to innovators, as well as the funding instrument modalities for public, private, as well as donor funding support for innovation. 

The committee was informed that the National Research and Innovation Programme framework has since been approved by Cabinet. The committee, however, observed the NRIP framework is only administrative and it lacks legal force.

The committee recommends – 

    1. That the ministry should designate a specific unit to administer the programme and use the framework as the guiding principle.
    2. That Shs 35 billion be reinstated in the budget for financial year 2019/2020 to support the innovation programme.
    3. That the ministry should initiate a Bill to give the NRIP the necessary legal force.

Concerning inadequate public awareness and support to science technology and innovation - science, technology and innovation remains obscure to many Ugandans and there have been limited efforts to sensitise and mobilise the masses to appreciate its role in the transformation of society.

The committee recommends that the ministry should spearhead massive sustained science, technology and innovation public awareness campaigns to sensitise and mobilise the masses to appreciate its role in the transformation of society.

General Administration and Planning

The committee noted that under programme 1849 - general administration and planning - according to the estimates for financial year 2019/2020, there is an increase in the budget from Shs 460 million to Shs 755 million. In the ministry's justification, the committee was informed that there were two planned outputs for the coming financial year 2019/2020, which were not budgeted for in the previous financial year.  

The committee found the explanation unsatisfactory and re-allocated the increment of Shs 295 million to vote 110, which is domestic development for Uganda National Council of Science and Technology. Mr Speaker, that is the end of the observations about the ministry headquarters.

Regarding the subventions under the Uganda National Council of Science and Technology, the committee made the following observations:

National Science, Technology, Engineering and Innovation Skills

Enhancement Project

Science, technology, engineering and innovation have played a key role in the development of countries. With an aim of driving the country towards competitiveness through access to advanced technologies, retooling manpower by offering opportunities for technical skills, provision of technical and business advisory support to scientists and generally to support science and innovation in the country, Parliament passed a resolution on 26 September 2018 authorizing Government to borrow up to $84.73 million from the Exim Bank of China to finance the above project. 

With the offset of this project, a skills enhancement centre and a technology innovation and skills incubation centre will be established in Sanga and Namanve respectively. With these in place, it will attract flexible manufacturing industry learning models, covering the technology areas of construction machinery, automotive engineering, industry technology and agricultural mechanisation among others.

The committee notes that the amount to be financed by the loan from the Exim Bank of China is $84.73 million, representing 85 per cent of the contract sum of $99.69 million, while Government was to contribute up to 15 per cent of the contract sum, equivalent to $14.95 million. Additionally, for continuity of the project, Government was supposed to also invest $15 million spread over a period of five years, to support pre-project activities, including the recruitment and maintenance of human resources to implement the project sustainably as well as monitoring and evaluation.

The committee observed that –

    i)  During the process of approving the loan for this project by Parliament, Government committed itself to provide counterpart funding of $15 million. Whereas the first loan disbursement of Shs 114 billion was provided for in the financial year 2018/2019 budget, no counterpart funding was budgeted for.

    ii) The loan disbursement schedule provides that Shs 114 billion should be provided for - Shs 106.34 billion in the first year, Shs 156.29 billion in the second year and in the third year Shs 106.34 billion, Shs 2.57 billion for the fourth year and Shs 20.61 billion for the fifth year. It is, however, disheartening to note that whereas the loan had been approved by Parliament in September 2018, the credit agreement has never been signed. 

    iii) During consideration of the ministry's policy statement for financial year 2019/2020, the committee was informed that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development wrote a letter to Exim Bank in April 2019 expressing readiness of Government to sign the loan financing agreement. A copy of that letter is herewith attached as an appendix.

    iv) Cognisant of Government of Uganda's contribution of $15 million, which is approximately Shs 57 billion spread over a period of five 5 years, the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation wrote to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development requesting for Shs 12.41 billion as per the work plan and budget for financial year 2019/2020. However, this has since not been provided for in the ministry's budget proposal.

The committee, therefore, recommends as follows:

    i) That the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development must immediately sign the credit agreement for the project.

    ii) That the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development must provide counterpart funding as per the work plan by providing for Shs 12.41 billion in the budget for the financial year 2019/2020.

    iii) The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should strictly adhere to the loan disbursement schedule as per the agreement by providing Shs 114 billion in the financial year 2019/2020 budget needed to kick-start the project to avoid further delays.

I must note here that the ministry has provided for a smaller figure, which is Shs 86 billion.

The Stalled Sericulture Project  

During the financial year 2017/2018, the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation released Shs l.5 billion to finance a feasibility study and initiation of the commercialisation of Sericulture Technologies and Innovation Project under the Innovation Fund. The project has since stalled because no money was appropriated for the Innovation Fund in the budget for the financial year 2018/2019.

The Science, Technology and Innovation sector working group has since approved the Sericulture project as a standalone with a proposed funding of Shs 360 billion spread over a period of five years, with an initial disbursement of Shs 10 billion proposed for the financial year 2019/2020. However, this figure is not included in the budget estimates of that budget. 

The committee visited the said project site in Sheema District in December 2018 and observed that tremendous progress had been registered and a lot of resources were invested but the project is now stalled. 

The committee recommends that Shs l0 billion should be included in the financial year 2019/2020 budget to allow for continuity of the project and protection of the already invested resources.

Lack of Domestic Development Budget for the Uganda National Council for Science and Technology

It was reported that no funds were appropriated for domestic development for the Uganda National Council for Science and Technology for the financial year 2017/2018 and financial year 2018/2019, leaving many projects worth Shs 5.2 billion annually, which were funded under this budget line stalled for the two years. The list of the affected projects is attached as an appendix.

The committee observed that due to the budget constraints, the Uganda National Council for Science and Technology is unable to perform its mandate as the continuity of its projects entirely depends on the funds from domestic development. Similarly, funds already invested in those projects are put to waste as the projects have since stalled.

The committee, therefore, recommends reallocation of Shs 500 million from the Uganda Industrial Research Institute domestic development budget, Shs 500 million from the ministry headquarters domestic budget, Shs 295 million from the ministry headquarters Programme 1849, and Shs 4 billion from Kiira Motors Corporation domestic budget to finance the domestic budget for the Uganda National Council for Science and Technology.

The Long-term EU–Africa Research and Innovation Flagship Partnership on Food and Sustainable Nutrition Security and Sustainable Agriculture (LEAP-Agri Project)

This is a joint project under the EU-African Union partnership. It comprises of 30 partners, including 24 ministries and funding agencies from 18 European and African countries joining forces and working to build a co-funded project with financial support of the European Union.

The committee observed the following: 

        a. The Government, through the Uganda National Council for Science and Technology, pledged to raise one million euros as commitment fee in the LEAP-Agri Consortium Agreement. However, up to date, Government has never fulfilled this promise.

        b. The European Union offered to waive off €300,000 so that Government contributes only €700,000 in total, spread across a period of four years.

        c. The Uganda teams have not been able to take part in the 12 selected projects, which started in September last year, thus affecting implementation.

        d. In a letter dated 4 April 20l9 to the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation, the European Union set a deadline of 25 April 2019 for Uganda to either confirm participation in the joint research project or be dropped from the list of beneficiaries. Consequently, this will affect future beneficiaries of this project and the country at large.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development must effect the payment of €0.7 million before the deadline of 25 April 2019, which is a day away from today.

Kiira Motors Corporation Limited (KMC)

Regarding the delay of KMC works, the committee noted that although Shs 13.15 billion was released to Kiira Motors Corporation as of 31 December 2018, works did not commence until February 2019. The referenced works included the construction of the Kiira Motors vehicle assembly workshop and offices, which is located in Jinja. The committee noted that these delays may have an impact on the execution of KMC’s work plan and budget absorption for the Financial Year 2019/2020. 

The committee recommends- 

i. 	That Kiira Motors Corporation should review its work plan and timeframes and come up with more realistic targets.

ii. 	Reallocation of Shs 4 billion, as earlier noted, to the Uganda National Council for Science and Technology under domestic development. 

Local Content

The committee observed that commercialisation of Kiira's vehicles is likely to enhance application and use of Ugandan local materials. The plant will require a wide range of parts that include brake pads, seats, seat covers, batteries, glass, vehicle upholstery etc. The country should, therefore, adequately position itself to locally provide such parts, in addition to the direct jobs that will be created by the industry. 

The committee also noted that there is need for deliberate efforts to promote local content participation in line with the existing policy and regulatory frameworks so as to stimulate the domestic manufacture of auto parts and components.

The committee recommends that-

    i. A database of potential suppliers for the automotive industry be developed.
    ii. The capacity of these suppliers should be developed to supply goods that meet quality and quantity requirements for the industry.
    iii. A local content policy should be developed to ensure that Ugandans benefit directly and indirectly from the automotive industry. 
    iv. The Uganda Investment Authority should reserve land in the Jinja Industrial and Business Park for potential suppliers for the automotive industry to create a cluster of related industries.

Regarding limited co-ordination between KMC and other players in the industry, the committee made the following observations:

Kiira Motor Corporation plans to assemble and deploy three electric buses and three charging stations as part of the Electric Bus Pilot Programme in the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area, which is scheduled to be completed this year at a planned cost of Shs 4.54 billion. Whereas this is an initiative geared towards the decongestion of Kampala City and the reduction of air pollution through introduction of cleaner fuel mass transportation, there are similar efforts by Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA), which has developed the Greater Kampala Multi-modal Urban Transport Master Plan.

The committee observed that there is limited engagement within the different players in the transport sector including KMC, which would ultimately benefit from synergies to solve the transportation challenges of the country. The committee, therefore, recommends that KMC should actively engage with other players in the transport industry to ensure future uptake of its electric buses and better planning of public transport.

The last subvention under vote 023 is the Presidential Initiative on Banana Industrial Development (PIBID) and the committee made the following observations:

i. About the commercialisation of the Presidential Initiative on Banana Industrial Development, the committee observed that PIBID has registered great success in commercialisation of production of bananas as an industrial raw material in Bushenyi District. 

However, PIBID has been faced with budgetary constraints. For instance, in the financial year 2018/2019, no money was appropriated at the time of Budget approval due to lack of a legal framework for PIBID although Shs 23.3 billion had been proposed. It is important to note that Shs 4.7 billion was provided after approval of the budget for financial year 20l8/2019 of which Shs 1.196 billion was a reallocation and Shs 3.547 billion was a supplementary release.

The committee noted that Cabinet approved the transformation of PIBID into a limited liability company called the Banana Industrial Research and Development Centre (BIRDC) and the budget provision of Shs 23.3 billion for Financial Year 20l9/2020, although the ministerial policy statement only provided for Shs 5 billion.

The committee recommends that –

    (i) PIBID should be provided with Shs 5 billion as provided for in the financial year 2019/2020 on condition that the new entity is incorporated by 23 May 2029. 
    (ii) The funding gap based on –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which year?

MR BWINO: 2019.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. (Laughter)

MR BWINO: The year 2019 before the budget is passed. The funding gap between what is budgeted for PIBID for the Financial Year 2019/2020 and what has been provided for in the ministerial policy statement could be considered in future as a supplementary release. 

The committee also looked at the ownership of the PIBID and commercialised patents. The committee established that the PIBID project is fully owned by the Government of Uganda. However, the committee was informed that the intellectual property rights in all the five patents registered under the funding of PIBID are owned and are in the names of Dr Florence Isabirye Muranga. The five patents are:

1) 	Process for preparation of raw bananas;
2) 	Preparation of pre-cooked instant banana flour;
3) 	Extraction of low amylose (banana) starch from a triploid acuminate East Africa Highland variety and its application for industrial use;
4) 	Extrusion cooking process of banana/non-cooking banana flour into extrudets, which serve as raw material for a highly soluble extruded banana flour; and
5) 	Processing for extracting of banana wool and sponge (issued by African Regional Intellectual Property Organisation - ARIPO).

The committee further noted that when Government sought to partner with the innovator, Dr Florence Muranga, to industrialise her research, there was no legal framework or policy in Uganda regarding patents that catered for this kind of arrangement and this is still the position to date. The current legal framework only caters for innovators as individuals and not institutions. With the support of Government, the innovator was directed to expedite the protection of the innovations through registration.

The Solicitor-General, in observation of the Industrial Property Act, 2014, advised Government that it can use the patented innovations either through assignment or licensing issued by Dr Muranga subject to successful negotiation with the innovator.

It should be noted that this has to be done retrospectively since the patents have been in use by the Government of Uganda since the initiation of the PIBID project.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Government of Uganda should enter into negotiations with Dr Florence Isabirye Muranga regarding modalities for assignment or licensing of the patents for use in industrial products as advised by the Solicitor-General in the course of Financial Year 2019/2020. 

Finally, the committee looked at vote 110, Uganda Industrial Research Institute (UIRI).

The committee found that the Uganda Industrial Research Institute has been operating for more than four years without a board despite the legal requirement for UIRI to have a board. Additionally, UIRI is legally housed under the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives yet it is operationally and administratively placed under the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation. The committee observed that without a board, the implementation of UIRI’s objectives and performance of its functions are left to the discretion of the Executive Director of the institute.

The committee therefore recommends that the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation (MoSTI) brings to Parliament proposals to amend the UIRI Act before the end of the calendar year 2019 to address legal and governance inconsistences brought about by the establishment of the new ministry and the movement of UIRI from its former home to the MoSTI, which was done administratively without any legal backing.

In regard to UIRI, the committee also looked at technology transfer and innovation. The committee applauds the efforts by UIRI to develop innovations and application of technology in coming up with products that are novel to Uganda or those that address specific challenges within the country. Notable among these are the portable neonatal warmer prototype, which aims to reduce cases of neonatal death, particularly in premature babies.

The committee however notes that the costs associated with production of these prototypes seem to be abnormally high. There is no indication of what a single unit would cost at commercialisation and they lack commercialisation strategies.

The committee therefore recommends that -

i. 	Before prototypes are built, economic viability and the commercialisation plans of products should be evaluated; and

ii. 	UIRI should embrace the use of software to model various processes, conditions and economic viability of projects before actual building of prototypes in order to subsidise the cost of preliminary research.

Recruitment and Incubation Guidelines

Uganda Industrial Research Institute is mandated to nurture business start-ups to ensure their survival and self-sustainability but it lacks clearly stated guidelines on how a potential incubatee qualifies to benefit from the incubation services of the institution. This has resulted into UIRI consciously selecting potential incubatees whom it deems capable of contributing to its long-term success. 

Incubatees obtain information on opportunities informally through previous beneficiaries after which they submit written proposals to the Executive Director of UIRI for consideration. The successful businesses then go through the desired necessary trainings after which they apply for incubation. The committee was informed that a business may stay for up to two years in UIRI during incubation.

The committee notes that there are no clear guidelines on duration of stay for the incubatees within the premises. For instance, the committee noted that incubatees such as Mega Milk Industries had been housed at UIRI premises for more than five years. This is despite the fact that its current production capacity is over 10,000 litres of milk per day and it was able to buy its own equipment that it installed within the Government facility (UIRI). Such a would-be commercialised and self-sustaining entity does not only deprive Uganda from earning taxes but also prevents other start-up enterprises from accessing the incubation services at UIRI.

The committee observed that while UIRI's mode of consciously selecting potential incubatees may be desirable to sustain UIRI as an institution, it is discriminatory as it fails to include all would-be beneficiaries due to lack of access to information.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation should ensure that clear guidelines are developed for incubatees, clearly spelling out the mode of disseminating information to the public on the incubation opportunities, criteria for selection and duration of stay, among others, before the end of the second quarter of the financial year 2019/2020.

Industrial Services at the Machining, Manufacturing and Industrial Skills Training and Production Centre at Namanve
It was reported that works for the above project commenced in January 2018 and are expected to end in December 2019. The Uganda-China bilateral project is supported by a $30 million grant for the construction and equipping of specialised facilities that will be used for integrated training and production, as a means to churn out industry-ready personnel. However, Government of Uganda is supposed to provide counterpart funding of $270,000, which has since not been provided.

Key to note is that at the time the committee visited the project site in January 2019, tremendous progress had been registered. The committee, therefore, recommends that the Government of Uganda should adhere to its obligation by providing counterpart funding of US$ 270,000 to enable project implementation.

Conclusion

The overall Science, Technology and Innovation Sector budget is expected to reduce by 13.33 per cent, from Shs 184.3 billion in financial year 2018/2019 to Shs 159.74 billion in financial year 2019/2020. This is an indication that the percentage share of the budget is expected to reduce from 0.6 per cent in financial year 2018/2019 to 0.43 per cent in financial year 2019/2020. This is quite worrying since science, technology and innovation were identified as key drivers towards achievement of targets in the National Development Plan II but Government seems not to be walking its talk.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thought the idea was to receive recommendations on numbers from the sector, which numbers would be forwarded to the Budget Committee. I have not heard any proposals coming from the committee. What will be for harmonisation when you go to the Budget Committee? What numbers are you proposing? Is that the new procedure now? What are we going with to the Budget Committee? We need to have it on record. What figures are you recommending to the House, Mr Chairman? Otherwise, you will not have anything to present to the Budget Committee.

MR BWINO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The figures are embedded in our recommendations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, read for us the figures.

MR BWINO: I have a summary here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what we are looking for. In fact, you should have just done that and sat down. All the other things you said would be useless without those figures. There must be a total for both development and recurrent expenditure budgets so that we know what we are talking about.

MR BWINO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We propose as follows:

Vote 023 – Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation

The committee proposes that Shs 31,270,000,000 and Shs 114,240,000,000 be provided for as recurrent and development expenditure respectively. 

Vote 110 – Uganda Industrial Research Institute

The committee proposes that Shs 6,750,000,000 and Shs 7,480,000,000 be provided for as recurrent and development expenditures respectively. 

Mr Speaker, we also hereby propose that Shs 295,000,000 be reallocated from the development expenditure, under vote 023 (Programme 1849 of the ministry), to Uganda National Council for Science and Technology’s development expenditure budget. 

Under vote 023, we also propose that Shs 4,000,000,000, under Kiira Motors Corporation be reallocated to the Uganda National Council for Science and Technology’s development expenditure budget. 

Similarly, we propose that Shs 500,000,000 be reallocated from vote 110 to the Uganda National Council for Science and Technology. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the report of the Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation. The numbers have been proposed. The question that I propose for your debate is that the report of the Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation on the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation be adopted and the debate starts now. Each Member will take three minutes. 

Remember you only speak to one sector report. Therefore, if you have spoken to this sector report, you will not speak on any other sector report. (Laughter) I will start with the Member for West Budama County North.

4.13
MR OKOTH OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. 

I need clarification with regard to Kiira Motors. If the chairperson of the committee had presented this report in a country like Saudi Arabia or Iran, I am not sure whether he would have walked freely in the public without being lynched. I am saying this because the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development is investing a lot of resources in ensuring that we drill oil and sell, and we need markets. The markets are the very vehicles that use this oil. However, at the same time we have a ministry, which is trying to kill the market for the oil by coming up with an innovation that ensures that we do not use that oil. 

I find it very contradictory that we have got a government that is promoting oil exploration and we are spending a lot of money on it - When one looks at the budget for the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, they realise that much of it is going into oil. When one looks at the budget for the Ministry of Works and Transport, it is the same trend. These are among the top five ministries. Shs 4 trillion will be spent in promoting the extraction of oil. Despite this huge effort, we have got a sister ministry trying to water down these investments. I find this very contradictory. 

Therefore, the country must tell us the policy direction we are taking. Are we in for the promotion of oil exploration or are we promoting electric vehicles? These are not complementary; they are contradictory. The fact that we are trying to promote electric cars means we have found it difficult for people to use oil yet we are just going to start producing oil.  So, who is going to use this oil that we shall be –(Member timed out.)

4.16
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee chairperson for the report presented. 

I appreciate the fact that the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation was created to help Ugandans. However, there are very many loopholes. The ministry has not helped Ugandans at all. The Government has put in a lot of money for students to study science in order for them to be useful to this country in the years to come. However, these students who are studying science subjects in our universities are not given a chance to do practicals. Hence, they come out with theoretical knowledge. There is no policy from the Uganda Industrial Research Institute and the ministry that these students must be given a chance to go and do practicals so that when they come out, they are real engineers and are people practicing science.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, we are living in this country but we go through a lot of hell. This ministry has not helped us at all. The cases of radiation - this Government has no policy on disposal of dangerous substances. Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for requesting Members to go and plant trees and we are going to plant trees. However, in this country, we have no policy on disposal of dangerous substances. We have got old radiation machines in hospitals still being used and the ministry has done nothing about it. We have importation of old fridges in this country that are very dangerous and Government has done nothing about it. We have also got old computers that are offloaded in this country –(Interruption) 

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have the Uganda Atomic Energy Council charged with the responsibility of regulation of radioactive substances and prevention of ionisation. It is housed under the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. Under the same ministry, we also have a department to develop atomic energy and promote prevention of radiation. 

Therefore, is the Member in order to say that there is no effort at all yet we are aware that recently, the world President of the Atomic Energy Council was in Uganda and agreements were signed on how to dispose of radioactive substances? Otherwise, as I speak, in Mpoma, Government is constructing a zone for disposal of all substances that have high chances of ionisation.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That sounds like information. Honourable member, proceed. 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to advise the Member to visit Mulago Cancer Institute. The situation there is pathetic and this falls under the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation.

Mr Speaker, the ministry was created to enable Ugandans have a good life in this country and live longer but this is not the case. The cases in Mulago are terrible and the ministry has not helped our people at all. Ugandans are suffering yet there is a ministry and a research institute but all these have not been useful to Ugandans. You are asking Parliament to give more money and yet we do not see the results. You are even talking of the Kiira vehicle but we saw Kiira when it was brought here one time. When we wanted to look at the engine, they said “No, you cannot open” –(Member timed out.)

4.21
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to begin by thanking the chair and the committee for the report. 

My issue is on the Innovation Fund and I feel disappointed with the recommendations of the committee. When the President promised Ugandans money for innovations, what he had in mind was that innovators in this country needed money to help them commercialise their innovations. However, what the committee is saying is that the people that received the money failed to use it for the purpose that it was intended for and they have ended up creating a programme out of the money that was intended for innovation. 

Once they create a programme, it implies that they are looking for people to give jobs, looking for money to buy cars, furniture and all those administrative things, which are not necessary for innovators. How can the Minister of Science, Technology and Innovation say that they do not have a unit that can aid the innovators to get the funds they need? 

Mr Speaker, the scientists in this country are not people who are swinging in their chairs. What they need is money to commercialise what they have done –(Interruption)

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: Thank you, honourable colleague. The information I want to give you is that when our committee was scrutinising the Innovation Fund’s budget for this financial year, we were disappointed that the money that had been appropriated had been put under recurrent expenditure because there were no guidelines and so, we could not provide more funds. Actually, we tasked the Minister of Science, Technology and Innovation to provide a framework and guidelines this financial year. This is what I would like to hear as we deliberate. 

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Thank you very much, colleague, for that piece of information. Mr Speaker, Parliament must insist that the Innovation Fund - like the President promises Ugandans - is for our innovators to commercialise their activities. This money should strictly be reserved for innovators not for people who are going to put it entirely in administration. That is a very big challenge. 

When I hear the committee say, “Now it is okay for this programme to continue”, I think all the money that has been earmarked for innovators is going to go into administration and that is a challenge. I am, therefore, calling upon the committee to re-consider that position and reserve all the money intended for innovation for innovators. I believe that the National Council for Science and Technology –(Member timed out.)

4.25
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (Independent, Tororo North County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker for the opportunity. Picking from where my brother has just ended, in the last Parliament when I was the vice-chairperson of the Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation, we came up with the issue of the Innovation Fund. The idea of the Innovation Fund was to support the jua kalis in Katwe. We looked at that case study and we said that these people needed support. They have very good ideas but unfortunately, Government is not supporting them and this is how the Innovation Fund came about. 

Mr Speaker, it was intended to support Ugandans who have very critical ideas that can transform this country to become commercial. However, as I listened, I realised that the direction the fund has taken has moved away from its original position and I implore the Minister of Science, Technology and Innovation to keep the fund for the purpose for which it was intended. Otherwise, it is not meant for buying chairs, workshops or travels but it is meant to support Ugandans who have small ideas to come up. We want Uganda to become an industrialised country through those artisans. That is the purpose. Therefore, I implore this House to guide the Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation to reaffirm our position on that fund. It must not be misused and diverted for a different purpose. It should maintain the purpose for which it was created.

Secondly, I would like to appreciate the committee for a job well done and to also appreciate Government for its commitment towards industrialising this country. However, the pace at which the commitments are being made is very slow and is not encouraging. Government needs to –(Member timed out.) 

4.28
MS ROSETTE KAJUNGU (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to commend the chairperson and the ministry for the proposals that they have made. 

I wish to follow up on what my colleague has said. As she was presenting, I wondered why the proposal that the chairperson made was reduced from 0.6 per cent to 0.4 per cent of the budget. I found this very disheartening. However, from the explanation, it looks like there has been a diversion of the priorities. 

I would like to agree with my honourable colleagues who spoke before me that the innovation fund is very important. I agree that we do not only have to fund those who have gone to school. I think it is those people who continually come to us. I have disturbed the honourable minister a number of times about the people who come to request me to help them find small funding to get their ideas commercialised. 

Therefore, as we move forward to the next stage, I wish to recommend that the innovation fund be emphasised. Some of our people may not have gone to school but they have ideas. Some of the developed countries, especially the four Asian Tigers, have not developed just because many of them have gone to school to do sciences but because they had ideas on which they were mentored and created jobs. We should stop this business of exporting our young people now and again to some countries where they experience hardships. We can create those jobs here and I see the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation as the future of this country. Thank you very much.

4.31
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have one observation in line with the submission by hon. Okoth Othieno. 

When you review this Kiira EV project properly, you wonder whether we have the potential and capacity to outcompete those who are already in the market. I have noted here that one of the buses that the project proposes to build for Uganda will cost about Shs 800 million and when you go to the market, a brand new Scania, which is very reputable, costs about Shs 650 million. An Isuzu, which is common and known to Ugandans, costs about Shs 600 million. Recently, there is a Chinese bus that also came at Shs 400 million.

Therefore, the economic viability of producing these cars here leaves me wondering whether the ministry is thinking in the right direction. I thought that we should be doing research around areas where we have a competitive advantage. In agriculture, for example, our fruits and bananas are known all over the world; you do not have to market them. Those are areas that I thought the ministry would focus on to enhance our production capacities so that we can supply the markets that exist.

I am disappointed that the committee did not recommend that these monies that are provided for Kiira EV should be reallocated to another sector. I doubt whether the Minister of Science, Technology and Innovation can even sit in that car. His ministry recently bought cars; he did not order from Kiira EV to make for him a vehicle to travel in. (Laughter) Therefore, this is a big question that I thought we should redirect our focus on. Thank you.

4.33
MS ANN NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice to the issue of the innovation fund. 

Late last year, Parliament of Uganda organised a science week here. Many of the exhibitors had ideas and they were innovators who wanted assistance to turn their ideas into commercial products and reality. What they need is funding. They have already done their own research but here we are; we want to look for those who want to research endlessly. 

We should have lessons to learn from the Presidential Initiative on Banana Industrial Development (PIBID). We are stuck and that is why today, other people own the patent yet you are the ones who funded that project. Now, a person has the patent. We are grappling with how to proceed.

I pray that the Minister of Science, Technology and Innovation hears our voice, which is very loud and clear. We want that Innovation Fund not for recurrent expenditures. Let a recurrent expenditure be only tagged as a percentage but we want the fund to go directly to help those innovators. Some of them have limited education but they have got the brains.

The other issue I would like to talk about is Kiira Motors Corporation. We are sinking in quite a lot but we are talking about business, getting oil from the ground and the other one is the market - downstream and upstream. If we cannot be the first targeted market, then I do not know who it can be. Would you think about Kenya? Are you going to think about Tanzania? Which other country are you going to talk about if we cannot make strategies of expanding our market?

I would not want to strike down the innovation of Kiira Motors Corporation but we can encourage them to change the scope to a motor vehicle that can use our products. I thank you.

4.36
MS HELLEN ADDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to also contribute on the issue of innovation. 

We have so many innovators in our different villages, as others have said. One time, I went to Olio Community Polytechnic, which is the only technical school we have in Serere District. I was also at Madera Technical School when the Minister of Education and Sports visited. When you look at the number of students that go there, I was shocked to find that there were only 122 students from Teso in Olio Community Polytechnic. Over 100 students had come from Gulu, Lira and Karamoja to Serere to study in that school. This is a very good Government school; I wonder why the Ministry of Science and Technology cannot identify these schools in our constituencies and train some of the young people even if for only six months. 

There are many innovators out there who employ more than two people and they are the ones who can help reduce the issue of unemployment. When you go to Lira – I have had a chance to co-own a school in Lira - there are many innovators there who are eagerly motivated to do a lot of work in technical schools. These are some of the things we would encourage. Even our women - there are very many of them out there who want to make things like cooking stones. That would save our environment.

However, if we divert all this money for research and we leave these local people we have in our constituencies, it will be very difficult. There are very many young people out there who want to do things and they are struggling. When we motivate and give them some push, they will be able to employ many people. As someone said, many people today have been employed by people who have never gone to school but carried out innovations. 

Therefore, I also urge the ministry and the committee to move to the regions and see how they can be able to –(Member timed out.)

4.39
MR HOOD KATURAMU (Independent, Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Western): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the chairperson of the committee for this comprehensive report. I would like to make a few comments about it. 

First, I wish to commend the committee for coming out with some important recommendations. As my colleagues who have spoken before me about the Innovation Fund, Uganda cannot compete with other countries in the world if we do not make a resolve to move to another level in innovation through science and technology. 

Mr Speaker, the direction the country is moving is commendable but it is an ambitious programme because the resources we have cannot match with the priorities that we have in innovation. The chairperson of the committee has told us that there were commitments particularly on counterpart funding that have not been honoured. I implore Government to honour such commitments to enable this programme to move forward. 

I would like to add that innovation is geared towards promoting development in all sectors in the country. I would, therefore, suggest that the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation streamlines this programme and convinces other Government sectors to include in their budgets, money for innovation. Money is required for innovation in the agriculture and education sectors. Therefore, if we could apply a multi-sectoral approach, then we would have enough resources to carry this innovation forward.

I was impressed, Mr Speaker, when the chairperson mentioned promotion of local content – (Member timed out.)

4.42
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Innovation is very important. We have ever seen big countries like Japan and China rising up because of innovation. As a country, we can concentrate on one innovation and it will raise the name of the country.

When hon. Odur was talking about Kiira EV, he said the vehicle may not be that important for the country. However, I feel that is not the case. When we invented Kiira EV, the name of the country entered the list of the countries that have very good innovators. Therefore, the most important thing now is to encourage more innovations. Even if it is small, let us inject money there in order to raise our name.

Secondly, as my colleagues put it, let the ministry liaise especially with the Ministry of Education and Sports. Right now, our students have negative attitude towards technical schools. Many of our students think those who join technical schools are failures and very many of them rush to universities. There, they do courses that demand for white collar jobs and yet every year, we graduate more than 40,000 people. After graduation, the graduates go on the streets to look for jobs which are not there. At the end, they resort to menial jobs like riding boda boda. 

We should encourage technical schools, even if at certificate level, where after completion, you go straight into making money. Innovation must be encouraged because it is very important and it will raise the name of our country. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the debate about starting something we cannot manage – You remember the story of a country - I will not mention the name but they are now the leaders in the manufacture and exportation of military trucks - that used to be under attack all the time and they could not import. So, they decided to make their own military truck. When they went to commission it, it could only move in reverse. It could not move forward. The Prime Minister said, “At least it can move; now, find a way of making it move in front”. Now, they have moved so much in front that the entire military equipment of most countries is imported from this country. Never despise the days of small beginnings. 

4.46
MR JULIUS OCHEN (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Mr Speaker, I start by applauding the Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation for the wonderful recommendations they have brought to this House. I also would like to thank the technical team in the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation who have been the brain behind what we are discussing here. 

Mr Speaker, for Uganda to compete with the rest of the world, she must seriously take a difficult task in the direction of science and technology. However, when you look at our school system, we have so many schools in the country without laboratories - nothing to make a start regarding what we are talking about. That is the reason everything appears difficult. 

For this ministry to do well and be shaped in the direction of science and technology, our Parliament should support her sister sectors, education being the most important, and then we run through to agriculture.

Mr Speaker, immediately after colonialism and during the Uganda People’s Congress (UPC) Government, there were tractor hire units spread all over the country. When you went to Arapai where those truck units existed, there were a lot of scientific experiments going on. Equipment was being worked on in terms of agricultural and mechanical engineering. 

However, from the time we went past that season, everything closed. You could no longer see the Ministry of Education and Sports investing in that direction. What are the results today? We are producing children from primary without science books, through to secondary without laboratories and equipment, up to senior four and senior six. What would you expect at the end? These are the problems we are going through.

However, we have taken an initiative to have science and technology brought on board. Our only prayer now is that you should not bring too many ideas. Please study –(Member timed out.)

4.49
MR VICENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the presentation of the committee and I would like to zero my contribution on the issue of value addition. As we all know, Uganda is largely an agrarian economy and almost every agricultural product can be turned into something - (Interjections) - not only bananas but even pineapples and all kinds of fruits. However, I would like to see Uganda Industrial Research Institute coming up with these kinds of technologies, which are simple for almost every group in Uganda, with some bit of money to start something and turn some of these products into value added products, which can fetch more money.

I have been looking at most of our areas, which grow cassava, for example. Cassava can be used for so many things. You can get starch and all other products you can think of from cassava alone. What is the country doing to promote cassava growing and value addition of cassava?

Therefore, this is an area where UIRI should advise Government and come up with appropriate technology. We even have some people who are willing to invest but they do not know how to go about it. We recently opened a fruit factory in Soroti and we appreciate that effort. However, we have some fruits, which can be dried with simple technology and can fetch more money and even be exported to some of these Arab countries. Therefore, I believe that a strategy should be adopted where UIRI comes up with clear technologies, which are appropriate for Ugandans - not very expensive but affordable. 

Mr Speaker, in Bugisu where I come from, we produce a lot of tomatoes. In the bumper seasons, these tomatoes go to waste. Why can’t Government invest in improvement of tomato into tomato paste or something like that? These are some of the things, which I believe that the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation, in collaboration with UIRI, should advise Ugandans to invest in. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.52
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the committee for the job well done. However, from the onset, I would like to make two prayers. 

By just policy and delivery review, without looking at the budget item, most of our population is school going; we are producing jobless graduates. Therefore, the right intervention, for us who did the old manpower planning, labour and industry, would be to have a relevant education curriculum right from primary and secondary. I am talking about vocationalising the education system by having agriculture, health science, technical drawing and metal work compulsory. You would have then prepared and by the time somebody finishes senior 4 and 6, they have some skills. However, this business of first running for universities for 20 years and then you put up many colleges when the foundation is lacking is not helpful at all. That is where science and technology can be built.

The other project I would like science and technology to try is: We have now done the roads and Government of Uganda’s core function has never been to buy land cruisers because we have a lot of them. We have more four-wheel drive vehicles in Ministry of Health than ambulances in our subcounties. Why don’t you ring-fence that Government money? Even Buliisa will get tarmac next year. Why don’t we work with those who are doing research, because science and technology is about replicating what the market demands, and have some appropriate technology?

We could ring-fence Government money for ambulances, tricycles, buses and move from kamunyes. Government has the money; why not do this and then you would work with three to four companies under Buy Uganda Build Uganda (BUBU) and make assembling plants in Uganda. That is an achievable project. We would have 10 years of market within Uganda and after 10 years, one would export to Sudan, Congo and other places in the region. These are very quick hanging fruits, which can easily be picked instead of going into areas, which you cannot replicate, which are not feasible and where you will have problems.

I think it is possible for this country to have science and technology as a way of transformation but also answering our real needs starting with the money in our wallet. (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, can we draw this to a close? I will ask the minister, in case he has a short response, to summarise and make his prayers. 

Honourable members, you need to deal with the issue of the Innovation Fund clearly because there seems to be some discomfort about the proposals that have come from the policy statement and from the recommendations of the committee. There also seems to be some contestation about your attitude toward Kiira Motors Corporation, and you might need to advise the House on how to proceed with this matter. 

There is also a proposal that the Innovation Fund could be multi-sectoral - in other words, housed in different ministries - and then have a bigger hub for the group that was specifically identified where the fund should be, and that is the Ministry of Science Technology and Innovation. 

Those are some of the issues you may need to deal with because it can affect the attitude of the House towards the conclusion of this matter.

Honourable minister, would you like to start or should I start with the chairperson? 

4.56
THE MINISTER FOR SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION (Dr Elioda Tumwesigye): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to appreciate the chairperson and the committee for the report. By and large, I associate myself with the recommendations in the report except for the reallocations. I would like to request this House that rather than reallocating within the sector, which is only 0.4 per cent of the national budget, maybe explore reallocating from other sectors to the ministry as appropriate. 

Back to the questions, I would like to thank the Speaker for summarising the questions for me. From the outset, I would like to state that my ministry is for science, technology and innovation. There is a separate Ministry of Information, Communication and Technology under hon. Tumwebaze. This ministry was created in June 2016. I was the only person there for about six months before I was joined by the Permanent Secretary towards the end of year. Right now, we have been able to put in place departments, divisions and units. The Ministry of Public Service is recruiting staff for us and so far, we have over 100 staff. I thank Parliament for supporting that effort. Once fully established, by the end of this financial year, with all the staff that we require, we shall be able to deliver fully on our mandate as expected. 

I would like to thank Members for the comments made but I wish to assure them that the Innovation Fund will be put in place as expected. We have been able to come out with the Innovation Fund framework because as you all know, we only received funds in 2017/2018 budget. In the financial year 2018/2019, Parliament did not appropriate any funds for innovation. However, also even the funding that had been under the National Council for Science and Technology, of about Shs 5 billion, which was used to support scientists and which was backed by the law on science and technology that provided for that fund was also not provided for.

We do not have any money this financial year to support innovators, yet as you are all aware, there are very many innovators. Even people who did not go to school need money for innovation. There is even an innovator who only studied building but has been able to manufacture a helicopter because he wanted to solve a problem in his hilly mountainous area; he is in hon. Kazungu’s constituency. He decided to make for them a helicopter for people to fly above the mountain to go to health facilities for services. The only issue is that while he was able to make a helicopter that could fly above hills, bringing it down was a problem; it actually injured him. 

Otherwise, as I said, there are many innovators. One time, when I was in Karamoja, somebody stopped me and told me about their motorised arrow but they needed money to concretise their motorised arrow. So, please, support innovation because as a country, we cannot develop without being innovative.

In the innovation index all over the world, it is clear that Israel was able to move from No.10 in 2017 to No.5 in 2018 because of working to add value to any product they had in their country. Therefore, as a country, let us support the Innovation Fund and support the recommendations of the committee to reinstate Shs 35 billion into the budget.

We have already put up that framework, which will provide for about 10 renowned independent personnel to steer this Innovation Fund. We have provided for a window for the informal sector as well as for commercialisation and incubation windows.

On Kiira Motors –(Interruption)

MS SANTA ALUM: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. I like the way you present your docket. It is true we have many innovators but in the committee report, we do not have a legal framework and the guidelines to help these many innovators. Therefore, when are you tabling the Bill that the committee recommended before this House so that the funds do not go to waste? Thank you.

DR TUMWESIGYE: Thank you. Of course, as the report clearly indicates on the 21st March this year, we had the Innovation Fund Framework approved by Cabinet. This framework provides for the way the fund will be managed and the selection process. It was also availed to the committee.

What the committee was saying is that beyond this legal framework, we need to come out - which has been a major issue with funds with respect to Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Getting the Road Fund and even HIV/AIDS Fund through here was also not easy but currently, the framework that has been developed is sufficient to ensure transparent application of the fund. 

On Kiira Motors Corporation, there was a very good question, which related to the fact that Uganda is actively involved in prospecting the exploration and actual production of oil, so why are we investing in cars or vehicles that are not going to use oil. First and foremost, it is very clear that one of the models of Kiira EV Motors is a hybrid that will use both electrical energy and energy from diesel and petrol. When one is on a highway and they need to fire maybe 120Kms or 200Kms per hour, they can use diesel or petrol. When they are in town, they can use the electric energy.

However, it is worth noting that world over, a lot of oil money does not come from transport; it only contributes about 20 per cent of the oil applications. My ministry is going to invest heavily in petrochemical industries. From our petrol, we can get products, which we can combine with products from Lake Katwe salt to produce plastics. We can get pharmaceuticals, synthetics, paints and many other items from petrochemical. We shall also get money from oil, even when we all know that the whole world is moving towards having sustainable energy production systems by 2030.

For Kiira Motors Corporation, therefore, I would like to appeal to you to support us. The country’s population is now about 40 million. By 2050, we are going to be 105.7 million. East Africa will have about 446 million and Africa will have 2.5 billion people. All these people will need to use vehicles. By having the capacity to produce our own vehicles through Kiira Motors Corporation, we can have a supply system to produce deferent parts and this will generate jobs and income for our countries. 

On bananas, I must say that we have moved a big step by getting, through Cabinet, an approval for turning this project into a legal entity. As you know, Parliament did not appropriate money because they said it is like an endless project. However, I wish to correct the chairperson that we are not going to turn it into a limited liability company. Rather, we are going to turn it into a company limited by guarantee, which means that there are no shares in that company but Government institutes guarantees in public interest for social economic purposes.

As you are aware, currently Uganda competes with China in production of bananas. The largest producer in the whole world is India at about 29 million metric tonnes; China is about 11.6 million metric tonnes and Uganda produces about 11.3 million metric tonnes. Therefore, Uganda is competing with China. However, when you look at the international market for bananas, it is dominated by Ecuador, Costa Rica and many South American countries. Uganda does not surface. By commercialising the different products of bananas, we shall be able to get Uganda onto the international market. 

We have a lot of comparative advantage in the production of starch and other items from bananas. With Mercedes Benz, because people are not interested in steel because of the high carbon content, they are looking at other ways. They have found out that bananas are the only ones with the longest fibre in the world; it is more than two metres. They are even looking at how to make car bodies from banana fibre. That is like at the extreme.

There is a lot of hope for the banana industry in addition to, of course, the food that you can get from bananas. The Shs 5 billion that is required or that has been provided is laudable but certainly, we will need more funding to be able to make this centre participate in international partnerships to produce and sell bananas and banana products on the international market.

On the issue of patents, my ministry has now established a whole department of intellectual property and innovations management, which is now engaging PIBID to discuss the issue. Also at Cabinet level, we are discussing the intellectual property policy particularly to provide for where public resources are used. Scientists in the universities develop intellectual property worth material. How does Government get equity from the intellectual property that has been developed using public resources in such a way as not to forestall or discourage scientists from producing intellectual property? This is an ongoing effort. As the chairperson of the committee did give us a deadline, we shall be able to work with the Solicitor-General and others and solve that particular problem.

Finally, on the issue of Innovation Fund to be allocated or applied to different ministries, we are aware that as a ministry, we are not the ones to be able to do everything. Our role is to coordinate the science, technology and innovation ecosystem. Both the National Development Plan and National Vision 2040 clearly indicate that our role is to ensure that we mainstream or integrate science, technology and innovation in every sector. 

Our role is also to ensure that decisions and programmes that are implemented or taken in various ministries are taken considering the best scientific evidence available and the least cost best quality technological tool that is available. I agree with you that we have to mainstream this in the various ministries. The Innovation Fund Framework that we have come out with that has been approved by Cabinet will have different scientists specialised in different areas of science. As I said, they are ten of them and they cover most of the areas in various ministries. Therefore, this is ongoing work. I would like to appeal to you to allocate the funds that –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, a matter was raised in the committee report that UIRI has not had a board for the last four years. I have not heard the minister say why he has failed to appoint it. Can he tell this House why he has failed?

MR MUKITALE: Honourable minister, you are talking of having the right to patent but you are not responding to the question of the curriculum, which is very important to give you the necessary scientists and technologists. 

Further, as a medical doctor, you know that even pharmaceuticals benefit from the cassava value chain but you are busy putting money in a bottomless pit in bananas, which is a grey area. You also know that even the military uses starch. Cassava is grown in the whole country; as a person in charge of science, technology and innovation, why are you killing the value chain of cassava, which is well known?

MR OTHIENO: Honourable minister, we are now in a budgeting process and there are issues that have been raised about the processes that have been patented in that PIBID project. How do you advise this House to proceed given that you still need time to sort out the patent issues and yet at the moment, the patent is in private hands? This House finds itself constrained in appropriating resources to private individuals without any memorandum or legal framework. How do you advise this House to proceed given that we are now moving on to appropriate resources and you still need time to sort out issues of the patents - referring to the processes that have been privately patented?

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Here is the last one. Honourable minister, about internship for students doing sciences, they do not have a chance to do any practical at all.

DR TUMWESIGYE: Thank you for your clarifications. Certainly, I would have wanted to respond to every question but the Speaker guided that I only had a few minutes –(Laughter) – otherwise, I had written all the questions and the names of the people who had asked them –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And the Speaker’s guidance must be heeded.

DR TUMWESIGYE: Yes. However, I can go ahead, write responses and circulate them to those Members who asked.

Hon. Okupa’s question was regarding UIRI. Like some of the other boards, there has been a challenge. There are two challenges; first, we needed to transfer UIRI from trade to science. We have had the principles approved by Cabinet and we are in the process of completing the Bill and bringing it here.

The second challenge that came is that Government decided to rationalise these agencies. Some of these would be removed while others mainstreamed in the ministries. Particularly, for the agencies, which would remain, those that are not money-making should not necessarily have boards. As this discussion was going on, there was guidance that we hold on to work that we are pursuing with the different agencies until it is sorted.

However, good enough, recently, the Attorney-General issued a letter that has guided that we should go ahead and form boards but ensure that we do not give these boards more than a month in case we needed to terminate them. My ministry has now written to various ministers to propose names for these boards and also bring the required legislative amendment to Parliament. This is going to be sorted out.

With respect to the curriculum, certainly, it is the Ministry of Education and Sports to respond. However, my ministry is also mandated to ensure that the products we produce have the requisite skills in the area of science, technology, engineering and innovation including mathematics. We have, accordingly, established a ministry responsible for science, technology innovation skills development. This is going to help to look at the issue of the curriculum in collaboration with the Ministry of Education and Sports to ensure that Ugandans who graduate have the requisite skills.

In terms of placement, our role is to ensure that we are able to enhance the capacity of our people particularly for employability in science, technology, engineering and innovation related jobs. Therefore, that is why Parliament approved that we should have support for science, technology, engineering and the enhancement skills project which they talked about, and that would be one of the steps to address that question of placement.

In addition, Uganda National Research Institute is coming out with a machine manufacturing and skills production facility in Namanve, where we shall be teaching Ugandans how to make machines - from machines using 3D printing, Computer Numerical Control (CNC) machines and all that. In our area, we are trying our best with this small budget but I am sure Parliament will support us to get more resources and be able to do as required.

On cassava, from the little money we had got under the Innovation Fund in the first one year before it was stopped, we had given some money for cassava. Someone was doing cassava value addition in Lira, trying to do research in that area to commercialise what he had invested. We know the powers of cassava. We also started on a project with Namulonge on making plastic bags that are biodegradable from cassava. 

Therefore, I agree with you that cassava has huge potential. Actually, Nigeria is getting more money from cassava than from oil or almost close to oil. Therefore, my ministry is committed not only to bananas but also to cassava and other products. What we are lacking is money. Even from the money we had - the Shs 35 billion for innovation and Shs 4 billion for the council - was scraped last financial year. Therefore, I beg that let it be reinstated this year and then ask us for results in the following year.

On the patents for PIBID - Should we go ahead and appropriate money? We have already done a lot of research and development. I would like to invite Parliament to go and visit the PIBID facility. When you look at the equipment that is there from Siemens Uganda and other renowned companies, you will realise that we have now built significant capacity. What has been lacking -(Interjection)- Yes, Shs 130 billion over four years but you should go and look at the capacity that has been built.

What has been lacking over the past two years is that PIBID as an entity would not go and have contracts, which are enforceable with any company in the world. Now that we are going to transform it into a Ugandan owned company, we shall be able to sell and get money. We shall be able to enter partnerships with renowned suppliers in the world, in South Korea and Germany, to participate in an industrial technology park to produce various products from bananas and earn money and therefore realise what we want rather than saying that we leave what we have invested in and let the infrastructure to go to waste. Let us go ahead and support the new entity. 

We are going to come up with the new board, improve on governance and management, enter into partnerships, make money for Uganda, and create jobs and food security for Uganda and Africa. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

5.20
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION (Mr Fred Bwino): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank honourable members for their contributions because they have generally enriched our report. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the clarifications that he has made.  

I have a few areas that I would like to emphasise. I want to assure honourable members that if the Innovation Fund was reinstated, the Committee on Science and Technology would ensure that those funds are not put to any other use other than commercialisation of local innovations. It will not be used for administrative costs like buying chairs or rent or vehicles. It will strictly be for those challenges that we have already identified as a committee that impede commercialisation of the many innovations that have been got through the effort of Ugandans.

The second area, which I want to emphasise, is that on top of the total budget of Shs 159.7 billion, which is broken down as a total recurrent for the two votes - vote 023 and 110 - of Shs 38.02 billion and a total provision of Shs 121.72 billion for development, the committee recommends additional funds particularly to address the most critical areas that include the following:

    1. Reinstatement of the Innovation Fund for which we are proposing Shs 35 billion.

    2. Shs 12.41 billion for counterpart funding for the National Science Technology Engineering and Innovation Skills Enhancement projects that would be based in Sanga and Namanve, for which Parliament approved a loan of the equivalent of more than Shs 320 billion. This only lacks that component of counterpart funding. Therefore, we are requesting that this august House approves our recommendation that additional Shs 12.41 billion be provided specifically for counterpart funding for this project.

    3. We also propose the provision of $0.27 million, which is also for counterpart funding for another critical project, Ugandan industrial skills training centre in Namanve, which is funded by a grant offered to Uganda by China to a tune of $30 million.

    4. We also propose that Parliament supports our proposal that additional  € 0.7 million be provided for counterpart funding for another important project for Livestock Environmental Assessment and Performance (LEAP)-Agri Project, for which Uganda is expected to benefit money in form of grants for research. We already have 12 projects lined up for this particular funding. Therefore, in order for the country not to lose out on this, we propose that Parliament supports our recommendation.

Finally, we propose additional Shs 10 billion for the Sericulture Project, which is already in place and operational and some and some resources have already been invested in it. 

Mr Speaker, I wish to once again thank the honourable members for the contribution that has enriched the committee’s report. Thank you. 

MS OGWAL: I would like to ask the chairperson to clarify this. Now that the PIBID project has become a reality and we are now getting into industrial production, export and local marketing, have we now sorted out the legal issues that had made it difficult for Government to have hands-on operations of that banana project? Thank you.

MR BWINO: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, as the minister had already pointed out, Cabinet has approved the transformation of the PIBID project to a company limited by guarantee. As a committee, we have recommended that funds be appropriated for this new entity, provided that it is incorporated before the approval of the budget. That would put to rest our discomfort on the legal issues. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. We bring this to a close. We have debated it for a long time and let me say, we have done very well but this is not exactly what we are going to do. In the subsequent reports, the time will be tight. The chairperson will be restricted to five to seven minutes. Therefore, we need to prepare summaries of these reports. The debate will only be restricted to 15 Members, who will take three minutes each. Each Member will only speak on one report of a committee. Therefore, the nine Members who have contributed to this report will not speak again on the other reports. (Laughter) That includes the Member from West Budama North, just for the avoidance of doubt. Thereafter, we will see how to proceed. 

As I requested, honourable members, this is to help us because we do not have a lot of time. As proposed, please, subscribe to the sector that you want to debate on. The first 15 Members will be picked to speak on that sector and each speech will be three minutes so that you prepare your intervention. 

I put the question that the report of the Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation on the ministerial policy statements for the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation for the financial year 2019/2020 be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The rules will strictly apply from tomorrow. Honourable members, it looks like most of the committees are not yet ready. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for this report and the committee for coming up and being the first born of this particular committee. (Applause) I see the chairperson for the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries; where are we with our reports? 

5.30
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Ms Janet Okori-Moe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As you are aware – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am not. (Laughter)  

MS OKORI-MOE: The agriculture sector presented its policy statement late because the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development disorganised some of the figures. Therefore, we are yet to get ready, Mr Speaker. I would love to be the last born. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is the chairperson of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development? Where is the chairperson of the Committee on Foreign Affairs? 

5.31
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr Hood Katuramu): Mr Speaker, my committee is in the final stages of completing this report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What are final stages? Break it down for us. Is it the signatures? 

MR KATURAMU: The final stages are actually compiling lists for members to endorse on every page and we hope that in two days’ time, it will accomplished and presented to this House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, do it tomorrow. 

MR KATURAMU: We will probably be ready on Thursday. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is the chairperson of the East Africa Community Affairs committee? Where is the chairperson of the Committee on Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance? 

5.32
MS LILLIAN NAKATE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luweero): As a member of the Committee on Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance, I would like to say that the report is in its final stages. We should be able to present it tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is good. Where is the chairperson of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry? Can you be on record, honourable member for Dokolo District, who is also a Parliamentary Commissioner? 

MS OGWAL: I am a member of that committee and as a Commissioner; I will make sure that we are ready tomorrow. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Where is the Chairperson of the Committee on Health? Is the report from the Committee on Education and Sports ready? What about the Committee on Physical Infrastructure? 

5.34
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Robert Kafeero): Mr Speaker, we shall be ready on Thursday. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why? 

MR KAFEERO: Our sectors were among those that were affected by the dummy ministerial policy statements that were laid on the Table and later withdrawn, Mr Speaker. However, we are now on course. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Will the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs be ready tomorrow? 

5.35
MS VERONICA ISALA (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Mr Speaker, we shall be ready tomorrow. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is good. Where is the Chairperson of Committee on Public Service and Local Government? Where is the Chairperson of the Committee on Education and Sports? 

5.36
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mr Jacob Opolot): Mr Speaker, we are concluding with the report and you could be aware of the challenges we had. We want to be ready by tomorrow. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why are you telling me that I am aware of the challenges? (Laughter) I am not a member of the committee, please.

MR JACOB OPOLOT: I have said, “you could be”. It is not committal but we would like to be ready by tomorrow. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Onzima -

5.38
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Godfrey Onzima): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are ready with our report but – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which one is this? 

MR ONZIMA: It is the report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government. We have not raised the required signatures. Some of the members were serving on other committees so they told me that by tomorrow, they might sign.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which committees? We are only allowed to serve on one sectoral committee. 

MR ONZIMA: That is what they told me but I think if we are able to raise all the signatures by tomorrow, we will table our report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is the chairperson of the Committee on Presidential Affairs? 

5.39
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): On behalf of the Committee on Presidential Affairs, I would like to say that we are done with our report. By tomorrow, our chairperson should be able to upload it. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is the Chairperson of Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs? Are you ready to proceed?  

5.40
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Doreen Amule): Mr Speaker, I have not yet raised the required number of signatures. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the text ready?

MS AMULE: It is ready.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there any member of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development? Not even one member of the committee is present! Where are members of the Committee on Natural resources? 

Honourable members, it is important that we finish this. In light of what we have seen, I had said that we would start tomorrow morning but it looks like we will not have any business if we start in the morning. Therefore, we will also start plenary in the afternoon tomorrow, just to be sure that we have enough. We will start at 2.00 p.m. because at this rate, it is going to be difficult. 

Honourable members, as of 30 April, which the rules command us to oblige to, if there is a committee that is not ready, we will not listen to that committee. We will send to the Budget Committee whatever report we would have got and we will not wait for any other committee after the 30th of April. Therefore, you will find your own way of accessing the Budget Committee with your own figures that are not approved by the House. I will not extend, not even by a second. If a particular committee has not reported by the 30th of April, that committee will use the back doors to access the Budget Committee. Its report will not be contained in the report of Parliament to the Budget Committee. In addition, the back door and all windows will be sealed. (Laughter) 

Let us observe this as it will help us to help the Budget Committee to have sufficient time to deal with all these proposals that will come from the committees. I thank the Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation for kicking off the ball and congratulations for doing it in time. 

Honourable members, the time being what it is now, House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 o’clock. Thank you.

(The House rose at 5.38 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 24 April 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 
