Wednesday, 27 April 2005

Parliament met at 2.34 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honorable members, I welcome you. Today in the public gallery this afternoon we have a group of primary seven pupils from Sacred Heart Primary School in Kawempe. They are here to see how you transact business. You are most welcome to Parliament. (Applause)

The chairpersons and vice-chairpersons of various committees of Parliament are required to attend the Budget Committee meetings. I understand you have been notified; this is an additional notification to you. You should promptly attend these meetings. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.38
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Syda Bbumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honorable members. I wish to take this opportunity to brief this House and the nation at large on the current situation of petroleum product prices in the country. 

I wish to point out right from the start that petroleum product prices have increased sharply since the beginning of 2004 in the whole world; Uganda and East Africa in general have not been spared. 

The major reason for the sharp increase worldwide has been increased demand, especially from China, and the increased demand to providing heating for the severe winters, against a relatively low supply. Countries like Indonesia, which were exporters of crude oil, due to economic reasons, have started importing oil as well. Production in Iraq has been constrained by the previous war. Consequently the world petroleum prices have risen significantly. 

The average price for crude oil on the OPEC basket was US $35.7 per barrel in 2004 compared to US $31.5 per barrel in 2003. The average price on the New York Mercantile Exchange was US $41.1 per barrel in 2004 compared to US$ 35.7 per barrel in 2003. Today a barrel of oil is at US $57 compared to US $15 during the same period in 1998. The increase from last year’s level is 65 percent on the international market. The barrel is at its record highest and if you compare with the 1998 prices, the increase is 300 percent.

Over the last two years petroleum prices in Uganda have largely been raising in consonance with international oil prices. At the beginning of 2003, the prices were as follows: a litre of petrol was Shs 1,580 for petrol, Shs 1,330 per litre of diesel, and Shs 1,160 per litre of kerosene. The prices rose in 2004 from Shs 1,584 for petrol, to Shs 1,890; and diesel from Shs 1,330 to Shs 1,600; and paraffin from Shs 1,160 to Shs 1,360 per litre. 

Mr Speaker, the strength of the Uganda shilling against the dollar in the latter half of 2004 up to last week, had played a big moderating role in the fuel increase. In fact, prices late last year dropped a bit. 

The current price hikes on the domestic market are unfortunately a combination of the sharp increase in the international market in the last two weeks, and the depreciation of the Uganda shilling by over Shs 100 against the United States dollar. 

Mr Speaker, let me take this opportunity to comment on the issue of tax and fuel. This is an area, which the public had been saying is contributing a lot to the price hike. Tax on fuel has not been increased for a long time. It is a fixed amount, it is not advalorem, and does not fluctuate with changes in the shilling value. It is fixed in Uganda shillings. In effect, therefore, tax rates have been going down in percentage terms relative to the pump prices. 

Our tax rates are quite competitive in the region. In Uganda the tax on a litre of petrol is Shs 660; in Kenya with all their advantages like having a refinery and coastline, it is Uganda Shs 607, and Rwanda is at Uganda Shs 657 per litre. The tax on diesel in Uganda is Uganda Shs 400; in Kenya it is at Uganda Shs 386; and the one for Rwanda is at Uganda Shs 756 per litre, which is 250 percent that of Uganda. Tax on kerosene in Uganda is at Uganda Shs 200, in Kenya it is at Uganda Shs 170, and the one for Rwanda is at Uganda Shs 789 per litre.

We know that the areas, which are major contributors to the hike of fuel prices, are outside the control of government. These include international oil prices and currency fluctuations, and those will continue unfortunately to affect our product prices as long as Uganda is not a producer of petroleum products. 

However, government has taken measures to deal with the areas, which have a potential to raise local pump prices, like lack of competition in the market and excessive profits by oil companies. 

We have deliberately encouraged small but efficient oil companies to enter the market in order to create competition and also to provide easy access to the consumers. In many rural areas now the oil pumps are a common feature among the so many economic activities in the area, and that has helped to moderate the prices. We have also instituted an extensive monitoring system to ensure that the product, which is sold on the market, is not adulterated because that could put it at an even higher cost than the increased fuel prices. When you buy adulterated products, it will affect the engine and you will not get the service, which you desired out of that. 

We are also ensuring that the physical measurements are not tampered with. People used to complain that the measurements were not up to standard and were cheating buyers. Mr Speaker, we ensure that we monitor –(Interruption)

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Mr Speaker, the minister has not given us the statement. I do not know how we shall debate it.

MRS BBUMBA: Mr Speaker, to my knowledge the statement is available on the table outside the Chamber, and I see most of the members have got copies of it. We have medium to long-term measures to stabilize product supply, and these include the ongoing efforts on petroleum exploration and development in the Albertine Graben and the development of the Kenya-Uganda oil pipeline, to ease the transportation and flow of the product into the market.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I thank you for listening to me. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister.

2.46
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement, but I have two clarifications to seek from her. One is that apparently the other reason why the fuel costs have shot up is the cost of transportation from our neighbour, Kenya, to Uganda. This is done majorly by land. I would like to find out from the minister what new stories she has on the progress of work for installation of the oil pipeline connecting us to Kenya?  

Two; may we know what capacity we have now in as far as the fuel reserves for this country are concerned? Do we have any fuel reserves for the country? I would like to thank you.

2.47
MR WADRI KASSIANO (Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the honourable minister for the timely statement she has made, especially at this time when all of us in different ways are feeling the pinch of the hiking of prices of petroleum products. When I look at page 2, the minister in her statement has given us the differences in taxation rates in the three countries, that is, Kenya, Uganda and Rwanda. Surprisingly, although the taxes in Uganda are much higher than in Rwanda, you still find that even if it were a matter of transport costs, fuel in Rwanda and Zaire is at a much lower cost than in Uganda. What justification do we have for that?

Logically one would have expected that fuel, which is in Kigali, which has to travel from Kenya through Uganda, should have cost more on the other side. Surprisingly it is cheaper. How do we account for this difference, Madam Minister?

2.49
MR PETER MUTULUUZA (Mawokota County North, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also thank the minister for the report, but I have two concerns also. One of the reasons why the prices of fuel have gone up is because of the exchange rate of our depreciating currency. I have a problem: when our dollar is appreciating, the Bank of Uganda comes in and immediately intervenes so that it does not appreciate further. But when the dollar is depreciating there is no quick intervention. That is my problem.  

Secondly, on the issue of exploration of petroleum products as in paragraph 13, at one time we were excited that we were going to get fuel but later machines broke down and they had to import others. These machines were brought and we were promised that within a short time we would get petrol. But now the thing has died away, I do not know the progress on this issue of the exploration of fuel. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.50
MR ISSA KIKUNGWE (Kyadondo County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to know from the minister, it is a known fact that oil reserves for this country, for some reason or the other, were sold. You sold the oil products and what I gathered some time back is that those you sold those products to, some of them have not paid. May I know, what is the position today?

2.51
MR HENRY KITYO (Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for this statement because Ugandans have been yearning for this statement. But I have two clarifications. One, I was made to understand that the pipeline, which is going to run through Lake Victoria, would supply fuel up to Katebo landing site, which is in my constituency. I want to know the Government’s position on that. 

Also, I want to request government to consider the peasants, as we call them, because the fuel they use most is kerosene. Kerosene is at Shs 1,700 a litre. I think this is too much for the common man in the village. Thank you.

2.52
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister too for her statement, but there are two clarifications I am seeking from her, especially about point No. 12 of her statement. 

If it is a deliberate act to ensure that so many petrol stations are created in this country to ensure that prices are moderated, then I do not see any way it can become competitive when they are all selling petrol at the same price - even diesel and paraffin. Is this competition? And putting up all these petrol stations, if she is not aware, has become a family business or one for friends where you go to the ones who are friendly to you. Otherwise, this has not helped solve the problems of this country in terms of the prices of this fuel. Thank you very much.

2.54
MR TOM KAYONGO (Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The honorable minister has alluded to the fact that the prices are going up because the dollar, vis-avis the Uganda shilling, is weak. However, it is a well-known fact that reserves the world over are getting scarce day by day. Last week there was a team from America actually, which met with one of the officials from the Ministry of Energy, and they were discussing possibilities of bio-diesel. Uganda being an agricultural country would be one of those well-placed countries to produce oil from seeds like Soya bean, simsim and the rest. But in her statement she has not referred to bio-diesel. I am asking whether the ministry has any intention of developing bio-diesel so that the country gets another alternative. Thank you.

2.55
MR DEUSDEDIT BIKWASIZEHI (Buhweju County, Bushenyi): I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the honorable minister. When you go outside this country to some of these developed countries, you find that as a measure to cut on costs of such expensive petroleum products they have developed alternatives like use of electronically run motor vehicles. You even find most of their buses and trains use electric system. They no longer rely on diesel. But for us who are poor we are basically on these petroleum products. What measures are being taken to also explore that possibility?

There has been a case, like my honorable colleague from Lubaga North has indicated, of some alcohol-run engines being developed in some of these countries, I think like Brazil. Due to the fact that we have got a lot of agricultural products from which we can get this alcohol, could we not explore that possibility? Is there a plan for that? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.57
MR PATRICK MWONDHA (Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The politics of oil is very complicated and international. One of the shocks to the prices of oil is the disequilibrium in Iraq. Only last week one of the pipes that had been repaired was again blown up, and is burning. We as a country are on record as having contributed to the international force that removed Saddam. Three months after elections in Iraq, they have not been able to have a government running Iraq. Can the minister tell the country, as part of the international force in Iraq, what progress is being done to stabilize Iraq and have systems run as they were so that the price of oil can stabilize?

2.59
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the hon. Minister of Energy for giving us a statement on a matter, which has got tremendous impact on not only our economy but also our social life. However, I have got the following concerns.

One, in terms of reserves, could the honorable minister tell the august House what kind of reserves we have in this country? In case of difficulties, do we have one week’s reserve, ten days’ reserve or one month’s reserve?

Two, this oil politics can be determined through economic intelligence. One can actually forecast that the price will go up in so many days or that in so many weeks the price will go down. I am disturbed to learn that we are holding our external reserves in foreign banks yielding very little interest on the reserves, and yet we pay so much on foreign imports such as energy. Why can the two ministries, through the Cabinet, not correlate information and figure out - Ministry of Finance, what is the forecast in terms of the price coming up? We knew as far back as four months ago that the price of oil per barrel would go from US $30 to nearly US $60 by the end of this year; we were here waiting. 

My honorable colleague, hon. Mwondha Patrick, has mentioned this matter of Iraq. We have not been conscious of it. And even Iran for that matter, Iran is a potential target for certain imperial powers for invasion.  

There is also the question of tax. The tax here is too punitive; it is hurting the economy in reverse terms. What we are getting out of taxes is not comparable to what we are losing. I will give an example, Mr Speaker. Because of high taxes on fuel we are unable to move milk from Mbarara to Kampala. Milk in Mbarara costs about Shs 150 per litre, but by the time you get to Kampala it is over Shs 600. Because of this high tax on fuel we are unable to deliver our milk in Kampala. As a result we are hurting the dairy farmer. So, indirectly through poor planning on taxation we are hurting our own industry.

Again on the impact, my honourable colleague has mentioned a problem of the paraffin. The majority of our people who use oil energy are actually in this category. We have not provided for any kind of cushion for these poor people. I think the Minister of Finance must consider taxation. It should not be uniform in terms of oil per se; it has to be in various categories. Jet engine fuel could be the highest on the scale because those people can afford it, and motorized vehicles’ fuel could be in a different category.  

I also express concern on a matter of consumption of fuel in this country. We should be more economical. I will give an example. The majority of our members of the Cabinet are driving vehicles of more than 3000 cc; some of them are actually driving four-litre engine machines. These consume twice as much as a vehicle, which is of about 1.8 liters. This is extravagant -(Interjections)- yes, Mr Speaker, my colleagues are retorting to me that, “What about you who drives a Benz?” I do not take the money –(Interruption)

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the honorable member for giving way. I just want to inform you that our colleagues in Rwanda have actually phased out these huge engine vehicles and prefer small ones, which consume less fuel.  

MR KITYO: Thank you, honorable member, for giving way. It is on record that hon. Aggrey Awori, during the presidential campaigns, acquired a helicopter. I do not know how much fuel this helicopter would have taken? (Laughter)

MR KIWANDA: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the honorable member, who is holding the Floor, hon. Aggrey Awori, that he even ran out fuel in my constituency and I helped him when he was in his chopper. When he is talking about the fuel being expensive, I do not think he is exemplary on this. He is actually consuming a lot of fuel. He drives a Benz and in his campaigns he was using a chopper. So, I think hon. Aggrey Awori is not fair on this.

MR AWORI: Thank you very much. I would like to set the record straight before I come to my substantive contribution. It is true my honourable colleague came to my rescue when I got stranded in his constituency and what he bought for me was not jet fuel. He bought paraffin, which I used. (Laughter)

MR WAMBUZI: Is hon. Aggrey Awori in order to deny that actually the aircraft he was using was using paraffin itself as he knows? Is he in order to try to mislead this House that paraffin is not fuel?

THE SPEAKER: I have no idea. (Laughter)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. Permit me to inform and educate my honourable colleague, who happens to be an engineer, most likely a civil engineer, that helicopters use both jet fuel and paraffin. What my honourable colleague bought for me was paraffin, which enabled me to fly from his constituency back to Kampala. 

I would, however, like to add that because I landed in his place and he helped me, he was able get elected to this august House. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, his candidature was elevated to a much higher level than other candidates, so he was able to come here because he told his people - actually when I stopped there, it was not like I had run out of fuel. I stopped there as if I had come to greet him and he said, “Have you ever seen anybody come here in a helicopter to greet anybody?” They said, “No, it is only you”. Now he is here.

The most important aspect why I am expressing concern over the consumption of fuel is that if we were moderate in our consumption, definitely it would help us. 

My other concern is our interest in Kenya Oil Refinery. Thirty years ago when the refinery was put in place, it was an East African business concern, and Uganda bought shares in that refinery. I would like to know, honourable minister, do we still have interest in Kenya Oil Refinery?

Mr Speaker, the question of the Kenya-Uganda oil pipeline -(Interjection)– I would not like to utilize my opportunity to contribute to this debate by calling to order my honourable colleague, but I am sure my other colleagues have observed the anomaly in the nature of dressing by one of my colleagues. We have a problem already and I am sure the Minister of Lands and the Minister of Energy will address it. We have a pipeline, which is stuck. The survey is stuck in Jinja; they cannot go beyond Jinja up to Namanve because there is a land dispute over ownership. Where we were supposed to pass the pipeline, the owners of the land are asking for more money. 

Secondly, the pipeline is also designed to pass through land, which is supposed to be owned by the Kabaka. I am just wondering whether the Government has now initiated negotiations with the owners of the land, especially the Kabaka of Buganda, about how the pipeline will go on. Otherwise, we are again going to have a problem over this matter.  

Once again I would like to appeal to the Prime Minister to reconsider his position on the purchase of vehicles of more than 2000 cc for all members of the public service –(Interruption)

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, my disgust is total. Hon. Aggrey Awori must understand that policies are made by the Cabinet; they are not made by the Prime Minister, so he should not personalize a Cabinet matter. 

May I also make it clear that although a number of people have printed allegations and stupid statements -(Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I have been patiently listening to the Rt hon. Prime Minister persistently using un-parliamentary language within the confines of this House, like calling printers stupid and saying that he is disgusted, when referring to a member of this House. Is the Rt hon. Prime Minister in order to use such un-parliamentary language, knowing very well that he is the Leader of Government Business, who is central in this House? Should he scandalize the dignity of this House? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would advise that before you react you should give time for somebody to complete the statement. He was talking about some stupid statements, whether it was in this House or outside, you did not allow him to complete. I wish you had allowed him to complete, then I would have asked him to substantiate.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: I thank you, Mr Speaker, and may the Almighty irrigate you with mercy. I was saying that the Minister of Public Service will be making a correct statement. 

3.13
MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Mr Speaker, thank you very much for giving me this opportunity to react to the statements of the Minister of Energy. I am very worried. I am worried about the impact on the economy of what is happening. Only yesterday we debated the increase in electricity tariffs –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, let me say that I am very happy with the attendance. Proceed.

MR MWANDHA: As I was saying, Sir, my concern is the impact on the economy of the kind of things that are happening. Only yesterday we discussed the raised tariffs of electricity. Members here made it very clear that what happened is going to have an inflationary effect. Today we are again told of the justification for increases in fuel. These two are major contributors to production and in addition the minister in her statement told us that already the Uganda shilling is depreciating. The sum total of all these occurrences is going to be a disaster for our economy.

Sir, we are a very poor country and we have no capacity to withstand shock brought about by such increases in fuel and electricity, especially when our shilling is depreciating. We had succeeded as a country in having reasonable stability of the macro-economic situation. However, if what is happening is going to continue, we might as well forget this. Inflation is going to go up and the cost of goods to our people is going to go up. This is going to add to the poverty already prevailing and it is not going to be good for us.  

Mr Speaker, if the Minister of Energy is not able to tell this House what counter measures the Government is taking to overcome these likely developments, maybe you can give permission to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development - we have the Minister of Finance (Planning) sitting there at the back. Hon. Isaac Musumba, maybe you can assure this House that in spite of all these things that are happening we need not to be worried that the Government is in control of the trends in the economy. Otherwise, this is a major worry to me and I am sure it is a worry to most of the members of this House. Thank you.

3.18
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was very attentive when the minister was reading the statement and I would like her to answer the following questions.

In the recent past the tax on petrol was Shs 650 per litre but the figure she has read is Shs 660. Does the minister deny that the recent price rises have also negatively impacted on the taxes we are paying for each litre of petrol?

Secondly, this government has a positive bias about the ordinary people. Since it is becoming almost difficult to provide electricity in the rural areas, why does the ministry not remove the tax on kerosene and retain only Shs 10 as operational costs?

It is unfortunate that the minister gave a statement without consulting her colleague in Ministry of Works and Transport, because just now UTODA has pushed up the fares for taxis. How do we know whether the new rates are in consonance with the rates of petrol or fuel in general?

The minister has given us two fundamental reasons why the situation is acute, namely international prices of fuel and the depreciation of the Uganda shilling. I would like to argue against that. The main reason now is, the people of Uganda are suffering, they are paying a lot of money for fuel because Uganda’s taxation base is narrow and the Government has not come up with measures intended to widen it so that we pay less for fuel. I expected her to have mentioned that point.

Lastly, I expected the minister to have said something in terms of a report on the on-going petroleum exploration on River Semliki. We have heard a lot of rumours that things are about to come to positivity. Let the minister tell us whether we are getting fuel effective from next year. Thank you very much.

3.21
MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much –(Interruption) (The House experienced a brief black out)- Mr Speaker, you can see the effect of this sector.  I sympathise with the Minister holding this sector.  You have seen the blackout and the other aspect.  She is not helped by other ministries like the Minister of Finance and Planning. Some of us have got information that there are proposals in the Ministry of Planning and Finance written by people who were eager to explore the factor of growing castor oil seeds; they have sat on that one, for what reasons, we do not know. 

That is why when you look at page 3, paragraph 13, under the medium and long-term measures to stabilize the products, the other sectors have left her alone to battle this out as if the minister owns this sector alone. If she was helped, even the minister, for instance, of Transport and Works would have come out, they would have imported buses to curb the consumption of fuel by these commuters, which are now filling up everywhere in the streets of Kampala. 

Again in paragraph 13, they would have helped the Minister to write this one scientifically by referring to future research in this sector. But when you look at all this, we do not know what the future will hold for us; we are looking at things in some sort of speculative way. Otherwise, when I look at the whole statement from the ministry, everything has been left to God and to the peasants and the poor people of this country. 

Therefore, I would urge other ministries to come and help the Minister out of this doldrums. Otherwise, this report and the future plan she has is not going to help even the investors to come into this country when everything is shooting through the roof. I thank you.

3.23
DR JOHNSON NKUUHE (Isingiro County South, Mbarara): I thank you, Mr Speaker, and honourable minister.  I have about three or four short questions. First of all, I really pity you, Madam Minister, because everything that you seem to touch goes wrong, I do not why –(Laughter)- and yet it is not your fault.  Now, Madam Minister, maybe you are aware that a good number of Ugandans live on less than a dollar a day and very many on less than two dollars a day.  So, any time that fuel increases to about a dollar a litre you see how many people are really falling through the basket. 

This morning it was reported that Shell BP, which is the second largest oil company, has made a profit of six billion dollars in just three months, and this is about two billion dollars more than they made last year for an equivalent period of time. So, there is a lot of money being made by oil companies. Therefore, Madam Minister, I want to know, have you really looked critically at the profit margins that these companies are making so that they can try to share that benefit with our consumers?

Secondly, one of the causes of high fuel costs in Uganda is transportation of fuel itself from Mombasa to here. Because the trucks come in full and go back empty, the costs are very high. If they went loaded, the cost of transporting whatever they are transporting would go down by half. Honourable minister, have you tried to talk to some of these people who are involved, say your colleagues in Kenya in the transport sector, to find ways of sharing some of the transport burdens? 

MR EMMANUEL DOMBO: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I want to give is that when Government took a decision to liberalize the oil industry, one of the reasons they gave was that the competition would naturally force the prices down because the operating costs naturally are not uniform. Unfortunately, what we are seeing in the country is as if there is a cartel where people sit and conspire on what they must uniformly charge against the consumers. 

I also seek clarification on whether actually the liberalisation has worked on the objectives that it were intended to serve. 

DR NKUUHE: Thank you, hon. Dombo. Actually it could true that there is a cartel, because much as the Minister has told us that they have encouraged small companies to come into the sector, these small companies actually buy from the big ones.  So, if the big ones decide to form a cartel and fix prices, no matter how many small ones you put into the chain, the prices will remain the same.  

MR AWORI: Thank you, honourable colleague, for yielding the Floor. I also want to add to the information you have provided to the august House that Sudan is one of the leading producers of oil now on the continent, and Sudan is a member of COMESA; and any member of COMESA can bring in oil, refined or otherwise, from Sudan at a fairly moderate price unlike when you will get it from the seven sisters. 

DR NKUUHE: Thank you. Now, honourable minister, have you considered transporting fuel by rail rather than by trucks, and what is the way forward that way? 

Thirdly, what other countries do is that when there is a suspected shortage of fuel, they store excess fuel either in used salt mines or other hard minerals, mines and so on. Do we have those measures where we store fuel strategically in anticipation of shortages?  

Honourable minister, finally, do you have alternative sources of energy? Somebody has already asked about diesel fuel, alcohol-driven cars, and those kind of things; what is your ministry doing? Do you have scientists in your ministry, and what are they doing to try to come up with alternative sources of fuel so that we do not always depend on petroleum and petroleum products? I thank you.

3.27
MR PETER OCHIENG (Bukooli County South, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the Minister for the report –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Haven’t we exhausted this?

MR OCHIENG: Mr Speaker, mine are very few issues.  Page 3, number 11, the Minister says Government has taken measures to deal with the areas, which have potential to raise local pump prices and so on.  But, Mr Speaker, I do not think there is really something to show for this. Even on that very page, number 12 talks about a number of things.

I want to inform the Minister that some of us live along the borders, and it is clear –(Interjections)- It is very clear that there is a big difference in fuel prices, and this contributes a lot in terms of disturbances in issues along the borders. If the price of kerosene is Uganda Shs 500 less on one side of the border, it becomes a problem, Mr speaker. We will have to fight with people smuggling, which costs Government a lot of money to try and bring it down. Is there a possibility of trying to harmonize fuel prices? 

What hurts most is basically kerosene, because we do not only use kerosene for domestic use but also as a source of fuel for other things. It becomes very difficult, Mr Speaker, if some of these things are left to work the way they are.

Mr Speaker the other issue is in number 13, the long-term measures. We started talking about this almost 10 years ago, but to-date there is very little that is being done. We are not informed about the extent to which we are going. 

Mr Speaker, as if that is not enough, there is this element of national reserves. We have a number of tanks in Jinja but Mr Speaker, some of us also deal in oil, and every time you buy fuel from any company, they will tell you, “Go to the reserve, that is where you will get the fuel”. We really do not know what fuel we are taking, are we taking other people’s or we are taking Government’s fuel?

Mr Speaker, there is a problem here about the pipeline. Mr speaker, I know about three ways. We have road reserves, since these pipes are supposed to be buried underground, why should we struggle with other people yet there are road reserves, which were fully paid for by Government? We also have railway reserves, which were fully paid for by Government, and electricity pylons. The electricity wires pass up; the fuel lines can easily pass down. Why do we have to fight with people and yet Government paid for such land in the past, and we can use it without compensating anyone? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.32
MR WAGONDA-MUGULI (Buikwe County North, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Only yesterday we were discussing the hiking of tariffs for electricity and we clearly noted that a number of people, particularly those in the lower and middle-income brackets may be forced out of use of electricity.  Today we are learning of the hike on prices for kerosene so that if the people who will have moved from electricity to the kerosene lamps known as tadoba are going to be inconvenienced. Can I know from the Minister what relief the Government intends to give to Ugandans so that they cannot resort to the burning of firewood as the method of lighting their houses, or that they do not resort to going to bed at 6.00 p.m. and thus contributing to the population boom in Uganda?

Mr Speaker, we know that the increases in diesel, kerosene and petrol prices are going to have an adverse effect on transportation. Could the Minister give assurances to this House that aviation fuel will also not be equally affected, because increase in aviation fuel would affect our imports and tourism, because inevitably carriers that use our facilities in Entebbe would have to make a reaction in the same way as the taxi drivers have done.

Mr Speaker, could the Minister also inform this House as to what increase, if any, has been made on industrial fuel? Already industrialists like the Sango Bay Sugar Factory have been complaining of the high cost of industrial fuel so that any further increase in that fuel would inevitably lead to higher costs of production, and therefore higher costs for the final consumer. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.35
MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI (Ibanda County South, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. A few months ago, I witnessed two incidents: one was when we were at Kololo, His Excellency, the President, ordered the Brass Band to play the song “Lullaby.” Two weeks later, we had a meeting in Kyadondo and the Minister of Energy was seated there, and I remember her words very well that, “Your Excellency, we have discovered hydrocarbon gases in Semiliki,” and that she intends to start using these hydrocarbon gases o generate thermal electricity. She did not talk about using diesel generators, and in the way she was talking, it was like we have gas already, therefore ready for use. 

I remember taking her on, that instead of using these gases, that is, propane, ethane, methane to produce thermal electricity we better put up petro-chemical industries to produce plastic items, and we argued on that. A few months later, I heard of thermal generators using diesel. 

Mr Speaker, today, many countries which produce gases have got gas-driven cars. Now, if your gas is there Madam, why can’t we use it in cars, because according your statement, by that time we had gas in Semliki. Mr Speaker, I know her dilemma, it might be a problem to solve the prices of fuel as we talk of now. But as a nation, we need to plan so that the economy is not hurt in future. Fuel is a very big component in the economy of this country.  As we talk now, prices have gone up, the transport fares, and they are right, but here we are lamenting!

Mr Speaker, I do not have much to say but I want to insist that if she has got gases now, if we have discovered gas, which you intended to use two months ago to produce thermal electricity, let us be innovative them gases for driving the vehicles.  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: But do we have anything new that has not been covered? 

MEMBERS: No.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us end with him.

3.39
MR KALULE SSENGO (Gomba County, Mpigi): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a worry that at this rate of increases we are likely to wreck our economy, because as we talk now we are faced with about three problems; an increase in fuel prices, an increase in power prices, and at the same time we are faced with the problem of lack of rains in the countryside. 

As a result, Mr Speaker, we do not have food in the villages, people are looking around for food, transport costs are so high, people are falling sick and they cannot reach hospitals because they cannot afford the taxi and bus fares.

Mr Speaker, I request that the Minister of Energy sits down with the Minister of Finance to tell us the effects of these increases on the economy, because I have a feeling that we are pushing people too much to the wall. These increases are too much.  People are already suffering with poverty; people do not have enough food. And as if that was not enough, then you tell them to pay higher prices for the fuel and for the power.

Mr Speaker, I also want to add my voice to what my colleague has pointed out. I remember at one time the hon. Minister of Energy did tell us that we had gases -(Interruption)

MR ERESU: I have been following very attentively the contribution by the Member seeking clarification from the Minister on the various aspects as a result of the effect of these increases, and perhaps further clarification could have been that, the Minister should tell us as to why in this country we import mainly  -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Eresu.

MR SSENGO: Mr Speaker, at one time we were told that we had gases, which would give us energy for the next 50 years, but ever since that statement was made nothing has been told to this nation at large. What is happening, did the gases disappear or was it wrong information? What really happened? We need to know.  

Mr Speaker, lastly, I am not satisfied with the comparison that the honourable minister is making in paragraph nine about the taxes on the fuel, when she compares the East African countries. If these comparisons were really genuine, why is it that people are smuggling fuel across the borders?  There would be no smuggling if these statistics were quite okay?

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable member, do you have other figures?

MR SSENGO: That is why I am asking her to give us –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Well, these are the figures she gave you; if you have other figures, state them.

MR SSENGO: Mr Speaker, I wanted the Minister to tell us why the smuggling is going on if these figures are genuine? That is all I am interested in; let her tell us. If these figures are correct, why is it that we still have smuggling across the borders? With those few remarks, I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Will the Minister please respond to - (Mr Musumba rose_) You are the one taking over now?

3.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Mr Isaac Musumba): Mr Speaker, there are a number of issues that Members have raised that –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: To Ministry of Finance?  Okay.

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you. Mr Speaker, I want to assure the honourable members that under Article 152 of the Constitution, any imposition or variation of tax would come under the purview of this Parliament, and this Parliament would definitely be aware. We in the Ministry of Finance have not in any way varied the tax on fuel recently.  Therefore, sir –(Interruption)

MR KIKUNGWE: Mr Speaker, the hon. Minister of Finance is giving the impression that the Ministry of Finance can never, will never and has never done anything outside the normal procedure. Mr Speaker, some time back, the Ministry of Finance went against the set procedures and gave excessive concessions of taxation to BIDCO. Today, to come here and say it is this Parliament to do every job, to vary taxation, I am only wondering whether he is in order, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I take judicial notice that this is an issue, which is in court. I have no comment to make on that.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I am invoking Rule 62 to move a point of procedure and I would like to read the first part of it verbatim; “All Members shall dress in a decent and a dignified manner.”  Mr Speaker, in respect of that, is it in order for the hon. Prof. Kagonyera, who always on a number of occasions acts as Leader of Government Business, and a senior minister, to dress in a manner, which lacks dignity, as if he is going for a disco dance?  (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: This is a matter I have considered and I intend to make some consultation with the Rules Committee because it is not very clear, and it is not only hon. Kagonyera that is a subject of this; there are many others. Since I have decided I have to make consultations before I rule on it, I will make my ruling tomorrow. (Laughter)

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, I want to inform this House that Government has not imposed extra taxes or duties on petroleum products, and the petroleum products do remain as indeed the Minister of Energy stated, charged at the level of taxation that has been -(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, the clarification I am seeking is that whereas the Minister has informed us that the Ministry of Finance has not imposed on fuel any other tax and that it is the Ministry of Energy that is concerned with the fuel, as people who set taxes for this country, isn’t it prudent that when there is a rise in price, the Ministry concerned should communicate to the consumers so that they know why the price has gone up? 

If you look at the statement given by the Minister, there are contributors, which are within the powers of Government and those outside their powers, and one of the reasons that contribute to price rise is excessive profit margins. Should we expose our consumers to people who want to make excessive profits? Isn’t it prudent that the ministry in charge of regulating this sector should come up with a statement to tell the consumers that oil prices have gone up because of this and that reason?

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, I trust the Minister of Energy will explain that as the minister responsible for the sector. I was only responding to the three issues that have been raised in this House namely:

1. Whether we have increased taxes or not, 
2. Whether the foreign exchange depreciation has been a factor in the recent fuel increases, and
3. Whether this will result into inflationary measures that would affect the economy.

Those are the three things, Sir, that I beg to continue addressing the House about.

On the foreign exchange element, the current foreign exchange depreciation is in fact a factor in the current fuel price increase because it does affect both the final price of the fuel and the transportation. The rise in pump prices is influenced therefore among other things by the depreciation of the shilling against the dollar.

The third point that was raised by this House is whether this does affect or is inflationary. I want to state that Government is committed through its firm policies to ensuring that the likely impact on underlying inflation is minimal. It will be there, increase in price of fuel will definitely affect the price of foodstuffs and this will in turn have an effect on our underlying inflation, but it is our commitment to minimize this by ensuring that we stick to monetary measures that will neutralize or reduce the impact on these fuel price effects.  

Mr Speaker, obviously we shall keep monitoring the world oil price, and we believe that the situation will eventually get to levels with which this economy can live.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I thank you very much.

3.53
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Syda Bbumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I want to thank the colleagues for their contributions, observations and comments on this very important subject. Mr Speaker, the situation pertaining today is most undesirable for Government. We would like to see these prices at the lowest possible, but as said in my statement, the main factors are outside our control. But what we are doing is to work out medium and long-term solutions as a hedge against such occurrences in the future.

In the medium-term, we are committed to develop the pipeline to reduce on the transport costs, and also on the disadvantages of not being members of the Kenya pipeline because this pipeline from Kenya to Uganda is going to be developed –(Interruption)

MS KIYINGI NAMUSOKE: Mr Speaker, as you have already noted, the House is really full, and I am concerned that some Members here are sitting in shifts. Mr Speaker, some members on the Front Bench are literally squatting, like Minister Okello Oryem, and I am concerned that the honourable minister and others might fall off their seats as they listen to the debate. May I propose that some chairs or mats be brought so that Members can at least sit comfortably? I thank you.

 THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the first place, I am very happy with the attendance, and I hope this will be a daily occurrence until maybe the Budget time. I am happy that the ministers, as you have said, are so squeezed in the way they are because when I make a case as Parliamentary Commission for funds to facilitate Parliament on capital development, I will not need to use many words because they are a vivid evidence that there is need to facilitate them, and I thank them for doing so.

MRS BBUMBA: Thank you once again, Mr Speaker. I will pick up from where we left. Under the medium-term measures to hedge against the current crisis, we are committed to development of the oil pipeline. As we speak today, this pipeline has been bid out, and it is going to be developed as a private public project whereby the two countries will have equal shares and there will also be a private sector player. That will give Uganda the advantage of becoming a member of the pipeline, because on the first part of the pipeline from Uganda to Kenya, Uganda has no shares and therefore our say in that pipeline is quite limited.

Mr Speaker, the environmental impact assessment of the way to be followed by this pipeline is going on. When it is completed, we shall start on the process of acquisition of the way. Mr Speaker, we also intend to stick seriously to the Constitution and to the Land Act when it comes to passing through private land and other land owned in a different way. Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Let us conclude this, please.

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, it is something fairly important, which may be overlooked. Thank you, Madam Minister. In the neighbouring –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, it should not be on the statement, but on the reply, if you want clarification.

MR ERESU: Precisely.  In the neighbouring country, Kenya, we have two types of petrol fuel. We have what is called super and we have what is called regular.  The super fuel is normally more expensive than the regular fuel.  May we know which one we have in this country, and if possible, is it the most expensive or the cheaper one so that we can look for a better option to reduce costs?

MRS BBUMBA: Mr Speaker, I will start off by disposing of that.  We have both, but according to the Kyoto Protocol by October this year we should have low sulphur oil for environmental and health reasons. So we are working towards that, Mr Speaker.  

Another intervention, which we are looking at, are the alternative sources of energy.  We started off with ethanol –(Interruption)

MR ERESU: Point of clarification, Madam Minister.  If you say we have both, why do we have the same price -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, resume your seat.

MRS BBUMBA: Mr Speaker, we started of with studying ethanol, this is waragi.  We thought this would be the easiest since there is abundant waragi in the country. We thought we would not have so many problems because we would be fighting competition from only waragi takers; there would be no competition from other users.  

Mr Speaker, a litre of waragi today sells at Ugshs 2,500, mandule and super are even more expensive.  So, we found that waragi cannot be a good substitute for oil. I think honourable –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not want to name you. We cannot listen to an honourable member when you are carrying on other debates.

MRS BBUMBA: Mr Speaker, another source we are studying is that of bio-diesel.  We have gone far with this; we are working with companies. As we speak today we have assisted Mukwano to acquire land in Masindi to grow seeds purposely for producing bio-diesel, but that is still far off. We are carrying out research with quite a number of companies. 

Currently, we are studying oil from Getrova- I think that is the kiryowa, which they use for creeping vanilla since it is abundant in vanilla growing areas- to see whether we can get a bio-diesel out of that.  But one hiccup we have met is that most of the seeds in this country, which can produce bio-diesel are expensive. Therefore, the oil out of it would be more expensive than what we have on the market today.

Mr Speaker, as I have said before on the Floor of this Parliament, we are carrying out oil exploration.  This is research; many of you here who have done research know how long it takes to get results.  I cannot tell you that we shall get it tomorrow, but what I know is that we have licensed three companies to-date to carry out exploration.  

One of the companies has attempted to do drilling in two areas. The first one, the drill broke down because they had underestimated the typography of the area.  He brought in another drill, and when he brought in the second drill he hit gas.  But because they were after oil, they temporarily suspended that exploratory well. It was not a production well; it was an exploratory well.  They abandoned it and very soon they are starting within the same area on another area, which appears to be having oil, which is easier to access.  

So, Mr Speaker, the exploration is on-going.  I have not told anybody lies. Government continues with its strong commitment to attract investors to come and do this exploration.  We are praying hard, Isha Allah, that very soon we shall get this oil.

Mr Speaker in the medium-term we are looking at expanding the strategic reserves.  We want to put strategic reserves in Kasese, Gulu and Nakasongola to enhance the capacity which we have in the country currently –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when you carry on conversation in various areas, we cannot listen.  Please desist.  Proceed.

MRS BBUMBA: We are making efforts to expand the reserves, Mr Speaker.  It is not true that we do not have reserves in this country.  We do have reserves but they are quite small. Those reserves being of a strategic nature, I cannot give the numbers of how many litres, how much there is, because they are strategic and of a security nature.  

Mr Speaker, Government has been very careful in fixing taxes on the oil products. Aviation oil and cooking gas have no taxes at all. They do not have tax because Uganda being a landlocked country Government saw it fit to make it a hub to attract aircrafts to come in. So there is almost no tax on aviation oil.  

Mr Speaker, on cooking gas, Government recently waived almost all the taxes on cooking gas, LPG, in order to encourage people to use cooking gas. We are working with oil companies to see whether we can come up with some arrangement through which the peasants can acquire cooking facilities using LPG gas in an affordable manner.  

Mr Speaker, paraffin has got the lowest tax.  To show that the Government is mindful about the peasants, it is only Ugshs 200.  In Rwanda it is Ugshs 759 a litre of fuel. In Kenya, which is at the border it has got the pipeline and refinery, it is at Ugshs 1870. So really our taxes are not out of tune on fuel.  

Mr Speaker, most of the other issues which were raised were –(Interruption)

MR WAMBUZI: Mr Speaker, much as we appreciate that the taxation levels of the three or four Republics is more less uniform in Uganda shillings, we would have preferred the Minister to give us the pump prices in Uganda shillings equivalent in the three different Republics.  It would have given us guidance on who is cheating who. 

MRS BBUMBA: Mr Speaker, the pump price is a product of a number of factors, tax being one of them. The other element is the capital investment, and the third one is the cost of transportation and other logistics. The forth one is the source of financing or source of the product.  

I remember soon after the war Uganda used to get subsidized fuel, this done in some of the countries.  However, I will give the pump prices in the three countries.  In Kenya a litre of petrol is $0.93 of petrol; in Rwanda it is $0.94; in Uganda it is $1.1 –(Interjection)- Kenya, there is no high transport cost; the difference is 0.2. 

In Rwanda, the standards for infrastructure development are not stringent. Here because of the high safety requirements, the oil companies –(Interruption)- yes, in Rwanda it is a common feature to find tanks unprotected on the surface.  

Today in this country there is nowhere you find a filling station with the tanks exposed, which are environmentally hazardous, so that takes extra money. It may be that Rwanda is enjoying some subsidies like we used to enjoy before the war, Mr Speaker.

Mr Speaker, I want to conclude by saying that the liberalization of the oil industry has helped to control prices and to provide easier access for the consumers –(Maj. Rwamirama rose_)

THE SPEAKER: I think, hon. Rwamirama, this matter will have to be followed up by the two committees: The Committee on Natural Resources and your committee.

MRS BBUMBA: Mr Speaker, competition has helped and the law, which was enacted by this august Parliament in November 2003, strengthened the competition because it bars cartels according to that law. I think soon we are coming out with an anti-trust law again to strengthen that.  It has also ensured quality because now the ministry has got powers to monitor the quality and standards. This is why you see that petrol stations are some of the best looking infrastructures in Uganda today because we are very strict on standards and safety.  

Mr Speaker, if there were no competition these prices would have been much higher than they are today.  I indicated that the increase on the international market today is over 65 per cent, but the increase on the local market as we speak today is under 40 per cent.

Mr Speaker, I want to end by reassuring members of this House and the nation at large that Government is going to continue in its effort to ensure that this country gets regular supply, high quality and affordable.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.  As I have said, the relevant Committees on Finance and Natural Resources should follow up this matter to advise us what to do.

MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION OF THE CONCLUSION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE QUESTION PUT BY THE SPEAKER ON THE MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO REQUEST THE HOLDING OF THE REFERENDUM FOR CHANGE OF POLITICAL SYSTEM
4.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Mwesigye Adolf): Mr Speaker, before I present my motion, I crave your indulgence to make one typographical error in paragraph 1 of the motion moved under Rule 53(3) of the Rules of Procedure.  I thought I should make that correction.  The indication here is Rule 53(3) of the Constitution, what should have been there is Rule 53(3) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion under Rule 53(3) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament for the rescission of the conclusion of Parliament and for a resolution under Article 74(1)(a) of the Constitution to request the holding of a Referendum for the purpose of changing the political system.  

WHEREAS under Article 1(4) of the Constitution the people -(Interruption)

CAPT. (RTD) CHARLES. BYARUHANGA: Mr Speaker, I have a notice to your office dated 22 April 2005.  The notice is, “Notice for motion for reconsideration of the conclusion of Parliament –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, leave him to finish what he wants to say, and then you will come in.

CAPT.  (RTD) BYARUHANGA: Mr Speaker, technically I am finding a problem.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, leave him to make his case, and then you will come in.

MR MWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, WHEREAS under Article 1(4) of the Constitution the people of Uganda shall express their will and consent on who shall govern them and how they should be governed through regular free and fair elections of their representatives and through referenda; and 

WHEREAS under Article 69(1) of the Constitution the people of Uganda shall have a right to choose and adopt a political system of their choice; and 

WHEREAS under Article 74(1)(a) of the Constitution provides that a referendum shall be held for the purpose of changing the political system if requested by resolution supported by more than one half of all Members of Parliament; and 

WHEREAS on Thursday, 21 April 2005, a motion was moved for a resolution to request the holding of a referendum for the purpose of change of political system but the said motion to request the holding of referendum did not pass; 

WHEREAS the Government is desirous of seeking a rescission of the decision of Parliament of 21 April 2005 to enable Parliament to resolve that a referendum be held under Article 74(1)(a) for the purpose of change of the political system; 

NOW THEREFORE, I beg to move that it be resolved by this House as follows:
1. That in accordance with Rule 53(3) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, Parliament resolves that the decision taken on 21 April 2005 not to request the holding of the referendum under Article 74(1)(a) be rescinded; and  

2. That in accordance with Article 74(1)(a) and Article 61(b) of the Constitution, Parliament request the Electoral Commission to hold the referendum for the purpose of enabling the people of Uganda to decide on the change of the political system.  Mr Speaker, I beg to move.  (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Byaruhanga had a point, let us hear it, please.

CAPT. (RTD) CHARLES BYARUHANGA: Mr Speaker, maybe let me start my procedure by quoting one Plato who said, “Good people do not need those to tell them to act responsibly while bad people will find a way around the laws.”  

Mr Speaker, the notice I have to your office, dated 22 April 2005, is a notice of a motion for reconsideration of the conclusion of Parliament on the question put by the Speaker on the motion for a resolution of Parliament to request the holding of the referendum for change of a political system.  

Mr Speaker, on today’s Order Paper the motion is for reconsideration of the conclusion of Parliament on the question put by the Speaker on the motion for holding a resolution of Parliament to request the holding a referendum for a change of a political system.  

Mr Speaker, the Minister in charge of Constitutional Affairs is now moving a motion under Rule 53(3) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament for rescission of conclusion of Parliament and for a resolution under Article 74(1)(a) of the Constitution to request the holding of a referendum for the purpose of changing a political system.  

Mr Speaker, this motion he is moving has no notice to your office. The motion with a notice to your office is the one I read prior.  Procedurally, is it correct for the Minister to move a resolution without notice?

THE SPEAKER: Let him explain.  Honourable Minister, there is a query about that.

 MR MWESIGYE ADOLF: Mr Speaker, let me read the wording of Rule 53(3) to the members.  Rule 53(3) reads: “It is out of order to attempt to reconsider any specific question upon which the House has come to a conclusion during the current Session, except upon a substantive motion for rescission.”  

Mr Speaker, the most instructive words in this rule are “reconsider” and “rescission.”  When this House decides on the motion to rescind the consequence of the outcome of that motion is that it will reconsider its position it took on Thursday.  

Therefore in this motion, Sir, there are two elements. The first motion is for a resolution to rescind. The second motion is for a resolution to reconsider the decision we took and resolve that the system be changed.  

Mr Speaker, the slight mismatch of the words between the notice and the motion in my opinion are not fatal to the extent that they should frustrate this motion.  Otherwise, the notice is given under Rule 37. The notice quotes Rule 53(3), and I have moved the motion under no other rule but Rule 53(3).  

Mr Speaker, it is my opinion that there is no technical flaw. I, therefore, invite this House to consider the motion on its merits. I thank you. (Applause)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  On the fateful day of 21 April 2005 when we were unable to reach a decision on a motion which had been moved, you made a ruling and you repeated the consequences of failure to make a resolution of Parliament in accordance with the motion. 

Mr Speaker, I beg, your indulgence that we look at the Hansard on the consequences of failure to make a resolution of a Parliament as a result of a motion moved by the Minister.  You told us among other things, if I recollect properly from the Hansard that should such a measure fail to reach a resolution of Parliament, this matter cannot come back to the august House for reconsideration.  

Mr Speaker, if anybody is disputing what I recollect, it is quite possible for the purpose of record and clarity that we read what you told us of the consequences.  

Ordinarily, Mr Speaker, your ruling is final in any matter, and for anybody to reverse your ruling has to come up with a substantive motion challenging your ruling.  What I see here is not a substantive motion challenging your ruling at the material time on the specific motion that we considered.  I seek your guidance, what did you tell us last time? 

THE SPEAKER: No, let me clarify, honourable members.  Deliberately on 15 February 2005, I made some guidance as to what is going to happen during a very important process of reviewing our Constitution.  The reason I decided to do that was to afford you an opportunity to point out anything if there was something that needed to be revisited and amended.  

I remember I told you that in carrying out this process you have to be careful on what you do, each step you take. I said that we shall have to have a Second and Third Reading passed by two-thirds majority. I said should we fail to have the necessary majority for a Second Reading, the Business will remain with the First Reading.  

But I told you that we have a problem with our Rules of Procedure, namely, Rule 53, which prohibits us to handle the same matter over which a conclusion has been given in the Session.  

But I said that, that Rule 53 has another part, that is Rule 53(3), that if you want to revisit a matter over which a conclusion was made in a Session you have to do it by a substantive motion for rescission. This means that you bring a motion to rescind what you have done before you can bring up that matter. This is what I said. (Applause)  

I think following failure for a motion for a resolution to go through- it failed because we made a decision in that the required majority did not support it. A notice was given that they intend to bring back the motion, and to appeal to you that you reconsider the matter.  

What you do - I have seen there are two resolutions here. The second resolution depends on whether the first resolution passes.  So, what we have to handle today in this matter, which we dealt with on Thursday, is to consider the grounds for rescission or if there is anything to rescind.  If that succeeds then that is when we can revisit the same matter which we have handled during the same Session.  If it does not succeed, the question of a second resolution does not arise. I think I am clear. What I said is in the Hansard of that day.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for clarifying a matter which was in a state of abeyance.  Among other things, you also mentioned, and actually you have repeated very accurately what you advised us, there is a time lag.  I wanted some clarification on that matter of time. How much time do we need in-between?  Are we bound by any rules of procedure –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, it is better you allow people to say- I will handle them.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your ruling.  But for the purpose of restraining, in addition to your ruling, some of our zealous friends in defence of certain positions, I think it is important that all of us, say Christians, we may be subscribing to the Bible but when we go to Church there are certain areas we have not read –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Make your point, please.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  As I said it is also a diversion for the purpose of restraining certain aspects of our debates here.  The clarification I am seeking is a time lag.  It may be mentioned here in the Rules of Procedure, but your interpretation is a lot more important as a presiding officer. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, you see, there are two alternatives. One is that you bring the matter, revisit the matter during the same session and time was not given, or you can bring the same matter in another session without applying for leave. 

But this one, if you have to bring it during the same session you have to bring this kind of motion, and you consider the merits and demerits and then you decide. It is up to you really.  But, of course, this does not mean that because there is this provision we have to be doing this now and then. It is only in special circumstances that it should be done.

MR MAO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order.  Well, it is obvious that points of order are when a member thinks the rules are being violated, and that is why I rise.

THE SPEAKER: Yes.

MR MAO: Mr Speaker, Rule (1) of our Rules of Procedure, our interpretation section, defines what a substantive motion is.  The motion is based on Rule 53(3), which requires a substantive motion. The relevant rule reads, “and a substantive motion is an independent motion” - I emphasize the word “independent” – “an independent motion of which notice is duly given but which is neither incidental nor relating to a proceeding or order of the day already before the House.”  
Mr Speaker, I see that there is a misjoinder. You have said one seems to be a consequential upon the other. This is what in law we call a duplex.  It has mixed up two issues, and since we have a clear definition of what a substantive motion is requiring a motion which stands alone. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, to purport to bring a motion, which is mixed up, in my opinion is a clear violation of our rules and the motion is therefore incompetent.  Are we in order to proceed to discuss an incompetent motion?

THE SPEAKER: No, as far as I see the business for us today or now is to consider the question of rescission of a decision we made on Thursday.  The other one can only come -(Interjection)- I have said so.  The other one can only come if the question of rescission succeeds. If it does not - in fact the Mover might even as well cancel number 2 and we proceed with number 1. It is possible; there is no problem.

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure.  Mr Speaker, for those who are aware of the way proceedings are made before court, a side can apply to court to have its pleadings amended and if in the opinion of the presiding judicial officer, if it does not affect the substance of the matter being pleaded, he can allow the amendment.  

Similarly under Rule 39, Mr Speaker, you are enjoined to permit a member to move in an amended form without notice, a motion of which notice has been given if in your opinion the amendment does not materially alter any principle embroidered in the motion of which notice has been given.

Mr Speaker, today the Minister has brought before you a motion to which –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, you see, honourable member, the matter is clear.  As I have said today, as I see, if we have to deal with this matter the only motion is for rescission.  If it exceeds then we deal with the other because we cannot deal with them concurrently. Therefore, if you want to amend, I do not see any problem.  But today we are discussing the motion for rescission, especially as it is causing misunderstanding.

MR MUSUMBA: It is on that ground, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of order in relation to the rules in which we are proceeding.  Rule 52 on page 71, the marginal note or the sub-heading is “Close of the debate.”  

It is the rule that provides for when debates should be closed and it reads: “No Member may speak on any question after it has been put by the Speaker, that is after the voices of Ayes and Noes have been given on it.” 

 Now, Rule 53, which the Minister is using as an entry point to bring back what we already refused is just - the marginal note reads: “Contents of speeches.” So, the rule is regulating whether issues should be brought back for debating or not. 

Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance in a point of order that Rule 52 has not been subjected to Rule 53(3).  So, are we in order to violate Rule 52(1) of our Rules of Procedure, which Rule 53(3) is not subject to?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there was a business which we handled last week, and that is business under Article 74.  We made a conclusion, how you describe the conclusion is not my problem.  But the mover I think was not satisfied with what was done. But at the same time he cannot bring the matter during the same session, a matter over which we have pronounced ourselves. Therefore, he is invoking Rule 53(3) of our Rules of Procedure to appeal to the same House during the same session to revisit the same business. 

Our Rule of Procedure is similar 100 per cent to the procedure in the Parliament of Singapore. There are differences – I have heard somebody talking about commonwealth procedures. There is no such a thing as commonwealth procedures because if you look at the provisions in India, they do not give this provision, in Zambia they do not give this provision, but in Uganda we put this provision and when on 15 February 2005 I mentioned it, I never thought that this situation would arise. I only mentioned it to say, be serious with whatever you are going to do because if you are not, you may find yourself not repeating the same matter during the same session “kumbe” I was predicting –(Laughter)- what would happen during this month.  

What I can say is that the mover has a rule on which he has based his motion. The question of mixing it with the other one, I think that is a matter over which he can decide what to do with it.  But the essence of today’s business is to decide whether we rescind what we did or not. If we do not rescind, it means it will be open to him when we start the next session to bring the same matter without seeking leave from us.

MR MARTIN WANDERA: Mr Speaker, the honourable Minister of State for Justice and Constitutional Affairs in his presentation stated that under Rule 53(3), two words are very instructing and these are ‘to reconsider’ and ‘rescission’ and I have heard some people trying to submit that these words mean one and the same thing. Mr Speaker, reconsider means consider something again especially for a possible change on it. Now, rescission means the formal revocation, cancellation, repeal and so forth.  

Now, if you read Rule 53(3), there are two things that have to happen: One, before you reconsider you must rescind, and for you to rescind, there must be a substantive motion. Hon. Norbert Mao has ably informed this House that under Rule 1, that is interpretation, a motion must be substantive and for that matter it must have due notice. Mr Speaker, I beg to submit that the motion that has been moved to rescind what we decided on the 21 April 2005 is not substantive in as far as notice is not given under Rule 37. I know you have a right to pray that Parliament reconsiders, but follow the rules, and this is our prayer. 

If this matter must be reconsidered, Rule 53 must be followed because what is on the Order Paper, Mr Speaker, item number 4 is “Motion for reconsideration of the conclusion of Parliament on the question put by the Speaker on the Motion for a resolution of Parliament to request the holding of a referendum for change of political system.” Now, the motion that is being tabled here is different because it is a motion for rescission. So, I pray, Mr Speaker, that the honourable Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs proceeds properly such that this House deals with this matter properly.  (Applause). It is just not a matter of hiding behind numbers.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Besides issues raised by hon. Martin Wandera, the motion which was moved without notice by the honourable minister also brings two issues: It brings the question of rescission and the question of reconsideration. And according to the Rules of Procedure, 53(3), a motion for rescission comes first. If that is reconsidered, a substantive motion for reconsideration should be brought following the right procedure of the three days. But this particular motion is bringing two motions both for rescission and reconsideration; it is still not substantive even if it were to have followed the same procedure.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, many times, even yesterday, I have been having problems with you putting questions. You narrate, you discuss and so forth, and the problem I think as I see in this one, is giving a preamble to what he wants to do.  But when I received a notice narrating what happened on Thursday, I knew the motion would be for rescission, and this motion for today as I have told you is for purposes of rescinding rightly or wrongly; rescinding a decision, which you made on –(Interjections)- it carries encumbrances, which cannot arise until the question of rescission has been handled. Do you want to defend your position?

DR OKULO EPAK: Mr Speaker, since the motion being tabled has indirectly brought in a second motion for which there has been no notice, and which is not under consideration under its resolution number 2, this is an awkward way of obtaining decision without a motion. I am therefore moving that resolution number 2 of this motion be deleted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is now before the House. The honourable member for Oyam South has moved a motion to amend the motion by deleting what was referred to as resolution number 2  so that we deal with the motion that falls under Rule 53(3). That is the motion; is it supported?

MEMBER: Yes.

MR WANDERA: No, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: It has been.

MR WANDERA: Mr Speaker, I can justify –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Oh, my dear, you see, a motion has been moved, let us debate it, you oppose it and then we decide.  Hon. Mwesige Adolf, you have heard the motion that –(Interjections)- honourable members, we have to be orderly! We are going to dispose of this matter, but let us straighten the procedure. I have said there is a motion by hon. Okulo Epak to delete.

MR OTTO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. There is a substantial issue that the motion has been mixed up with the resolution, and hon. Okulo Epak has started amending the mixed up issues before we have clarified what hon. Mao raised. Is it in order?

THE SPEAKER: You see what has happened, a motion was tabled, and everybody who rose including hon. Mao was saying it is carrying resolution number 2 , and I said resolution number 2  cannot be entertained until the motion for rescission has been carried. Now, in an attempt to improve this motion, a Member of the House has moved that we delete resolution number 2  so that we only deal with rescission, and then if it fails then a question of resolution number 2  does not come, and if it succeeds we shall - and therefore it is not out of order for a Member to amend a motion, which has been tabled.  

MRS MUSUMBA: Clarification, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Is it against the motion?

MRS MUSUMBA: No Sir, I am seeking clarification. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it does not pay for all of you to stand when there is one to address me. Let us be calm, we are going to dispose of this matter.

MRS MUSUMBA: Can I speak, Sir?

THE SPEAKER: You will catch my eye, hold on; let me explain. Honourable members, we have to conduct our business in an orderly manner and I will give you time; I will be here for hours, but let us take each point and dispose of it. I have said the notice, which was served on me, was for purposes of moving a motion to rescind a decision -(Interjections)- well, if it is the language I know how to interpret Rule 53(3); Rule 53(3)’s term is rescission, I understood it so. Therefore, when notice is given to me under Rule 53(3), I start saying, “What decision are we rescinding?” 

Since the notice was served to me, my understanding was for a rescission –(Interjections) But you do not have to talk? I am giving the Floor to hon. Salaamu Musumba and listen to her attentively.

MRS MUSUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The matter before us is intricate, and I am sure in the history of Parliament this is the first time we are doing it. So, we are setting a first precedent on this rule, and I really wish that we would do it properly with proper clarification. 

What I see as the body of this motion cannot be sustained under Rule 53(3) because the body is talking about other things, which do not constitute or add up to a substantive motion; they are picked from everywhere, it is like a mixed grill. It is collecting bits and pieces from everywhere to justify and it does not add up to a substantive motion that leads us to a decision of rescinding.  The body of this motion is very defective and it cannot be sustained in this House.

Mr Speaker, just read the content, “Whereas Article 1, No.4 …” is not the thing in issue; the issue is the rescinding. So, can we have drafters of a motion to rescind, which can be substantive in itself? 

Mr Speaker, in the Sixth Parliament I do recall –(Interjections)- let me make my point, Mr Speaker.  In the Sixth Parliament there was a Bill on this Floor about political parties presented by hon. Joash Mayanja Nkangi, and when that Bill was substantially changed in content, he begged to withdraw it because it was badly mutilated. In amending the resolution before us here, which is already defective, amending a defective resolution further mutilates it and so we cannot recognize it as a substantive motion. Mr Speaker, I would like clarification, is it possible for the honourable minister to withdraw and form a substantive motion so that it helps us to move properly?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members and honourable member who has just made a contribution, you are free in your wisdom to improve on this motion, which is before you. If I was to deal with this one, and I am not, I see where the roots are. But it is a question of preambles, this and the other, I see it and I agree as I have told you, resolution two only comes when ground one succeeds. That is why hon. Dr Okulo Epak has made an improvement. He says what has been causing these problems is resolution two. It will come because if you succeed then you bring another resolution and we handle it, if it is causing a problem. 

Honourable members, what I am going to do, I am suspending the proceedings for 20 minutes to see what you want to do.

(The proceedings were suspended at 4.53 p.m. for 20 minutes.)

(On resumption at 5.48 p.m. _)

THE SPEAKER: What is the position, honourable minister?

5.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have duly moved the motion and this motion has been duly seconded in accordance with Rule 53(3) of our Rules of Procedure. 

Sir, you have already ruled that notice was dully served on the Speaker and the Clerk. It is government position that this motion be maintained in the form it is. The motion is consistent with Rule 53(3). Therefore, Sir, I would like to crave your indulgence to allow me justify my motion so that debate can ensue there from.  Thank you, Sir.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This Parliament has got its own Rules of Procedure; they were never made in vain but they were made to direct this House as to how we transact business. The motion as it is now is incurably defective; there is nothing to cure in this motion and it cannot even be debated, we cannot even go to the merits. Why? 

Mr Speaker, our Rule 53(3) the proviso says, “…except upon a substantive motion for rescission.”  Unfortunately, the Rules of Procedure do not define rescission. So, what do we do? We fall back to the ordinary meaning of the word ‘rescission’ as it is in any other English dictionary. If we do not do that, then we go to the Parliamentary Practice as it happens in the countries, Mr Speaker, you have mentioned where some of our rules are word per word.  

What does rescission therefore mean? Let us start with the ordinary meaning. In an ordinary dictionary, rescission means revocation, cancellation, repeal of a law, order or agreement.  So, Mr Speaker –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not want to interrupt you. Do you not think really this is an argument for a case that a case has not been put up for a rescission; this is a substantive contribution to the motion. He says, “rescind” then you say “rescind what, what are the grounds for rescinding?” Do you not think that is when you put that case?

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, I thank you for your advice.  But I can only say, Mr Speaker, you know what we call a preliminary objection because this is what I am raising. We shall save Parliament’s time to go into substance, which does not exist. We are not here to debate for it’s own sake, we are not here just to vote –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, if you say “something that does not exist’ I understand you are saying there is nothing to rescind and, therefore, if there is nothing to rescind that is the contribution you give when he justifies something to rescind.

MR KATUNTU: But, Mr Speaker, I am sorry I do not like this sort of dialogue but I must –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: It is not a dialogue, it is my guidance.

MR KATUNTU: Yes, I can only say, Mr Speaker, that if there is something to rescind it should be in the pleadings, it should be in the motion. As it is now, there is nothing to rescind either in law, in common sense or even in parliamentary proceedings –(Interruption) 

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, hon. Abdu Katuntu is talking about pleadings. Pleadings are not complete in a motion unless and until I have justified the case for my motion. So, he would be fair enough to allow me justify my motion then he would be able to understand what the pleadings are about.

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, I really did not want to come in at this stage. I thought the minister was going to say something else, but now that he maintains that there is a motion, I have a big problem. My contention is that there is actually no motion for rescission. I see two possible resolutions: Resolution number 1 is asking for a rescission, and resolution number 2 is for reconsideration of what we did the other day.  

Now, if I look at the notice, which was duly served on you, I notice that it is a notice for reconsideration of the conclusion of Parliament.  This notice, therefore, only deals with part two of the possible resolution, which leaves part 1 for rescission without any leg because no notice in respect to part one was ever duly served on you -(Applause)– and yet, Sir, we cannot move on a motion of this nature unless it is a substantive motion, and a substantive motion must be pegged on a notice given to you. That is my biggest problem.  

I thought that the minister was going to reconsider this and maybe withdraw and start afresh. If we, Members of this Seventh Parliament, insist on going on this -(Interruption)

MRS HOPE MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of order on the basis of Rule 65, which talks about decision of the Speaker or the Chairperson. This rule provides as follows: “The Speaker or the Chairperson of a committee shall be responsible for the observance of the rules or order in the House and committee respectively and his or her decision upon any point shall not be open to appeal and shall not be reviewed by the House except upon a substantive motion made after notice.”  

Mr Speaker, you have ruled that you duly received the notice to move the motion in question.  (Applause) Therefore, is it in order for the honourable members to keep disregarding and challenging your wise ruling on basis of Rule 65?  Are they in order, Sir?  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have said a motion under Rule 53(3) is for rescission, and I have said resolution 2, which appears in the text here of the motion, can only come after you have succeeded on rescinding what was done and, therefore, personally - somebody actually moved a motion that we delete then we handle it afterwards.

MR WACHA: Can I finish? The Minister, my sister, was in a hurry, but I was about to finish.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the notice which I received was for intention to move a motion under Rule 53(3); that was rescission. So, for purposes of rescission, yes, for purposes of the second reason I would advise, because you cannot argue them concurrently, that let us finish the first part and once you succeed, then you handle the other one. (Applause).

MR WACHA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I do abide by your decision, but I wish to point out the following –(Interruption)  

THE SPEAKER: The case, which has to be made, is for rescission; why we rescind and what we rescind, then after that has succeeded or has failed then we see how we proceed.

MR WACHA: Sir, I agree that we cannot handle resolution number 2 at the present time because it will hinge on what we decide on resolution number 1.  But I am arguing that we do not have a motion to support the possible resolution number 1 because the notice that was served on you, Sir, and which you accepted, is in respect of reconsideration of what we have decided.  It is not for rescission, reconsideration can only come in after we have rescinded. That is my argument. So, the minister should do things properly by going back and giving you a notice for rescission and then we can handle the matter.

MR KATUNTU: In conclusion, Mr Speaker, if we are talking about rescission in the second part of the resolution where our case has been rendering this motion incurable, defective and does not even qualify for consideration by this House, Parliamentary Practice requires that the power of rescission –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think we are moving in a circle. I have said, as far as I am concerned, the notice was for a rescission. But what I am saying is that, the other second resolution cannot come in until a decision to rescind has been passed. This is what I have said.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, you have said, as far as you are concerned, the notice you received was for rescission; one would take it as that. But, when your Office received the notice, you decided to accept it the way it was and you stamped it. Your Office went ahead to issue on the Order Paper of the day the same motion as it was. If you knew it was rescission, you would not have produced it exactly as it was on the Order Paper. The motion, which would have been here for rescission would have been for rescission.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ekanya, I have ruled. The purpose of the notice to me was to move a motion for rescission.

DR OKULO EPAK: I moved a motion of amending this very motion and it was seconded.  But, I have not been allowed to defend my motion. You asked for the opinion of the honourable Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs whether it is acceptable to him, and he objected. So, we must dispose of my motion before we can proceed to his substantive motion.

THE SPEAKER: Proceed with your motion.

6.04
DR OKULO EPAK YEFUSA (Oyam County South, Apac): Mr Speaker, the notice you received was contradictory.   Whereas it was supposed to proceed under Article Rule 53(3), which is for rescission, the permission sought was for reconsideration. Consequently, in my humble opinion, there was enough confusion already in the notice for this motion never to have come out in the House because you cannot proceed on Rule 53(3) and then ask for permission for reconsideration, no. This is technically wrong, and I think it is unfortunate that this motion has found its way on the Floor of this House by the hon. Attorney General.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I think in all fairness, I was in the Constituent Assembly. Some of you were not there and this question of number, which is creeping here is the very cause of the problems we are battling today and the arrogance of number, if we do not avoid it, will land this country into trouble. Really, a humble motion trying to correct a government gets rejected! I think there must be something absolutely wrong with us, either our arrogance is so much that we have not even any regard for Parliament or for this country. 

Some people have integrity enough to see a loophole and a technical problem in a situation and would want to move to correct it. Now that it is rejected, I had planned to withdraw my motion according to the precedent set by hon. Kityo. But now that I have heard the views of the honourable Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, I would like my motion to be debated and a pronouncement made on it. I thank you very much.

MR WACHA: On a matter of procedure, Sir, you will bear with me. Following my sister, hon. Mwesigye Hope’s advice, you have already made a ruling on this matter that technically we cannot proceed on resolution number 2 because we have not handled the possible resolution number 1. Now, hon. Okulo Epak is saying exactly what you have already stated –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me; you will bear with me also. Let me read the only motion under Rule 53(3), I will read slowly: “…conclusion during the current session, except upon a substantive motion for rescission.” So, when I get a notice under Rule 53(3), the main substance of that motion is for rescission, and once we succeed in rescinding, then the way is open. I do not see what is really causing problems that you insist having the second –(Interruption)

MR WACHA: Can I finish, Sir? I thank you very much for that clarification because you have really stated what I want to state. But my problem is that, the minister is insisting that his motion remains as it is. Where does that one leave us? It leaves us with a possible resolution number one and possible resolution number two on which you have already ruled. What are we going to do about it?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the House is adjourned until tomorrow 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 6.10 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 28 April 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)
