Wednesday, 1 April 2015

Parliament met at 2.12 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I just want to inform you that after a long wait, yesterday we received the letter from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that they are ready to proceed today with the laying of those documents on the Table - the Budget Framework Paper, the National Budget, the Finance Bill, the Excise (Amendment) Bill, the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, the Report on Public Debt, Grants and Guarantees, and the Ministerial Policy Statement for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

We also expect all the others to be laid on the Table today so that we can see how to proceed with this matter that has now become fairly urgent, by the operation of time. We expect all the documentation to be received today so that we can see how we can allow the committees to work with great speed. This is in order for us to see how we can complete this process within the timeframe provided by the law. Thank you. 

2.15
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this chance to bring up a matter that has affected a number of people in the Kumi County constituency.

Honourable colleagues, on the night of 22 March 2015, fire gutted a house in the central business district of Kumi. It burned this house completely to the ground. The fire went off at its own freewill; that means nobody intervened to try and help put it off. 

As you are aware, we have scarcity of water in Kumi Town and this even gets worse during the dry season. Therefore, what I bring to this House is the fact that nine families with an average of six people per family have been severely affected. They have lost capital and income, given that this particular building housed businesses - a restaurant, boutiques and other forms of businesses being conducted in that building. 

Ironically, the building I am talking about is next to the Central Police Station in Kumi. The question I would like to put to Government is that recalling that this very House passed US$ 100 million to procure earthmoving equipment for our roads and firefighting equipment, how could this fire go on razing this building at its own will without the intervention of Government?  

I would like to ask Government to offer firefighting services to even small towns like Kumi. I would also like to indulge Government to come to the aid of these people in whatever way. They have lost their livelihood. Next term, the children from these families will not be going to school for lack of school fees. 

I would like to hear from somebody, probably the Leader of Government Business, whom I assume is being represented by the Government Chief Whip, to give a response to this. What kind of assistance will be given? Will it be humanitarian or revamping their businesses? Whatever form of assistance that Government can give to these people would be very welcome by the people of Kumi and me. 

Certainly, there is need for some form of relief. These people have nothing to eat. In towns, people have their granaries in the market. If you do not have money, you cannot access that granary. These very families are unable to access that granary. I wish to ask Government, since a precedent has been made in a previous crisis, that the people of Kumi, particularly these families, be helped. 

2.19
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to begin by passing on sincere sympathies to the families that have lost property. 

I would also like to clarify that indeed Government has a plan to establish fire stations in municipalities and those big towns that are on highways. There is a loan request that was passed to make sure that we procure such. At a given time, I will ask the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development together with the Minister for Internal Affairs to brief us on how far we have gone in procurement or establishment of fire stations.

Regarding the assistance that can be offered, every district has got a disaster committee. The Chief Administrative Officer (CAO), who is the secretary of that committee, is supposed to do assessment. Government cannot come in without prior assessment of the damage. When the assessment is done, it is forwarded to the Office of the Prime Minister in the relevant department of disaster management to find out which assistance can be offered. 

I also would like to request hon. Patrick Amuriat to pass on this information to Kumi District leadership so that they can quickly do the assessment and forward the report to the Office of the Prime Minister. We can then find out what assistance, in terms of relief, we can offer. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker and honourable members, my senior colleague, hon. Aronda Nyakairima, was due to present that statement. He must be on the way. I do not have it with me here. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you start with the preliminaries so that when he comes, he can continue from -(Laughter) 

MR BABA: I request that I do not pre-empt what he is going to say. I do not want to be accused of insubordination. He said that he wants to handle it himself. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is by order of the Speaker, so it is not insubordination. 

MR BABA: Mr Speaker, I do not have any preliminaries at the moment. We want to go straight to the substance. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us go to the next item. There was that report on NSSF; can we deal with it now? It is item 10.

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF 
THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL SOCIAL SECURITY FUND (NSSF)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had started processing our decisions on the specific recommendations of this report and we had concluded chapter three. Chapter four had issues of sub judice, which we had guided on; it falls within the framework of that rule and I had ruled on that matter. We therefore can go to chapter five. Read recommendation No.1.

Chapter Five

Recommendation No. 1

The committee recommends that Government enacts a robust social security policy and legislation to facilitate expansion of social security coverage in Uganda.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to that recommendation.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation No. 1, agreed to. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Recommendations 2 and 4 were already passed in the previous recommendations.

Recommendation No.3

The committee further recommends that as is the practice in other countries, the responsibility of investing pension funds should be vested into the board of trusties. The board of trusties should be the final authority on matters of pension fund investment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to that recommendation.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation No. 3, agreed to. 

Recommendation No. 5

The committee recommends that the lessons from Tanzania be considered for possible adoption.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to that recommendation.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation No. 5, agreed to.

Recommendation No. 6

The committee further recommends that the Public Private Partnership Bill be urgently enacted to create a conducive environment for profitable and long-term investment of pension funds.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to that recommendation.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation No. 6, agreed to.

Recommendation No.7

The committee further recommends that strategies be devised urgently to expand social security coverage to include Ugandans currently engaged in the formal sector.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to that recommendation.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation No. 7, agreed to. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question to the adoption of the whole report with exception to those matters that are sub judice. I put the question for the adoption of the report of the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Government Chief Whip, where is the Minister of Finance?

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was duly informed of the fact that today is the deadline to lay the Bills before Parliament, as it is indicated on the Order Paper. There was a delay in printing and that is why the minister is late but he is coming to perform the duty. We are sorry for that.

2.27
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank you for the prompt start of the plenary session. It has appeared that now we are here on time representing the Ugandans, and I am here representing the people of Aruu County. We came to transact business on behalf of Uganda and the Ugandans who voted for us. Surprisingly, just a week after a mini Cabinet reshuffle, we do not have two key ministers here, the Minister of Internal Affairs, Gen. Aronda Nyakairima, and the Minister of Finance. This Parliament needs to pronounce itself very clearly because there are many people who would like to be ministers and are willing to work. (Laughter) There is a whole Opposition Cabinet just waiting to take over Government. 

Can we be advised by the Government Chief Whip on when this kind of dillydallying will stop? When will we stop wasting the taxpayers’ time to wait for ministers who knew very well in advance that Parliament will be sitting at 2.00 p.m., moreover they lobbied to be appointed into those positions? (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, we seek your guidance. Can this Parliament take stern action against the ministers who are not here on time to explain issues of national importance, including the death of a lead prosecutor that the whole country would like to listen to? Can we be guided accordingly?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, I do not know whether we wear the same watches and whether our phones run the same national time or international time. It is becoming a problem; 2 O’clock is always 2 O’clock, especially where you have matters that have been agreed upon in advance that they should be handled. Since when has 2 O’clock become 3 O’clock? Please, can you say something on this?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Let me begin by welcoming back my colleague, hon. Odonga Otto, from wherever he has been. I have not seen him in the House for a long time but welcome back. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member for Aruu had due permission from the Speaker, so it is okay; you do not have to worry about that.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Yes, he deserves to be welcomed back by a friend. Mr Speaker, the absence of the ministers has nothing to do with the reshuffle and ministries have got their own problems. However, I would like to agree with hon. Odonga Otto and with you, Mr Speaker, that we have to do something to ensure that we are all here. I would like to thank you very much for having kept time; you are teaching all of us to keep time. 

As Chief Whip, I have designed methods of ensuring that the ministries are represented in the House. I have my methods, which I have tabled today in Cabinet. The Rt Hon. Prime Minster was the one in the chair and I have told my colleagues that I will be informing them of their performance in the House on a weekly basis. If the problem persists, then I will refer it to the higher authorities. I am therefore assuring the House that very soon we will see business unusual by having members of Cabinet in the House.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the kind comments she has just made about me; we have definitely come a long way. (Laughter) 

Having said that, to show the seriousness this House has on late attendance, I would like to seek your guidance if it would not be prudent to adjourn the House for 10 minutes as we wait for those ministers. This would show the ministers that business came to a standstill in the House because they were not there. I am more interested in knowing why someone was killed than going into other Bills at 5.00 p.m. or 6.00 p.m. I seek your indulgence, Mr Speaker, and I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: House is suspended for 15 minutes to allow the ministers come in.

(The House was suspended at 2.32 p.m.)

(On resumption at 2.52 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I state this for the record: 1st April, Fools’ Day, does not apply and will not apply to those who have legislative responsibilities to perform. Duty bearers of legislative mandate cannot use April Fools’ Day as an excuse for misleading the House. (Laughter) It does not apply to the House and functions of the House. Please, do not sight April Fools’ Day as a defence for failure to perform legislative functions.

In the public gallery this afternoon, we have students and a lecturer of the constitutionalism and political stability in Africa course, Kyambogo University. They have come to observe how business is conducted in the national Parliament. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

LAYING OF PAPERS

2.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members -(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We broke off for 15 minutes because the honourable ministers were not around. We have wasted time and taxpayers’ money. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the minister, before he proceeds, to first apologise to this House and the country for letting us down? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the minister has not even said a word. Are you God to know that he was not going to apologise? Please, now you are beginning to contribute to that wastage of time we are talking about. 

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, first, I apologise to the House that we were not able to be here in time.  

I beg to lay on the Table the National Budget Framework Paper for the financial year 2015/2016. In the same vein, I beg to lay on the Table a report of public debt, grants and guarantees as required by law. 

I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for vote 008, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, for the financial year 2015/2016. 

I beg to lay on the Table statutory reports on the implementation of the Public Enterprises Reform and Divestiture Act, Cap 98, also in accordance with the law.

I beg to lay on the Table expenditures of the statutory bodies for the financial year 2015/2016.I beg to lay.

In accordance with the law, I beg to lay on the Table a certificate of gender and equity of the Budget Framework Paper for the financial year 2015/2016, as required by the law. I also beg to lay on the Table a certificate of compliance with the National Development Plan, as required by the new Public Finance Management Act.

Mr Speaker, we have two other papers and with leave from you, I beg to lay on the Table a report of tax expenditure for the year 2014/2015. The law requires that together with the National Budget Framework Paper, we lay on the Table the Treasury Memoranda. I beg to lay on the Table the Treasury Memoranda. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture all those documents that have been laid before Parliament. They stand committed to the appropriate committee and committees to handle in this new timeframe.

Tomorrow, I will be making additional communication on this subject. We will be adjourning plenary to enable the committees proceed with the expeditious handling of this matter. The Clerk is directed to extract these minutes and communicate to the chairpersons so that they can handle this quickly. Thank you.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE 
OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

i)	THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2014/2015

ii)	THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2015/2016

3.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move a motion that Parliament do resolve itself into a Committee of Supply for consideration and approval of: 
(i) The revised revenue and expenditure estimates for the fiscal year 2014/2015;

(ii) The budgetary proposals for the revenue and expenditure estimates for fiscal year 2015/2016.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the Minister of Internal Affairs, the State Minister for Planning, the Government Chief Whip and the Minister of State for Energy.

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, this motion is moved in accordance with Article 151 of the Constitution of Uganda and section 13 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, which entails us to resolve into a committee of supply so that we consider the revised revenue and expenditure estimates for the year 2014/2015 and also the draft annual revenue and expenditure estimates for the year 2015/2016.

The budget for the financial year 2015/2016 has been formulated in the context of Vision 2040 and the National Development Plan. It has also taken into account the findings of the 2014 population and housing census, the recent rebasing of our country’s growth domestic product and the roadmap for the forthcoming general elections in 2016, while taking into account the prevailing macroeconomic conditions and output.

In consistency with the National Development Plan, the overarching macro-economic goal for the financial year 2015/2016 budget remains to deliver macro-economic stability to support inclusive and sustainable economic growth and social economic transformation. Accordingly, the priorities for the current budget have been crafted in line with the above strategic slots, with the ultimate objective being to improve the standards of living of all Ugandans through the following:

1. Maintenance of national security and defence.
2. Facilitating private sector enterprise for increased investment, employment and economic growth.
3. Effective delivery of infrastructure development and maintenance.
4. Commercialisation of production and productivity in primary growth sectors.
5. Enhancing capacity for increased domestic revenue mobilisation.
6. Increasing social service delivery. 
7. Enhancing efficiency in government management. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the projected total resource envelope to finance the above priorities for this coming financial year will rise from Shs 15,535.81 billion in financial year 2014/2015 to Shs 18,364.01 billion during the financial year 2015/2016. Domestic resources, comprising domestic revenue and net domestic financing, will account for 87 per cent of this budget. Domestic revenues will equal to Shs 12.494 billion, external financing will equal to Shs 5.5484 billion, totalling to Shs 18.364.01 billion.

Mr Speaker, consistent with the resource envelope, the total government expenditure will amount to Shs 18,364.01 billion, as summarised. The recurrent expenditure will be Shs 9,107.86 billion. Development expenditure will equal to Shs 9,256.15 billion. All this will total to Shs 18.364.01 billion.

In compliance with Article 155(2) of the Constitution and section 13(10) (e), I wish to submit the budgetary proposals of the nine self-accounting bodies. I also would like to, in accordance with Article 155 of the Constitution, -¸ Government has made recommendations on these proposals; I hereby lay both the budgetary proposals and the recommendations of Government before this august House as required by the Constitution. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, you are aware that the law has changed. Ordinarily, in the past, we would be receiving the Budget Speech at this moment but that has changed. This is now the procedure according to the new law. These proposals are received and forwarded to the committees of the House. The extracts will be made. However, honourable minister, you recall that they are supposed to be facilitated in sectoral committees by the ministerial policy statements. 

Therefore, at this time, I would like to receive the ministerial policy statements that are ready to be laid on the Table. Do we have a Parliamentary Commissioner? At least the one for the Parliamentary Commission should be ready because we have to lead by example. Can the one for the Parliamentary Commission be laid on the Table? Any member can lay it on the Table if there is no Commissioner. Dr Chris Baryomunsi, you are not a commissioner. (Laughter)

3.07
MS OLIVIA KWAGALA (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for vote 104, the Parliamentary Commission of Uganda, for the financial year 2015/2016. I beg to lay.  (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that and it stands committed to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, to handle within this new timeframe and report to the House on how we proceed. Honourable minister, what about the other departments of Government?

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, for the record, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has laid on the Table the policy statement for vote 008, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, for the financial year 2015/2016.

Mr Speaker, you have rightly said that this is a new process and we have informed all the accounting officers and all MDAs. They are in the process of finalising with their policy statements and as soon as they are ready, - in any case, you can give us a timeline - these will be presented before the House. I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, these ministerial policy statements should have already been received. I read the communication from the Secretary to the Treasury who had given the accounting officers a deadline, which has expired, for the submission of ministerial policy statements. The committees cannot begin to handle those processes unless we have the ministerial policy statements. As Parliament, we are ready; the committees are ready and anxious to contribute to this quick delivery of the Budget.

THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Actually, the ministerial policy statements are basically ready. There was one technical hitch that has affected all the ministries, which is being sorted out in the course of this afternoon. I, therefore, expect that the statements should be available for the House tomorrow.

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITON (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Mr Speaker, we would expect the Prime Minister to tell us what the hitch is because as it is, he could just say anything. Therefore, we would like to know what the hitch is because we were supposed to have them. What has just been presented here is the Budget Framework Paper, which we were supposed to have by 31st December last year and the Government has brought it three months later. 

We were supposed to have presentations on ministerial policy statements by 15th March. The Government should be kind and more serious and tell us the reasons or what this hitch is. It would appear that the Government makes the laws and they do not know how to implement them. You made this law yourselves and you cannot implement it and we are wasting taxpayers’ money coming here and there is no work to be done. 

Mr Speaker, I implore the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to give us details as to why there has been this delay so that it is on record. We demand that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will also recall that the Public Finance Management Bill became law when the President assented to it and that was in February this year. Some of those timelines had already been exceeded, but that is not to say the time that has passed since that date was not sufficient for the ministries and departments to have fulfilled their obligation within the timeframes provided in the law. Hon. Prime Minister, what are these technical issues?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, there is a period of transition from the old to the new law and the technical hitches are in that connection. This period of transition is a short period. As I told you, we expect that by tomorrow, the policy statements will be available for this august House.

MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We are starting the exercise a little late and we are aware that many times when we are considering or dealing with this exercise, we invite ministers and accounting officers to come and attend committee meetings and defend their policy statements. We now do not have a lot of time for this exercise and it is a bit tricky for a committee like mine, where we have about 13 institutions whose policy statements we have to consider. 

Would the Prime Minister, therefore, assure this House that the ministers and accounting officers will attend committee meetings and defend their policy statements and therefore facilitate the passing of the Budget in time?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, through you, hon. Tashobya is assured. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Tashobya and the whole House. Honourable members, as I said last week, this is going to be a very tight time for Parliament because we are expected to complete this process by the 30th of this month. 

I said I will be making communication to that effect tomorrow, but let me say some of it now. What this means is that the time that used to be given to the shadow ministers to present their alternative policies will have to be reduced to a week, and that is from when we receive the policy statements tomorrow. A week from that, they should be able to feed this into the committees and the committees should be ready to report on the whole process in two weeks. The House can then sit to look through what they have gone through so that by the end of the month, we are through with what has to happen in Parliament and the rest of the process can continue. I will be giving formal guidance on this tomorrow, but that is the highlight of what I will say anyway, so let me say it now.

MS ALICE ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We certainly appreciate your overall direction on how to process the entire Budget business before the House. However, I am concerned about two things. Of course, the first casualty in terms of the incompetence of the Executive not delivering on time is now the shadow Cabinet. It is we that are suffering and not them. 

I think it should be on the record that they have become very incompetent, so that even as we cut the time of the shadow Cabinet by half, they should bear the blame that by them sitting there, going for jobs that they are not committed to, they are the cause of the cutting of time for the shadow Cabinet. If there is any objection, let any one of them who is competent bring a policy statement and I sit down. They do not have it and that is a sign that they are extremely incompetent and they have let down the appointing authority. 

Secondly, I want to appeal to my colleagues, particularly the chairpersons of sessional committees. When you are hard-pressed for time, sometimes as committee members we make a lot of sacrifices on scrutiny. I want to pray to the chairpersons and all of us members to particularly pay attention to procurement plans and work plans before we give money to the entities. Almost all our reports, including those on the Order Paper, point to one thing: that we give monies to entities without scrutinising the procurement plans. That is where the accountability lapse in this House begins from. 

I thought I would implore the members, even as we are hard-pressed by time, to keep an eye on those two issues. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, and this should go to the shadow ministers, I do not think it is what is desired that they should wait for the ministerial policy statement from the Government side and then you react to it.  You are an alternative Government; you should present alternative policies and be ready with them any time -(Laughter)- so that the response to what the Government has said only constitutes a little chapter of your own alternative policy.

What Government has said should not be the body of your policy statement. You should propose what is best for the country as from the opposition side. Your comment on what the Government has proposed can only be a chapter or two in your own alternative policy. If you are to wait for them to say and then you only criticise, then you would have not helped the country. 

Maybe looking forward, the Opposition shadow ministers should also begin the process of consulting early and present real alternatives, so that we put them - You know, the only way you can tell if a stick is straight or crooked is by putting a straight one next to it. However, if you are to wait for the crooked stick and then try to straighten it, it must be a problem.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, perhaps I just need to own up; in case I misunderstood what you are saying, then I really apologise because I got the impression you had said you had reduced the time for the shadow ministers from the usual two weeks to the one week to make their presentation. If I got you right, I thought you are giving them less time than they have been using. That is why I am saying they need all the time because they have alternatives. We recently launched a policy agenda for this country; we have everything and we need the two weeks to put this to good use.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I agree with you. I am not saying anything new because you are ready. Just put those together and hand over to the committee so that they handle concurrently.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, We are in the budget process and there is only one national budget. We are not going to write two budgets for this House to consider. Our only input is to look at the government proposals and say, “On a, b, c, d we agree and a, b, c, d are our proposals.” It is going to be very difficult for us to come up with two parallel budgets because there is only one. 

The MTEF has been given; we must look at it and say, “This is the resource envelope we have, are getting our priorities correct?” That is what the Opposition is all about. We are not here to just oppose each and every statement being proposed by Government; no. We are looking at these statements, the budget allocation and we are being critical. 

We are saying, “If Government can reconsider this” - It is not about us but the whole country. I will give an example. We have problems of court awards that Government is not paying and this has escalated to almost Shs 400 billion, and you can imagine the figures. We should look at what Government has proposed for this and then we give our response. 

At a certain policy level, we can have two parallel policies, maybe manifestos, and we say, “this is what we intend to do when we are in Government”. However, we want to have a meaningful contribution to the budget process and to do this, we need to look at what Government is proposing. We are building one budget for the country; it is not about competition as I understand it.

Therefore, my proposal, and I think that is also the understanding of the Opposition, is that we are looking at what the Government is proposing, see where we agree with them and we get what we call constructive criticism. The Government should be able to appreciate some of the proposals that the Opposition is making.

Mr Speaker, if we proceed that way, I think we would add value to this process, other than us sitting and coming up with a parallel budget. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The point I was making is very simple. It was that your response is not to the budget but to the ministerial policy statement and the rules call it a different name - alternative policy statement. If “alternative” means a critique of the existing, then we may need to find another way of defining it. (Laughter) 

The rules say “alternative policy statement”; I was just trying to interrogate the word “alternative” in this area. If the interpretation is that you wait and critique it, then that is okay, let us go by your interpretation. That was my pedantic way of understanding the words that had been deliberately used in the rules. However, it is okay; we have been moving and we will continue to move. 

Can we go to the next item? Let me say this before we leave this item: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, tomorrow I will be adjourning the plenary to enable the committees handle this. By the time the House rises tomorrow, we should have received all the ministerial policy statements, without exception, to enable the House proceed, and underline “without exception” for emphasis. I thank you. 

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, since we have exceeded this time by 30 minutes, we shall top it up and then we receive a statement from the Minister for Internal Affairs thereafter. This is the time for the Prime Minister’s questions. The last time we met, I did not have any overflows and so, we shall start from a clean slate with the member for Bulamogi.

3.26
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): I thank you, Mr Speaker. My question to the Prime Minister is that during the 2010/2011 campaigns, several pledges were made by the NRM to the people of Bulamogi County in Kaliro District. I will enumerate four of them. 

The first was to extend power to Nawaikoke and Gadumire. The second was to tarmac the road from Kaliro to Gadumire. The third was to extend the Social Assistance Grant for Empowerment (money for the elderly) to the people of Kaliro. The fourth was to elevate Bumanya Health Centre IV to a district hospital.

As I speak now, not even one of those has been fulfilled. I would like the Prime Minister to state to the country and the people of Kaliro whether you will be able deliver on any or all four pledges within the remaining time. I thank you.

3.26
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, with regard to the pledges made during the campaigns, works on many of the roads are being done and it is true that the Kaliro roads are part of the roads on the programme.

With regard to the health centres and their upgrading, the Ministry of Health is gradually implementing the pledges through upgrading of the health centres. They are doing this to ensure that there is a health centre III in every sub-county and health centre IV in every constituency.

Finally, on the question of electricity, the Rural Electrification Agency is carrying out a programme of fulfilling the pledges. For the specific time for Kaliro, you could get this information from the Rural Electrification Agency. 

The pledges will be fulfilled as promised and of course, depending on the availability of resources. 

2.29
MS GRACE KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo):  I thank you, Mr Speaker. In February 2014, the President wrote and directed the Minister of Health to construct a general hospital in Zombo. He directed the then Minister of Health, who was you, Prime Minister. I would now like to ask you on how far you have gone with the construction now that you are even in a better position to do that? (Laughter)

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, my sister is right that this pledge was made. The Ministry of Health and Government of Uganda are discussing with development partners on funding the upgrading of health centres to hospitals. 

Zombo is one of the areas under consideration. As soon as these negotiations are complete with the development partners and the Islamic Development Bank in particular, the programme will be fulfilled and the requisite hospital constructed.

3.31
MR XAVIER KYOOMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask a question to the Prime Minister regarding the economy. You will recall that shortly that after the 2011 elections, we had a lot of instability in the economy including inflation, which hit double digits to more than 30 per cent. This was largely attributed to elections. There was also food shortage as food prices went up. 

Related to the situation we are in now, the rains have delayed in most of the parts of the country - thank God it is now raining. This implies that we are likely to have food shortage, which is likely to skyrocket food prices. Coupled with the forthcoming elections, we are likely again to get into what we experienced in 2011. My question is: what short term measures do you have to mitigate the anticipated effects?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, this cyclic problem that hon. Kyooma is talking about is not going to happen now. Government, under the programme of Operation Wealth Creation, is mobilising and galvanising the population to produce more food and cash crops and, therefore, buttress our economy.

Policies are firmly on the ground. I want to assure the House and the country that the economy is on course and that any excesses that will be deleterious to the population will be contained.

3.33
MR YAHAYA GUDOI (NRM, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Recently, I read in the New Vision that Government had come up with a suggestion of constructing 500 secondary schools in 500 sub counties. I did not get it well; does Government mean that it is going to grant-aid 500 secondary schools in sub counties which do not have them, or is it going to construct 500 secondary schools in the sub counties that do not have including those which have but the seed schools are not constructed?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the policy of Government on secondary schools is very clear. The policy is that every sub county should have a government secondary school. Most of the sub counties have these schools. The focus is now to make sure that the sub counties that do not have those government secondary schools can have them and the programme is on course.

3.35
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The question I have for the Prime Minister is: is there a security threat in Apar? I have been informed that there is heavy deployment of both the Army and the Police; if this is so, why? People are living in fear and owing to the fact that this is now a planting season, we do not need to create more fear in the hearts of people. I really need this reassurance. Thank you very much.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, in spite of scattered, isolated and unfortunate incidents where there has been loss of life by some criminal elements, the country is secure. Therefore, if there has been need for any deployment, this is something that we can find out. We can find out why there has been this deployment. 

I would also say that you as a leader of the people, you should be able to communicate with security leadership and be able to easily get an explanation. You can do this at your level by talking to security or directly talking to us as the political leadership. We are at your disposal.

3.37
MR ROBERT KAFEERO (Independent, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, it is Government policy in the Republic of Tanzania that Government owns stone quarries as a strategy for reducing the cost of road construction in Tanzania. What is Uganda’s strategy in ensuring that we reduce the cost per kilometre of roads?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the principle that we have been using is one of market forces of supply and demand at play. We advertise and we get the best bidders. This has definitely brought down the prices and the cost of the infrastructure.

However, if there are additional measures that Government can take in order to lower the cost per kilometre, any good ideas will be very welcome by Government.

3.39
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Last month, Iganga District and specifically Kigulu South Constituency was severely hit by hailstones and heavy winds. I raised this as a matter of national importance and Government committed itself to respond to the plight of those people. The question at hand is: when will the people of Kigulu South get some assistance from Government?  I thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Government is in absolute solidarity with the people of Kigulu. Today, a team was dispatched from the Office of the Prime Minister to Kigulu. We are awaiting the report and there will be immediate response after receiving this report about the situation there.

3.40
MS LYNDAH TIMBIGAMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is a high increase of land wrangles in Uganda and particularly, Kyenjojo District. There is a high rate of killing in regard to that matter and this is caused by expensive land titles and the process of getting them. In that regard, what is Government doing to help our poor people to solve their land problems? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, this is a very important question. It is true that land wrangles are rampant. Cabinet, Parliament and other fora have discussed this very question. Recently, Cabinet constituted a committee specifically to deal with land issues. This committee is headed by hon. Adolf Mwesige and has a number of other Cabinet colleagues. 

Therefore, in brief, Government is fully aware of this problem and is dealing with this matter. We will be able to liaise with other organs of the state and the wanainchi to ensure we bring an end to this problem.

Of course, it is also true the fraud in issuance of land titles has further complicated this situation. However, government is determined to bring an end to these apparent misdeeds and fraud in land transactions and we resolve the issue. I call on you, colleagues, to again use your positions of influence to sensitise the population to be able to sort out many of the land issues themselves. They do not have to take every case to courts of law. Sometimes, this causes congestion in courts and delays in land dispute resolution.

3.43
MR VINCENT KYAMADIDI (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Sometime last year and the year before, a health centre II in Mwizi was, through political influence, upgraded to a health centre IV. Ideally, what was going to happen was the upgrading of a health centre III to a health centre IV. However, some people politically maneuvered their way and they did it. That was maybe by the politicians then. It is now a point of contention in the constituency. It is a political problem. Is the Prime Minister aware, in the first instance? If he is aware, what are you trying to do to help the people of Rwampara?  Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the Prime Minister is aware. In fact, about a month ago, hon. Elioda Tumwesigye, the Minister of Health, visited the area to get that matter sorted out. We expect a solution soon.

3.45
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, it is now common for a spokesperson of the Police and the IGP to make irresponsible statements about the cause of death whenever there are murders in this country. When Sheikh Abdul was killed, for example, they first told us it was ADF. Later, they told us it was Dr Kiyingi. When Counsel Joan Kagezi was shot, so far the Police have made three statements. The first one is that it was ADF/Al-Shabaab. May I know whether it is now a Government policy to make such statements before concluding investigations?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is not Government policy.

3.46
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Mr Speaker, I would like to draw the attention of the Prime Minister to Article 237(1) of the Constitution of Uganda, which states: “Land in Uganda belongs to the citizens of Uganda….” If land belongs to the citizens of Uganda and the majority of citizens in Uganda have no security of tenure – they are almost landless - how can you guarantee their citizenship and ownership? 

In Ankole, your government has established the land fund to cater for those without land guarantee. Why don’t you establish the same in Buganda? Why maintain double-standards? Why should you joke in matters regarding land and citizenship? (Laughter) 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is not correct that Government has set up a land fund for Ankole. What is factual, though, is that Government has established a land fund for Uganda to empower people who are landless or who are bibanja owners to be able to purchase land and indeed, own it. 

However, this process requires substantial and heavy resources. The programme has started; it has already taken place in a number of districts in the country, especially in the areas of Buyaga, Bugangaizi and also in some areas of Ankole. Indeed, this national programme will continue. As more and more resources become available, more people will be able to liberate themselves using the land fund.

3.48
MS BRENDA NABUKENYA (DP, Woman Representative, Luweero): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question to the Prime Minister relates to nutrition. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are a doctor and you are very aware that the last report of the World Health Organisation indicated that we have more people dying of non-communicable diseases like cancer, diabetes and the rest. However, when you go to the National Referral Hospital in Mulago, you only have a nutrition unit for children below five years. I would like to know, when do you plan to put a national nutrition unit at Mulago to address nutritional-related diseases for all Ugandans who cannot afford private medical care?  Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Sir, it is true that hospitals have varying sizes of nutrition units. Needless to say, nutrition is very important for health. When you are well-nourished, that alone will be able to fend off many diseases. 

However, as we control infectious diseases, which we are effectively doing, we will have more of our people gradually increasing dying from non-communicable diseases. In fact, the future will be more dominated by non-communicable diseases than communicable diseases, which will have already been controlled and contained.

3.50
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Mr Speaker, aware that the biggest chunk of the population of Uganda is of the youth; and aware that many of them, at the moment, are endowed with many skills and others are semi-skilled; and aware that many of them are unemployed, what is the effort of Government to boost job creation in this country in order to curb unemployment?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the entire manifesto and programme of the National Resistance Movement Government is really hinged on job creation. If you look at all angles, we are talking of Operation Wealth Creation, for example; that is creation of jobs. We are talking of the Youth Livelihood Programme; that is creation of jobs. We are shortly launching a livelihood programme for women; that is job creation. We have investments in infrastructure - roads, railways and the like – and that is job creation. Therefore, in a nutshell, the programme of the Movement is to expand the economy, promote investment and create jobs.

3.52
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, allow me draw your attention to the belts along Lake Kyoga and Kwania where ground water is highly saline and therefore, not conducive for human consumption because of its poor quality. Rather than install deep boreholes with galvanised pipes that get corroded very fast because of the saline water, thereby increasing the cost of operation and maintenance in their effort to deliver the salty water, what other technological options are available with Government to provide clean and safe water to communities settled along the belts of Lake Kyoga and Kwania, especially my constituents of Kioga in Amolatar District?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the policy of Government, as all of us know, is to ensure that the people of Uganda have safe water at their disposal and close to their homes. Depending on which part of Uganda you are, different forms of water harnessing are used. Some people, who live in very hilly areas and have many sources of water, may easily collect, protect water and supply it to the population through springs. Others are using rain harvest. Therefore, if there is a problem in Kioga, I am sure the ministry responsible for water is going to address it, if they have not done it yet, to ensure that the people of Kioga get their due share of safe and clean sources of water.

3.54
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask the Prime Minister about the road repair equipment given to the districts. This road equipment is supposed to be repaired centrally in each region. For the whole of Northern Uganda, with 28 districts, repair is done in Gulu. If equipment breaks down from Koboko, you have to take it to Gulu. The cost of taking the equipment and the time taken for repair is a lot. It may take six months. 

May I know when Arua will have its own technicians so that our equipment is repaired in Arua, at least to cover the whole of West Nile instead of 28? Thank you very much.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, hon. Baba Diri is raising a very serious and important point. It is true Government is aware of this problem and wants to do two things: the first one is to increase equipment in the current repairing centres. Secondly, to gradually decentralise the workshops so that tractors, graders and other equipment do not have to travel hundreds of miles in order to get repaired.

3.56
MS GRACE NAMARA (Independent, Woman Representative, Lyantonde): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mining is taking place in a number of areas in Uganda. A case in point is Lyantonde in a place called Kasana where wolfram is being mined. I would like to know from you, Mr Prime Minister, if the Chinese company in this place is certified to do that job. I thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, nobody is supposed to do any mining without any licence. Therefore, I expect this Chinese company to be licensed. However, if there is any doubt, then the mining authorities will do the necessary checking to ascertain that the Chinese company is authorised to do the mining in Uganda.

3.58
MS JENNIFER MUJUNGU (Independent, Woman Representative, Ntoroko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what measures is Government putting in place to prevent the overthrow of His Majesty the King of Toro, Oyo Nyimba Kabamba Iguru Rukidi IV? (Laughter)

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the apparent confusion has appeared in the media about the Kingdom of Toro. However, the cultural institution has its own mechanisms of dealing with this matter. I expect the cultural institution, using its internal mechanism of conflict resolution, will be able to resolve this matter, contain it and establish harmony in the kingdom.

4.00
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There are many universities offering different courses in this country and they are training students anyhow. At the end of the day, there are no employment opportunities for our students and yet parents have invested a lot in them. What programmes do you have, as Government, to slow the gap in terms of employment opportunities to guide training in different universities?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, hon. Nyakikongoro is raising a very serious point. It is true we have many universities passing out many graduates but some of the graduates or many of them are not properly guided in as far as job creation and opportunities are concerned. There has been more emphasis on numbers in universities than career guidance. 

It is true Government is aware of this matter and it is going to put more emphasis on career guidance. In fact, the Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports in this coming financial year is going to have an overall review of the education sector. This will be one of the issues to definitely address - career guidance and guiding our young people to focus on where they will be able to obtain or create jobs.

4.02
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The road construction of Olwiyo-Gulu-Kitgum is on. The people of Kitgum along the roadside have been told to let the contractor go ahead with the work and yet their property has not been evaluated and compensated. This is a prerequisite so that the people are aware of the value of their property and they get compensated as per the law before the construction goes on.

What is the Government doing to ensure that the property of the people of Kitgum and the people along the road is evaluated and the people are compensated before the construction goes on? They are already threatening to go to court.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is true that sometimes, there is divergence between what is desirable and what is happening on the ground. It is true that there have been some cases of delays in compensation, especially in construction of civil works - roads, railways and the like.

I would say so long as the government valuer has confirmed this, payment would definitely be made. If the government valuer has not, then the Ministry of Lands, Housings and Urban Development should ensure, working with the Ministry of Works and Transport, that the government valuer does his work. When that has been done, political leaders should assure the people that they will be compensated even if there may be some unfortunate delays sometimes.

I hope that hon. Beatrice Anywar will take a lead role in assuring the population in Kitgum that they will be paid their money by Government so long as the government valuer has confirmed. I also advise you, my sister, to link up with the minister responsible for works to get this matter sorted out; either directly with minister or even with the technical arm that is responsible, UNRA. 

4.05
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Mr Speaker, about a month ago, I visited the Central Police Station in Kampala in the night to report a traffic case. There was a blackout in the central business district of Kampala. I really sympathised with the conditions under which the policemen worked. There was no emergency lighting at the Central Police Station in Kampala. The policemen were left to share one kerosene lamp and many of them used light from their telephones to record statements. I thought I was in the Stone Age -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: With mobile phones? (Laughter)

MR AMURIAT: No, lights for mobile phones and kerosene lamps. (Laughter) If you think otherwise, Mr Speaker, it is the way I thought. (Laughter) If this is happening in the capital city of Uganda, in the biggest police station of Uganda, then you can imagine what is happening out there in the districts and in the villages.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the question, honourable member? 

MR AMURIAT: The question I would like to ask the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is: What plans has Government got to provide emergency lighting to the police stations and other Government installations? The second question I would like to ask is: Why this is happening?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, ask only one question.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the situation that is being described is not a common issue. It may sometimes even occur in your house that suddenly, there is no power. Perhaps, that is the time when you visited the Central Police Station.

Secondly, this is such an important matter. I hope that the honourable colleague immediately informed his colleague, the Minister of Internal Affairs, so that immediate steps can be taken to correct the situation -(Interruption) 

MR AMURIAT: I am really constrained to bring Ndugu Ruhakana Rugunda to order but I think I am forced to do this. Is the Prime Minister in order to expect me to do the work that is assigned to the Minister of Internal Affairs? Is he in order to come here and tell the whole country that the Minister of Internal Affairs does not know what is happening in his ministry, that he actually may be incompetent? Is the Prime Minister in order to come and express the incompetence of Government before the entire country? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Kumi, you just informed this House that there were mobile phones in the Stone Age. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister is trying to respond to those conflicting historical situations. Please, allow him to do that. (Laughter)

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is really very good to know that this Stone Age has telephones lighting for policemen to be able to write their statements. This must be a new definition of Stone Age. Nevertheless, this matter raised by my brother hon. Amuriat is going to be looked at by the Minister of Internal Affairs.

4.10
MR ISAIAS SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the current Cooperative Society’s Act, which is governing the cooperative societies and marketing boards in the country now, is as old as the Independence signs. This has created unfair play in business as it is inadequate in nature especially with the adoption of the structural adjustment policies like privatisation and liberalisation. 

When is Government tabling this Cooperative Act for amendment in order to encourage fair competition between the cooperative societies and the private sector? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, there has been a rapid change in the policies of Government especially in the economic field and liberalisation of the economy has been done. If any law is archaic and inconsistent with these new polices, it is going to be amended like any other law to ensure that it is updated.

On the timeframe, one would need to crosscheck to see how far the responsible ministry has gone in ensuring that the law is updated. 

4.12
MR JAMES MBAHIMBA (NRM, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question to the Prime Minister will stem from 2013 when Kasese was hit by floods. In May 2014, we got floods again and next month is May. River Nyamwabwa and Nyamugasani were filled with streams that any little amount of water will accelerate flooding within the town. Property and lives will be destroyed. My question to the Prime Minister is: what plan do you have to de-filter the streamed rivers? 

DR RUGUNDA: Hon. Mbahimba is making a valid point. It is true that a lot of property including part of Kilembe Hospital was destroyed and a number of other things. Government is aware of that problem and the ministry responsible for works together with the Ministry of Water and other agencies are already involved in some kind of de-filtering programme. 

However, a number of additional structures need to be made. I cannot give you the specific details now, but I know Government is fully aware and taking steps to avoid the repetition of what happened some time ago. 

4.13
MR ROBERT KASULE (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Kampala is choking on traffic jam and that is why we have had problems of recent. Likewise, Wakiso is choking on traffic jam. Aware that we have just given a loan to Kampala City Council Authority to do some roads in Kampala, but those roads are going to evacuate traffic in to Wakiso or Mukono, what strategic plan does Government have for helping Wakiso to at least upgrade their roads to tarmac to be able to evacuate traffic out of Kampala? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the problem being raised is real. However, there is Kampala Metropolitan Area Plan that is underway. In addition to doing many other things, it will cater for the problems of traffic in Kampala and the neighbouring areas including Wakiso. 

4.14
MS EVERLINE TETE (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukwo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The other day, the Committee on Presidential Affairs went to Sebei region but we almost perished on our way. Mr Prime Minister, last time you told this august House that the issue of Bukwo Road is being handled expeditiously between the Kenyan Government and Ugandan Government. How far have you gone? What are you discussing? Why the silence now? How long will it take?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Bukwo Road is clearly very high on the priority programme. I know that it is going to be done. I cannot give you the specific details now but I know that it is very high on our programme. All of us would like to have that road done as quickly as possible. I advise you to get in touch with the minister responsible for roads to get the exact timetable for Bukwo Road.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, obviously I have the greatest respect for and to the Prime Minister. The reason we have an arrangement in our rules to ask these questions to the Prime Minister is to know with exactness from Government. If the Prime Minister cannot establish details from his ministers and he keeps telling the Members of Parliament to get those details from the ministers or to consult the ministers, of what relevance is the Prime Minister’s Question Time?

In my own understanding, humble as it may be, the Prime Minister is supposed to coordinate all these Government ministries and have the details. This business of referring us to departments of Government, as if we are an extension or an annexure to the Executive - Are we proceeding rightly?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think you raise an important point and I raised this same point when we were introducing this Prime Minister’s Question Time to activate that particular rule. My statement then, which still remains today, is that we are not testing how much the Prime Minister knows. We would like to know and our people would like to know what Government is doing about certain things that affect them.

The Prime Minister is not abreast with all the facts and cannot anticipate what we are going to ask and therefore prepare sufficiently to respond. That is the gap. When you stand and raise a question now without any background or prior information, that is all he can say. I had proposed then that there should be a framework for highlighting areas of coverage so that the Prime Minister is alerted on those areas and by the time he comes on Wednesday, some research has been done and he is advised by technical people. This is so that when the questions are asked, he can respond to them. However, with the way we are proceeding, you cannot expect much from the Prime Minister. He cannot know everything. If I asked him about the pothole in Omoro, for example, he would not know. He can only say – 

In fact, today, I was going to ask that we may need to task the Rules Committee to review how we handle this so that it benefits the country. This is because when the Prime Minster has an answer, he will give it. If he does not have it, he will say, “Please, consult with the respective people.” That is the best he can do, humanely speaking. There might be need for us to look at the rules again and see how best this thing can achieve the purpose for which it was intended.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, if this can help, my understanding when we were making those rules was that when the time comes for the Prime Minister’s Question Time, his “army” should be here and that is the Cabinet. This is so that the questions that he does not have the right answer to would be forwarded to minister responsible for the sector there and then to respond.

It is upon that minister to request for two or three days to bring an answer. We have found problems when we give questions to the ministers in advance. Up to now, there are questions I raised in 2012 and have not got answers to.

Mr Speaker, we can improve this by ensuring that on Wednesday when it is Prime Minister’s Question Time, the ministers - because there are some ministries with more than two ministers - should be here such that questions directed to their sectors are passed on to them. If the Prime Minister does not have the answer, he should pass the question on to the ministers to respond there and then or request for time within which to respond. That way, we will be able to achieve a lot.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the housing of Prime Minister’s Question Time is in the Commonwealth practice. If you go the House of Commons, during Prime Minister’s Question Time the Prime Minister even comes with a book containing specific answers synchronised in relation to the question. When members ask, he already has information about the questions he should expect and he will give direct answers in a short time and in the 40 minutes of the Prime Minister’s Question Time on Thursday afternoon in the House of Commons, the amount of work that is done is unbelievable. This is because he has information and he cannot withhold information that he has. 

That is why I am saying, Prime Minister’s Question Time is not minister’s time. If you now allow the Prime Minister to come and say, “Let the Minister of Education answer this”, it stops being the Prime Minister’s Question Time. That is the reason why I am asking for a review. I will consult with the Speaker and see whether we can send this to the Rules Committee so that we can consult and see how best it can be done so that it is productive. For now, let us just proceed this way.

Honourable members, all your names are on the list here. Let me just process it properly.

4.19
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. Kanungu has a very big problem of the road. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we have been talking about this road and bringing up the matter here during Prime Minister’s Question Time -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. I have been in this House now for 14 years and the former Prime Minister was from Kanungu, hon. Amama Mbabazi. Is it in order to have the same problem in the same area where a Prime Minister has been, just like in other areas where we do not even have a minister? Is she in order to raise an issue, which they have failed to talk - (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the honourable Member of Kanungu District does not sit here to represent hon. Amama Mbabazi. She sits here to represent the people of Kanungu District and she has every right to raise those issues that affect the people of Kanungu District.

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for that wise ruling. I thank God and I know that is the reason you are there. Recently, I talked to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister in the corridors but I would like him to assure the people of Kanungu. We were assured last year by the then minister, hon. Byandala, that the road works would start in July of this year, 2015 - (Interjection) - Excuse me, let me finish my point.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, let us have order.

MS KARUNGI: We were told that they had started the procurement process so when I tried to find out, I found out that there was nothing going on. When are you going to stop lying to the people of Kanungu so that they will also be sure that they will get the road or that the road will not be constructed? Thank you very much.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Government programmes cover the entire country and Kanungu is one of those areas covered by Government programmes. Only a couple of months ago, His Excellency President Museveni told the people of Kanungu that the road would be starting soon. Again in reference to the point made earlier, we can get specific details and share them with our sister, hon. Karungi, so that in turn she can share this information with the people of Kanungu. 

I am reminded by my colleague, the Minister of Internal Affairs, that this very august House has already approved the loan. Therefore, my sister, hon. Karungi, you are now empowered with full information. Please, go and explain to the people that the money for the road has already been approved by Parliament and that the procurement process is going on.

4.22
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is quite a number of years since Uganda last had a currency reform and printing of new notes and coins. By that time, every coin and currency notes had value. However, along the way, some of those currency notes and coins have lost value to the extent that by late last year, the public had repeatedly come out to reject the Shs 50 coin. 

Late December last year, Bank of Uganda issued notice to the public reassuring us that the Shs 50 coin is still legal tender. However, the public has not heeded to it and right now, wherever you go and whatever the amount of money you have, if you attempt to transact using Shs 50, it is rejected. What plan does Government have, now that we are not only going to elections but the public has lost confidence in this as a medium of exchange? What plans do you have as a government?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the critical point is that Bank of Uganda has emphasised and affirmed the sanctity of the coin. Therefore, it is legal tender and should be used. As leaders, we should reassure our people and encourage them to use the coin because it is recognised, certified and accepted by Bank of Uganda.

4.24
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. About two weeks ago, the Prime Minister made assurances to this House in regard to the welfare of the soldiers that are deployed in Somalia. To date, the veterans contingent that is deployed with the UPDF and the 346th Battalion have not been paid their salaries and it is now coming to the sixth month. 

It is even worse that now they are short of food and fuel and yet they are on the frontline in what is called “Mile 60”. I want to imagine that this is very demotivating. What else can the Prime Minister now say in order to motivate the troops on the frontline? They have no food, we have not paid them and they have no fuel. What can be done by the Government to sort out this situation?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it seems my sister, hon. Alaso, focuses on looking for the slightest possible weakness concerning the mighty UPDF. My sister, when you talk of morale, as a political leader one of your responsibilities is to ensure that there is as much morale in the national Army as possible –(Interruption) 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I have not been a specialist in demotivating people. Actually, my main work as a community leader is to bring out the best in people. Surely, for a hungry stomach without salary or fuel, where even the assurance of the Prime Minister has not been acted on, how do we expect that person to be motivated? 

Is it in order for the Prime Minister to trivialise such an important concern and reduce it to purely demotivating instead of figuring out a proper way of addressing the problem? Is the Prime Minister in order to mislead this country that, that is my speciality?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know about the issue of speciality. The Prime Minister knows because you might have to put him to strict proof to give evidence of how he comes to that conclusion. However, that is for another moment. For the issue of motivation, I think the Prime Minister was clear; he said that all of us have a responsibility to motivate. However, where the answer was supposed to come, he had not yet come to that so we are waiting.

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I said last time, the honourable Minister of Defence will be coming to this august House to give a statement about our sons and daughters in South Sudan. Therefore, this aspect will also be covered. Thank you.

4.27
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, of late we have seen the President, who is also the Chairman of the National Resistance Movement, go out on a campaign trail especially during by-elections. Part of his massage, as has always been when he visits our constituencies, is that all the money is his money and that people who wish to access funds and share the national cake must vote for those that meet him to share part of his money. In the past, he has stated that the UPDF is his army. 

As the Prime Minister of this country and as Cabinet, have you ever advised the President about using language that is presidential and unifying to avoid putting the presidency on a collision course with Parliament, other than using public positions and funds to de-campaign us? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, on what I have advised the President or whether I have is an issue of internal working mechanisms of Government, and they are not to be discussed publically with my distinguished brother, hon. Sseggona, in this august House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have on my list Gulu, Bukoto East, Koboko County, Lira, Rubaga North, Kasilo, Labwor County, Oyam District, Kole District, Bukedea, Mbarara Municipality, Busongora South, Ayivu County, Bundibugyo, Dokolo, Gulu and Kaberamaido. For now, let me stop there. That is what I have on my list. I will start with these when we next resume. It is over an hour; let us allow the Leader of the Opposition to respond.

4.29
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): I was worried I was being overthrown. Mr Speaker, thank you very much. 

I am glad, Mr Speaker, that you have addressed the issue of the quality of the Prime Minister’s Question Time. From our side, a number of members say that it is a ritual, which is useless as we are not getting value out of it. I think what you have suggested is going to improve on its quality. However, even before we change the rules, it is better for the Prime Minister to give answers where he is knowledgeable and where he is not, he can come later and provide the answers in another form after consultation. We do not expect the ministers to answer for him but that would be value for money in this process.

Mr Speaker, I would like to ask the Prime Minister a question. Today, the Electoral Commission issued a road map, complete up to the time of election. We have been discussing electoral reforms, constitutional reforms, political reforms and all sorts of reforms. We do not know when those reforms are going to be discussed or whether we are wasting time because the Electoral Commission is moving on as if we are not doing anything in this House or in the Government. We would like clarification on what we should expect from Government, given that the Electoral Commission has brought out their road map.

Mr Speaker, the Prime Minister gave an answer regarding pledges. However, we think that the Government should be more serious about this issue of pledges. We have tried to quantify, through the Government Assurances Committee, the estimated value of the pledges so far made by the President and it runs in trillions. When it was published by the then chairman, hon. Odonga Otto, it was disputed by Government. 

We would like the Government, on its own, to do an assessment. This is because all these MPs have been promised something by the President or by the ministers. We would like to know the value of what you have pledged. It is sort of a moral debt to the people of Uganda because like the honourable from Kanungu has said, if you do not do something about it then you are lying to the people of Uganda, honourable Prime Minister. 

A matter was raised about ADF. The Minister of Internal Affairs is looking at me. The Police issue careless, lazy and reckless statements. For any killing, they say it is ADF, rebels or Muslims. I think we are not being careful about this. Before any investigation establishes the truth, we should not pronounce ourselves on some of these things.

One time, the IGP made a pronouncement that Entebbe Airport was about to be attacked and that sent off a lot of tourists and stopped them from coming to our country. Even the other day, tourist operators were talking about how their businesses are affected because of such statements and they sometimes blame the media. However, the media only publicises what the government people say. We would like to implore the Minister for Internal Affairs; your policemen talk too much, please make sure that they stop issuing thoughtless statements on some of these issues.

The Prime Minister talked about job creation. The NRM is the only government which does not talk about job creation in their programmes, whether in their manifesto for five years or one year. If they do, I would like to note from you, honourable Prime Minister, how many jobs did you promise to create this financial year and how many have you created? How many jobs did you promise to create during this five-year term and how many have you created? That is a sensible way of talking as it is measurable. Smart governments do exactly that - (Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Thank you for giving way. In line with what you are saying, recently we read in the papers that the Minister of Internal Affairs had sacked the technical team that were involved in the ID exercise and has instead recruited the military to take over. It was in the media and has not been contested. This is the kind of recklessness, which causes panic to the country when we know that this House, from the government side, fought so hard to make sure that the ID process becomes part of the electoral process. I just wanted to inform you that among the reckless statements is that one made by the Minister of Internal Affairs.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much. I am sure the honourable minister has heard that. 

My last point is on the deployment of security forces in Apar, the land between Adjumani and Amuru. The information I have is that Government is trying to forcefully demarcate that land so that it can take it over. That land is under dispute and peasants have already petitioned court. If Government goes by the rule of law, we would expect Government not to do anything before that matter is sorted out.

Otherwise, the deployment is done. Recently, the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs were in Gulu to deal with this question of the land in Apar. Indeed, one of our colleagues, hon. Olanya Gilbert, briefed me yesterday that the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs threatened to arrest him over this land because they think he is the stumbling block.

All these things need clarification, honourable Prime Minister. Thank you very much.

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The honourable Leader of the Opposition has raised a number of critical issues. 

On the question of job creation, I think he is raising a good point that Government should come out regularly with statistical information on job creation. I think it is good to monitor closely and I see no problem with that. 

However, the assertion that job creation is not an issue is exactly the opposite of what the government policy is. Government policy, both in public and various documents and the manifesto of the National Resistance Movement, highlights job creation as a critical factor and it will remain a critical factor until we are able to absorb so many of our people that indeed should be absorbed by our economy.

On the question of reckless statements by the Police -(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. For an honourable Prime Minister to be useful to this country, the suggestions that have been advanced by the Leader of the Opposition would really be an easy guide. 

When we talk about job creation, we should not be talking as if we are in the wild. It would be important for Government to persuade this Parliament and the citizens of this country that there are jobs being created in terms of quantifying those jobs and giving us facts and figures about how many Ugandans have got jobs over a certain period of time. That kind of information would be useful to this country.

I do not know whether it would not be procedurally right, Mr Speaker, for the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in consultation with the ministers, to try and bring this kind of information to this House so that as a country, we get to know how we are doing in terms of job creation. We are also job creators as individuals and we could participate in helping Government to create jobs but we cannot do this blindly.

I do not know whether it would be procedurally right for you, Mr Speaker, to urge the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to come with facts and figures to this House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is exactly what I heard the Prime Minister saying, that if the facts are required, they will be making them available to Parliament. I heard that.

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for that very correct expression of what I stated exactly. In fact, I did thank the honourable Leader of the Opposition for raising a legitimate point. Government will come out with information on the question of job creation. 

However, let me also say this. You have heard on many occasions His Excellency the President and the rest of us talking about investment, infrastructure development and the like. Look at the jobs created by Karuma, by works in Isimba, by the various road and electricity works. Therefore, there is absolutely no doubt that government programmes and every investment that takes place in the country in industry and construction of schools is creation of jobs. Therefore, the question of creation of jobs is a top priority for Government. 

Now I was just mentioning –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank the Prime minister for accepting the clarification I am seeking. Just yesterday, I received a young man who works in Karuma with those Chinese. He informed me that out of about 2000 staff there, there are 1500 plus Chinese doing petty work. The clarification I am seeking from the Prime Minister is: are you able to give us some of the statistics on those issues of job creation you are talking about?  

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is the right of the people of Uganda or the Parliament of Uganda to have this information. Therefore, the responsible minister will be able to avail this information. However, let me also say that sometimes when a project is beginning, it starts with people to train and as they train the local people, the local people take responsibilities. We expect that when the training programme is completed, the trainers will then be the Ugandans and the Chinese will be able to go home. However, let us have a more authoritative statement on this matter.

Mr Speaker, regarding the question of reckless statements, let us not rush to criticise people who are on the frontline. It is true that when an unfortunate incident takes place such as an injury or murder, the whole country is anxious, the country wants to know, and it is possible that some of the preliminary information given by those in authority or by those investigating may not be absolutely accurate. It may be merely indicating that yes, we have lead X, lead Y and lead Z, to inform the people of Uganda of what is happening and not keep them in the dark. 

Let us not be too harsh about these patriotic Ugandans who are doing their work and trying to inform fellow Ugandans on the progress that is being made on the question of investigations. The final conclusions may be completely different but there is nothing wrong with keeping Ugandans posted. (Interruption)

MR BIREKERAAWO NSUBUGA: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Regarding issuing a statement, those of us who have grown during our times know when a civil servant makes a political statement -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For the readers of the Hansard, which time was that?

MR BIREKERAAWO NSUBUGA: I mean people like Prof. Kabwegyere, the Prime Minister, the Minister of Internal Affairs and I. We know that a civil servant cannot just come and make a political statement. We know that if there is anything to do with the Police, the Minister of Internal Affairs is responsible for making a statement. If it is defence, I expect the Minister of Defence to come here and make a statement.

However, when we hear even civil servants making statements, I think - Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we also have a Minister of Information and National Guidance; why do we use civil servants to make political statements, which are sometimes worrying like you have heard? Is it the policy of Government that anybody can make a statement or should we expect respective ministers to be in charge of their departments? I would like you to clarify on this issue of why civil servants make political statements.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is true that at a political level, ministers definitely make these statements and indeed you heard hon. Jim Muhwezi make a statement recently when we lost our dear sister. It is also true that authorised public servants, as and when necessary, may be able to make a statement and definitely, there is no problem with the Inspector General of Police making a statement about an investigation. Therefore, to answer your question, yes, public servants may make statements on critical issues, which they are authorised to speak about and where they are authoritative. 

On the dismissal of people working on the ID project by the Minister of Internal Affairs and replacing them with the military, I do not think there were people on permanent and pensionable terms on this project. I know that there were some people working on short term contracts and if, in his wisdom, the Minister of Internal Affairs decided to rearrange his staff or to reinforce it with cadres from UPDF, I find no problem with that. (Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for giving way. It is increasingly becoming the norm of the day that our UPDF are deployed in civil service jobs. We have seen it with NAADS, which is now wealth creation; we have seen it in the Police; and we are now increasingly this, and I read it somewhere that all the retired UPDF will be deployed. 

You are aware that it is very threatening for civil servants to see a systematic increase of security personnel and particularly UPDF deployed to do the work of civil servants. Is this a deliberate policy? Should we take it that the UPDF are going to take over other jobs? I even heard a joke over the radio that soon, somebody will come and take over the presenters’ jobs at the radio station. People are worried, please clarify. (Mr Okupa rose_)

DR RUGUNDA: Ndugu Okupa, why don’t we make progress and finish? Can we agree that yours will be the last?

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. This arose because of the matter of these young people who were employed for the ID registration at Kololo. I happened to have some from Kasilo. Their contract that I saw was for two years but when they were terminated midway, that is where the problem came from.

Secondly, on the issue of deployment of the soldiers everywhere, I do not know whether you are aware that today, in a number of State authorities - I want to give you a specific one, the Uganda Investment Authority where we have a Major who has been deployed there. In the Electricity Regulatory Authority, there is a UPDF Major also deployed there. We are wondering which will be the next authority or commission where we are going to deploy these men and women. There are other people who also need jobs.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, this august House should be very happy because the skills and discipline clearly demonstrated by the UPDF is being shared with some other Government departments. By the way, if I may say so, there is already a very positive impact where some of these UPDF officers have been deployed. In the distribution of agricultural inputs where these officers are deployed, for example, some very positive results have been achieved.

By the way, it does not mean that when you are in UPDF, you have lost your rights as a Ugandan citizen to serve in any other department. Therefore -(Interruption)

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Speaker, thank you very much and thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for giving way. Is it your information that you want the UPDF to be in every aspect of the public service? Our information is that they have trained UPDF in China in computer science and they are going to handle elections. Is that your information and is it okay? We can also give you names of the officers who were trained in China to work on the computer system during elections.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the Prime Minister does not have the information that the Leader of the Opposition is talking about. I will be interested, at an appropriate time, to get more details of what his information is about. Nevertheless, let me make this point: The fact that two, three or four UPDF officers may be involved in distribution of agricultural inputs in Mayuge or Mukono does not mean that the UPDF has taken over. We are just trying to get synergies; we are trying to get the best cadres to be able to perform certain duties. 

You know very well that we lost a lot of money in NAADS and as a result, this recent measure that has taken place has actually improved the distribution of agricultural inputs. Therefore, colleagues, I propose that while we may have issues, we should not oppose the deployment of appropriate UPDF officers to do certain jobs where they may excel.

There were a few other points but let me not go to them. Let me finally make one point, and that final point is on electoral reforms. Today at its sitting, Cabinet completed all the discussions on electoral reforms. In fact, today, Cabinet approved the Bill to be tabled by the Attorney-General to this august House on electoral and constitutional reforms. 

Well, I hear murmurs of tomorrow but the fact that Cabinet has completed its work, in my view, is great work. Now the ball has rolled and is rolling to this august House. I have no doubt that this august House, when time comes, will do its job expeditiously and diligently so that -(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Thank you for giving me way to seek clarification. Mr Speaker, I want the Prime Minister to clarify to us; he has just told us that the Cabinet has completed discussions on electoral reforms. I believe this was on 31st March and now we have entered into April. During all this time, were they not aware that there would be elections in 2016? Why did it take the Cabinet so long to conclude their work when they knew that by so doing, they would be putting pressure on the institution of Parliament to go through the process? Can the Prime Minister clarify to us what the Cabinet has been doing these four years? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, my sister, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, knows very well that in this House, there were concerns that there had not been enough time for consultations and that the second round of consultations on electoral and constitutional reforms had to take place. This is one of the reasons why there was some bit of delay. 

However, Government is confident that now that we have completed our work as Cabinet, the House will expeditiously deal with its work because the Bill is going to be printed and brought here. I expect Parliament to complete its work quickly for us to be able to catch up and be on time with the requisite reforms.

Mr Speaker, with those comments, I thank you for giving me this opportunity. If Ndugu Ssekikubo or any other colleagues have issues to raise, they should have raised them much earlier than this or else they will get the benefit of lobby consultations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. As I said earlier, we might have to find direction on how we handle this particular aspect of our rules so that it is beneficial and it delivers on the purpose it is intended to achieve. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE RECENT KILLINGS IN THE COUNTRY

5.01
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Thank you, Mr Speaker and colleagues. I am sorry that the House resumed before I arrived. 

Mr Speaker, on Monday, 30 March 2015 at around 19.20 hours, Mrs Joan Kagezi, Senior State Attorney and acting Assistant Director of Public Prosecutions, was shot in Kiwatule Central Zone, near St Mbaga Catholic Church. The shooting was done by unidentified assailants who sped off on a motorcycle after committing the heinous crime.  Unfortunately, because of the confusion and panic that followed, no one around noted the particulars of the motorcycle, the rider and the assassin.

Preliminary police findings and reports from some eye witnesses indicate that Ms Joan Kagezi was shot when she stopped to buy fruits at a fruit stall as she often did. She was on her way back home and three of her children were with her in the car.  She was shot in the neck and in the shoulder. The children were not injured.

The Police rushed to the scene and evacuated her to Mulago Hospital. Unfortunately, she was pronounced dead on arrival. The Police, together with other security agencies, embarked on investigations and are analysing all information they are collecting. They are following all the leads that they have come across. The hunt for the killer is on.

Mr Speaker, preliminary findings suggest that the murder of Ms Joan Kagezi is a consequence of organised crime, which the Police and the sister security agencies have been warning us about since September last year.

You will recall that on 13 September 2014, a number of suspected suicide terrorists, who had suicide jackets, were apprehended. They had planned to execute their mission on 14th September last year.

At the close of last year and early this year, prominent Muslim leaders were gunned down in Mayuge and in Kampala. The LC III Chairperson in Namayingo District was also killed.

Also, two police officers were recently gunned down as they were riding from a guard post to Bugiri Police Station. Now, we have the murder of Ms Joan Kagezi.

Honourable members, you will note that there are similarities in the methods the murderers used in many of these cases; they selectively picked their targets and used motorcycles to get away.

I wish to report that the joint security agencies, led by the Police, successfully hunted down the murderers in the Busoga Region and criminal cells were dismantled. Operations in the region provided valuable intelligence that the security agencies are using to hunt down other criminal gangs in the country.

The intelligence gathered has enabled the security agencies to get on top of the situation.  A number of measures to protect lives and property and to detect and prevent crime have been taken.  

The Police and sister security agencies have intensified patrols in the city and across the country. Overt and covert operations have been intensified. All potential terrorist targets are being covered or hardened, if you use that language.  Through such measures, the security agencies will remain on top of the situation.

Mr Speaker and colleagues, the murder of Ms Joan Kagezi may lead some people to pose a number of questions, for example, the provision of security to some high profile persons. It is unfortunate that at the time of her murder, the late Joan Kagezi was not with her guards as they were at her residence. As Parliament is aware, it is Government policy to provide extra security to such high profile people. Unfortunately, on this occasion, the late had left her security guards at her residence.

Ms Joan Kagezi had specialised in prosecuting such high profile criminal cases. The perpetrators of the crime, we believe, intended to eliminate her in order to strike terror and intimidate investigators in this country who would take on such cases. They intended to scare them.

I would like to take this opportunity to inform Parliament and the country that all prosecutors and investigators of such cases will be protected. We have put in place a robust protection system to enable everybody to go about their duties in a safe and secure environment. The loss of Ms Joan Kagezi has strengthened the resolve of the security forces to go after the perpetrators of such crimes and bring them to book.

There is the question of unregulated boda bodas and the way they behave when it comes to such heinous crimes. The Mayuge, Bugiri, Bwebajja and now Kiwatule murders were carried out by people on boda bodas. This suggests that there is need to set up mechanisms to regulate this industry.  

I have already set up a team to begin studying how to regulate the activities of this boda boda community, which offers a very important service in the area of transport. We will also benchmark practices from sister countries that have boda bodas like Rwanda, Tanzania and Ethiopia, among others, in order to come up with recommendations together with stakeholders, so that the implementation can help in regulating this transport industry.

The question of access to and use of firearms has come up. There are regulations on acquisition and management of firearms by both private and state actors. Arms in possession of the State are marked and properly stored. Where there are lapses, they are being closed. In addition, training of all state operatives in the handling of firearms is being intensified and through these measures, proliferation of firearms is hoped to be controlled.

There is the question of security alerts. Time and again we get alerts about possible terrorist attacks. Alerts are issued when there is intelligence information pointing to a potential threat.  The alerts have helped us avert many attacks. They should therefore be taken seriously whenever they come up. 

While we do not want to throw the public into panic, it is Government’s duty, obligation and responsibility to protect the people. We therefore call upon the public to always take the alerts seriously and to always cooperate with the security agencies when the need arises.

Additionally, our urgent advice is that you become my keeper and I become yours. If you see anything suspicious, please inform the Police. If a neighbour is screaming in the night or there is an alarm, do not look the other way; please, go to where the alarm is coming from and help out and also inform the Police. If you see a lady’s handbag being snatched, please call the Police. Today’s handbag snatchers can be tomorrow’s murderers. Please, report all these criminal incidents for us to put into place a strong policing system and general awareness. Our country will remain peaceful and this will spur social and economic development.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, I would like to reassure the public that security agencies are on top of the situation.  Investigations are on and those responsible will be found, apprehended and prosecuted. The Police and the sister agencies have the capacity to do this as demonstrated by the recent events in the Busoga Region.  The murderer of Ms Joan Kagezi will not escape the long arm of the law.

The fight against crime requires everybody’s involvement. After committing such heinous crimes, these people will stay in a community, in a neighbourhood and somebody will be looking on. The public is called upon to remain vigilant. It is everybody’s vigilance that will help us fight and eliminate crimes.

Criminals live and work amongst the population. If the population remains vigilant and reports all suspicious activities, - like one would say, see something and report something - crime will be detected. We have detected crimes in the past, we are defeating these crimes and we will continue to ensure that crime is reduced and finally defeated. Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, under our rules, specifically rule 42 (2), a statement of this nature attracts a debate and that debate, by the rules, is not supposed to exceed one hour. However, this matter is important and covers a wide range issues, so we will see how far we will go, but let us restrict our contributions to three minutes so that we can spread the little time among all of us.

5.12
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This government has achieved success in the area of security. However, I wonder why the same government up to now has failed to install security cameras in this city. This would go a long way in detecting these crimes.

Two, why has this government failed to zone operational areas of these boda bodas and to number their helmets, overcoats? Why hasn’t this been done? 

Three, like other countries do, why can’t these government officers and other high profile officers stay in some designated areas so that their security is guaranteed? We are entering into a serious phase of terrorism. I think the security agencies and Government should look into these areas.

Finally, Mr Speaker, in most countries, number plates of all motor vehicles and motorcycles are given to known holders; not everybody can go and buy a number plate. Why can’t that be done, so that every motor vehicle or motorcycle has a number plate that is attached to a name of the owner perpetually? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.14
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My condolences go to the family of late Ms Joan Kagezi. 

All of us are living under fear now. I am not convinced when the Minister says that our security agencies are on top of the situation. I do not know what he meant because these killings have been going on for quite a long time. What worries me most is that whenever these killings happen, you see the might of our security agencies coming up. Whenever there is an incident, that is when our security operatives and agencies come in big numbers to show their presence and yet the incident has already happened.

Mr Speaker, we were informed by the mother of the late Joan Kagezi that some three days ago when the late visited her in Buloba, she hinted on threats. She told her mother that she was under threat because of the cases she was handling. The mother urged her right away to get off those cases. She told her mother, “let me handle this case; when I am done, I will go on leave”.  This is what Joan’s mother said.

Mr Speaker, I wonder how a senior officer at that level happened to know about those threats but the security agencies were not being informed. I believe that maybe she had informed some of the officials at the Ministry of Justice or the Ministry of Internal Affairs.

Lastly, when you look at these killings, these people are specialists; they have never missed. Whenever they want to kill someone, because of the list they have, that person must be killed. They are very quick in doing this. In the blink of an eye, someone is dead and nobody is seen. If this is kind of organised crime -(Member timed out.)

5.18
MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO (Independent, West Budama North, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The late Joan Kagezi, to those of us who knew her, was a very humble, unassuming and professional lady. She woke up every morning, went about her business - her commitment to the Government the Republic of Uganda - to prosecute the cases that were available before her. At the end of the month, she probably earned a meagre salary, not comparable to the service she rendered to this country.

Her professional nature meant that she only acted on the evidence that was available to her. It is, therefore, important that in paying tribute to that great lady and in responding to the minister, we do not point fingers, accuse or condemn except when we have evidence. 

The minister has said that they will do all that it takes to bring the murderers of the late Joan Kagezi to book. I only want to say that you owe this to the late Joan Kagezi and to all Ugandans, and we know you will keep your word. I want to say that we shall hold you onto your word; we shall ask you every week, month or year until you produce the murderers of Ms Joan Kagezi for prosecution.

Mr Speaker, the minister also said that the late had in her car three children. She left behind a very young family and that is of paramount concern to me. What happens to these children moving forward? This lady served the Government of the Republic of Uganda; can the Rt Hon. Prime Minister also make a commitment to this House that Government will look after these orphans? Take them to school, make sure there is a roof over their heads and they get better education than they were getting or at least the same quality of education that they were getting when their mother was alive.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, this is a matter we need to take very seriously - prosecutors are our other line of defence against anarchy. The first line of defence, we may argue, is the soldiers and the policemen, but prosecutors and lawyers are our other line of defence. If you do not want this country to slip into anarchy, you must protect them so -(Member timed out.)

5.21
MS JOY ATIM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement he has issued. 

The number of killings in this country is really overwhelming. In this statement, he says Government will bring the perpetrators to book, but this is a lot. The minister says, on the question of unregulated activities of the boda bodas, like those in Mayuge, Bwebajja and now Kiwatule, murders are being carried out by boda bodas. It is unfortunate that we target such an industry when things happen along that line and we forget others.

We have other industries like special hire cars and taxis that are not being regulated. Recently, in Lira, one of the taxi drivers was burnt alive in one of the trading centres. Up to date, there is no information and the perpetrators have not yet been brought to book. Recently again, one of the head teachers in Lango sub-region was murdered just at a distance of less than five kilometres and his body was dumped along Kamdini-Gulu Highway. No action has been taken.

Mr Speaker, some of these people sit in taxis and you would assume they are right people, travelling to the same destination as yours. However, what happens is that if one is not murdered, they are offloaded after stealing all their property. Therefore, Government has really got to take stringent measures to curb this wave of crimes. It is too much for Ugandans. We are living in fear. The minister should assure us on this. As parliamentarians, just like the lawyers and the prosecutors, we are living in fear. What measures do you have for us? Thank you.

5.24
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I send my condolences to the family of the late Ms Joan Kagezi. However, I am interested in the children this woman has left behind because I am reliably informed that her husband is also not alive, which makes these children total orphans. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, whenever the boda bodas and all cars in this country become old or are being used for some other things, they can dump them anywhere and the number plates are not recalled. If you go to garages, all old cars have got their own number plates and these are the number plates that people are using to finish us.

Thirdly, Mr Speaker, there is a Tundra car, which I usually meet along Bukoto Road and it has no number plate. It passes the traffic police officers, but they will come and capture somebody driving a simple Corona car because he is a taxi driver. There are very many cars and boda bodas that are moving in Uganda without number plates and they pass police officers and nobody talks about it. You will never know whom those cars and boda bodas are carrying.

Another thing, Mr Speaker, is about the guns that are being used to kill us. I would like the minister to tell us exactly the people you have already apprehended - the criminals who are killing people in Busoga. I hope you have captured at least a gun or two. Where are these guns coming from and who is issuing them? If you want to give us guns, give me mine tonight because I am not safe - (Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The information I would like to give you is that the very day Joan was gunned down, in Bunamwaya at a place called Ngobe at around 7.30 p.m., a woman who was disembarking from a taxi was shot dead by people on a boda boda without number plates and they ran away. Of course, Government has also not looked for these killers.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, that is why I would like to commit the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Works and Transport. I want us as Parliament to commit these two ministers together with the Rt Hon. Prime Minister; can you come tomorrow with a statement on what you are going to do about boda bodas and cars that are driven in Uganda without number plates. 

Secondly, what are you doing about these cars which are no longer on the road but are lying in garages with their number plates? These number plates are being used by boda boda riders to confuse people as they commit murders.

Lastly, are you also giving us guns because we need them to defend ourselves?

5.27
MR GEORGE EKUMA (NRM, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the report. 

I recall that last year around December, hon. Alice Alaso raised an issue of insecurity in the Teso Sub-region, to which the Minister of Internal Affairs was supposed to give a report to this House. That report has never been given. Sons and daughters from Teso Sub-region are being murdered in the same way but no reports come to this House.

Last week, I engaged the Minister of Internal Affairs on when these reports will come to the House. Instead, he gave me a task to go to the Police and get the names of all those people who have been killed. I am wondering: are we going to wait for the likes of the late Joan Kagezi to be murdered before we discuss these issues?

Secondly, Mr Speaker, this morning I read in one of the newspapers a story about 500 soldiers being retired from the army. I do not know what package we have for them. When we send them home, what do they go with? They may have a package that is equivalent to buying a motorbike and they will engage in the business of boda boda riding. Such people have the background of handling a gun and of escaping when a murder has taken place; how are the ministries of defence and internal affairs going to follow up these people being retired from the army? What plan do we have for these people? 

We do not know who these people handling the gun are? How can a normal boda boda rider hide a gun and no one can detect it, not even the Police? Therefore, it is really my prayer to the Minister of Internal Affairs that our security, the security of Ugandans, is all in your hands; I should not be called upon as a civilian to provide information regarding the deaths in Teso. Thank you very much.

5.30
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement he made. 

I would like to bring to the attention of the minister that if you follow all these killings that have been going on, you realise that the perpetrators are so daring that they execute their missions without missing. That means they have observed the general security and intelligence situations in the country. They plan properly and know once they move out for a mission, they must execute it. 

I want to inform the minister that the style these people use seems to be advanced and above us. It therefore means that we should take a more sophisticated approach in order to deal with security and intelligence surveillance in order to protect our people. If we do not do that, they will continue.

We may say it is the boda bodas, but an organised criminal will go and buy a motorcycle, remove the number plate and use it to move and kill somebody. All of us will divert our attention to the boda bodas when the criminals are just doing this and keeping the motorcycles somewhere. These are areas that we should look into.

We should also take note of people within the security because not all of them are good citizens. Some of them are part of this. There is the CMI boss who was giving his boys guns to go and rob people here and there. All those are areas to look into.

Also, I want you to take serious concern and provide protection for those people in the DPP’s office. These things are still going on; they are still dealing with cases of terrorism and treason - (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: I want to thank my colleague for giving way. Mr Speaker and colleagues, the information I want to give my colleague is that following the death of Ms Joan Kagezi, the DPP made a commitment to provide security to these people. 

When you read the minister’s statement, it says that the late Joan Kagezi had left her guards at home. However, those of us who have known her and worked with her know that she had never had guards in life. She had always driven that pickup alone with her children –(Interjections)– I am giving information. I want to challenge the minister to give me the names of those guards and when they were ever provided. The information is that these people are not protected.

MR AYOO: Thank you. There are even other staff of DPP who are expressing fear of being trailed and that their lives are in danger. The minister should know this.

Finally, Members of Parliament are also not safe. Most of us are not protected. Some Members have tried to apply for small arms but it has been very difficult for the minister to give them out. I want to ask the minister to also consider the concerns of the Members of Parliament as the country goes for elections -(Member timed out.)

5.33
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to express my personal shock and also condolences to the family of the late Joan Kagezi, more so as the chairperson of the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, which had been interacting with her in her professional work. As Assistant DPP, she had been coming to our committee.  We recall her work and her humility and professionalism in the execution of her work. 

May I also take this opportunity to extent and convey the condolences from the Parliamentarians for Global Action who intensively, at various levels, interacted with the late Joan. They asked me to convey their condolences to this Parliament and the family of the Joan Kagezi.

Mr Speaker, I would like to re-echo the point made by my colleague, hon. Fox Odoi. We were informed yesterday that the late Joan Kagezi did not have a husband and she -(Interjection)- the husband died. She was a widow and she has left four children. In the newspapers today, it was reported that two of the children are at university. I would like to re-echo the point made by hon. Fox Odoi that at this point, considering the work she was doing and the risk she was exposed to, it is only humane that Government commits itself to educating and looking after these young children.

Mr Speaker, in the same manner, this also brings me to the point of prosecutors in the DPP’s office. We are starting the budgeting process; the prosecutors are amongst the least paid people in this country and yet you can see the risk they go through in doing their work. Maybe it is time, and I hope when we come to Parliament we shall be supported when looking at the remuneration of state attorneys and prosecutors that do this type of work.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Police, particularly the Inspector General of Police, for rushing to the scene of crime because we were informed he was there in a very short time. However, the point I have failed to understand is whether, if one is exposed to risks as the late was and they are given security guards, it is an option for someone to decline to have the security when actually the risks have been ascertained by professionals. I am sure the Police and security agencies have the capacity to assess the risks encountered by different officers; so it should be incumbent upon them to provide security so that we do not have these instances occurring in the future. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.37
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is unfortunate that we have lost such a committed person in Joan Kagezi. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to find out whether there is a policy on the use of government vehicles. This was such a high profile person driving herself without security. If one is given a government vehicle, is it in order for that person to drive themselves? Is there a policy on the use of government vehicle?

Secondly, I want to inform the minister that studies were done on regulating boda bodas. While I still worked as the Deputy Mayor of Kampala City Council, we had consultations with all the stakeholders - Ministry of Works and Transport, the licensing board and the Police. We had a study and we even did benchmarking. When it came to implementation, it was the IGP that stopped Kampala City Council from implementing what they had approved.

Each time we talk about regulating boda bodas, the issue becomes political. Even recently when KCCA tried to regulate boda bodas by registering them, it was the Police that stopped the exercise. Isn’t it the intention of Government to leave the boda bodas to work the way they want? Now that problems are cropping up, we see you coming out panicking and doing what has already been done. Isn’t this a waste of resources? When you constitute a team to look at regulating boda bodas, you will be doing what has already been done and you are going to use resources. Is there any difference that you are going to make that has never been done? 

Honourable minister, what about the security of all of us because as I drive home, I am not very sure whether I am protected? What are you doing about it? We are also high-profile persons as Members of Parliament. What are you doing to see that we are protected? We are all Ugandans.

5.41
MS LUCY AJOK (UPC, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to extend my condolences to the family and indeed the children of the late Joan Kagezi. 

I am a bit concerned and surprised that this country does not take issues of security seriously. Given that the late Joan Kagezi was working on those cases which the country is steadily alert about, I do not understand why she was allowed to drive herself. We should have done a security risk assessment around her family. Being a single mother, she needed to look after her family also. Therefore, I was surprised to know that she had been driving herself. I know she wanted to have a normal life with her kids, but it was wrong for her to drive herself without security.

She was a major lead officer in the prosecution of serious cases. We have ministers and high profile people here who even have a second car as part of their security. Given what the late Joan Kagezi was, that should have been offered to her too. On issues of security, the security personnel have the control over the person they are guarding. So, one cannot say that she declined to have that security. I think even the President cannot decline security. So, why would the late Joan Kagezi decline security? 

I am calling upon Government to look at this issue, even for all the officers that are now going to deal with those cases. We have heard about an incident where some people tried to sneak into her home. If a security risk assessment had been done, even her home would have been guarded. I call upon the minister to take this very seriously. It is not going to be easy and you are not going to replace the late Joan Kagezi. In this country, we are not going to get a dedicated officer like the late Joan. Thank you.

5.44
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I thank the honourable minister for presenting this statement. I also join my colleagues to convey my deep sympathies and prayers to the family of the late Joan Kagezi.

From the statement made by the minister, there are salient issues that come up. One of the issues is that on that fateful day, the late Joan had left her security guards at her residence. It has also come out clearly, not from the report but from the information we have been receiving, that she was aware that there was a threat to her life, which she had communicated to some of her close people.

I would like the honourable minister to come out clearly and inform this House and the nation whether, truly, Government had provided Joan Kagezi with security for her to move from home to work and back; or this security that the minister is talking about was from her own effort to get security to protect her at home. As a person, I can actually apply to have security at my home, but that would be different from the security that is to guard me as I go about with my business. We need this to come out clearly.

Mr Speaker, boda bodas or motorcycles in this country are now being known for two things: the carnage and our people dying in accidents and the murders which have become rampant. As you stated, honourable minister, the murders in Busoga and elsewhere were all executed by people travelling on boda bodas. 

I think it is important for us to come out with radical action on these motorcycles. We may have to think about regulating the time they have to move, probably not beyond 7 o’clock. We know that people who use these boda bodas use them for convenience as they escape. They are very quick if one wants to escape and they are very hard to pursue. We need to address the matter of boda bodas very seriously in order to save the lives of our people. 

I know that we have about 10,000 or more boda bodas in this city. That means 10,000 people are employed in that industry.  Because of that, Government has been cagey in taking action on them. Many times, Government has felt that it would have political ramifications if we took strong action on these boda bodas. However, honourable minister, considering the losses this country is facing, as a matter of urgency we have to come up and take a radical stance as far as boda boda operations are concerned in this country. I thank you.

5.47
MR JACOB OPOLOT (NRM, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also join the rest in conveying my condolences to the family and children of the late Joan Kagezi. 

Mr Speaker, I mainly rise to comment on the statement of emphasis by the Minister of Internal Affairs. When you say that you are on top of the situation, what does that mean? Joan Kagezi is dead and she was shot down by someone you say is part of an organised crime; would you really be credible enough again to say here that you are on top of the situation? Maybe I do not know the situation you are talking about.  

I think these criminals have now reached a point where they will start killing people during broad daylight. Much as there are conflicting accounts of the time she was killed, 7 O’clock is still bright enough. This cannot happen under the watch of someone who is on top of the situation. 

Therefore, I think when we come here to talk about serious issues, let us be serious as people who are accountable to Ugandans. Let us not talk as a ritual, that when you say that that you are on top of the situation, it will pass. Someone has died! Some children are going to be without a mother and they already do not have a father. You are duty-bound to safeguard them and you just come to Parliament and say, “we are on top of the situation”. That is a little careless.

The hon. Mwesigye talked of zoning areas for high profile people. Security is for everybody. Every life is as valuable as the other. In my view, we should be urging the security agencies to guarantee the security of everybody within the boundaries of this country so that they can be assured of another day. We cannot only look at the high profile cases. Today, Joan Kagezi has died; an honourable colleague said that on the same day, some lady who was getting out of a taxi was shot dead, and she also deserved to live. Everybody is entitled to life. 

Can we be assured by the Minister of Internal Affairs and his colleagues in the security circles about what they plan to do to guarantee that they are actually on top of the situation they are talking about? 

5.51
MS OLERU HUDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for presenting the statement. I also would like to extend my condolences to the family and the country at large. I know that the late Joan Kagezi has been working for this country; she sacrificed herself to take the highest risky job. That shows she really had this country at heart; she was a nationalist.

Now that she is gone, it is a warning to us. The saddest part in that profession – I know there are very few people in terms of gender; there might be less than 10 women who are professionals in that area.  It is a very big challenge to this country that we have lost a gallant daughter that had put high the face of women in this country.

When we talk about issues of security and peace, it is really a very paramount issue. Some of us still have a live example of where – some few years ago, in the late 1990s and the 2000s - you would be in a class studying during day time but in the evening you would go to hide in the bush yet in the bush is where the criminals lived.

I would like to appeal to my government that these situations must not repeat themselves. When I heard of the death of the late Joan Kagezi yesterday, it really made me recall all that we went through in those years. Government has tried to bring about peace and security, but please can you assure Ugandans that that security you are saying you are on top of will not only be in words but practical?

Now that they have started killing women yet women are really vulnerable, I do not know how many of us are going to be killed every day. Government, you may not guarantee good infrastructure to Ugandans. You may not also to guarantee good social services to Ugandans. However, please assure Ugandans on issues of security. Even if people are poor –(Member timed out.)

5.54
DR MARTIN DRITO (NRM, Madi-Okollo County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and fellow colleagues. The death of Ms Joan Kagezi could have been avoided. In Joan’s home, the security lights had been attacked at night. Joan reported that she was being trailed. Joan reported that she was getting threatening telephone calls.

The government and authorities very clearly knew the sensitivity of the matter Joan was handling in the courts. For such a high profile person, handling very sensitive matters, to be allowed to travel without security, is something that demands a lot of questioning and a lot of answers.

This is a death that could have been avoided. If she had been provided with security, Joan today would not be dead. Therefore, for the minister to come up with a statement, which of course we are happy with, but a statement which in my opinion has a lot of holes punched in it.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the death of Joan Kagezi is an issue that could affect any of us. All of us are at high risk. The general security situation in the country needs a statement which is very substantive.  We have heard of women being killed. We have also heard of a situation in Luwero today where a police station was attacked. We need answers to be issued so that the country can rest at peace knowing that the security the NRM brought in the past still prevails.

Finally, I would like to hint on the issue firearms for self-protection. There are many Members of Parliament in this House including myself, who have applied for firearms for self-protection. Two years ago, I raised this matter on the Floor of this Parliament. However, until yesterday, I was running behind the IGP - at his desk there was a heap of files dating as far back as five years - I have seen firearms lying in CPS for the last four years, but at the same time, Mr Speaker and Members - (Member timed out.)

5.57
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister and the security – I think they have done their part. It is only some gaps, which must be identified and addressed. Any person handling any sensitive matter must be provided with security, whether small or big. A person of the late Joan Kagezi’s calibre should have been given maximum security, given the nature of the cases she was handling. 

When the minister talks about the security that had been provided but that they had remained behind - what type of security was it? Was it home security or personal security? If it was personal security, which was supposed to provide security wherever she went, then she should have been moving with them.

Of course I also know that there is a tendency of some of us, when even given security, to leave them behind. I have seen senior ministers driving their government vehicles, struggling with us in the morning in the traffic jam - you find a minister manoeuvring and crisscrossing - I can name them. Some of them are seated in front of me here. (Laughter) What is the use of having a driver and a body guard? You find a minister who is an old man struggling with a steering wheel in a traffic jam. I think if you do not want to be a minister, then leave it.

Honourable members, the issue of the boda bodas and the transport sector, I think needs to be regulated. Their operations need to be regulated. When Ms Jennifer Musisi tried to regulate these boda bodas, it was some of us who started blaming her for what they attempted to do.  We must put a stop to that and let the transport sector be regulated.

The traffic officers who we always see at roundabouts and at traffic lights - why do they allow boda bodas to cross? They don’t follow the traffic lights? Why should they cross? It is under such circumstances that an assailant can follow and shoot you and run away. 

Gen. Aronda, please help us with the traffic officers. Why do they allow these boda bodas to crisscross as if there is no law? You go to Equatorial- Guinea, or Benin, the boda bodas respect the traffic lights. Why not in Uganda here? 

The issue of the boda boda riders and taxi drivers having uniform such that we are able to identify them - if these two people on boda boda who were trailing the late Kagezi were putting on uniform - (Member timed out.)
	 
6.01
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Of course the statement of the minister is not different from the statements which the police have been making. I was talking to a colleague that so far, the police have made three statements in respect of the death of Joan Kagezi. The first one was that it was ADF. The second one was that it was Al-Shabab. The last statement was that these are people linked to Dr Kiyingi. I was also at a loss and wondering, if police is on top of the situation, why are they making different statements? What is the responsibility and function of the police?

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, the functions of the police are embedded in Article 212 and these are:

    a) To protect life and property;
    b) To preserve law and order;
    c) To prevent and detect crime.

I would like to add some emphasis on prevention and detection of crime. Given the current situation, we want to see the strategy of the police. There used to be government houses; the Prime Minister, hon. Rugunda, is aware. The zoning was that senior civil servants would be in those houses. I remember there were some in Kololo. I do not know who is staying there now. There were some in the ministers’ village. 

As hon. Okupa has said, with a lot of respect to my good friend, hon. Kabwegyere, he seems to be struggling driving himself in the car coming from wherever -(Laughter)- and another minister comes from another direction. When you say that the police are going to provide security to everybody, it is not practically possible. You cannot attach a police officer to each of us. This is what it means. Even if you did, what about our children, you cannot do that. If the people who commit these crimes intend to hurt you and they miss you, they can hurt your children. It is high time that Government took action. Such policies like ministers staying in one place make it easy to provide security because if there are 70 ministers in Ministers’ Village in Ntinda, it is easier for you to secure that place and whoever becomes a minister has a personal body guard. 

I have my good friend, hon. Minister Aronda - body guards should be like a mobile phone. There is no way one can leave a body guard at home. In fact, you should have arrested the officer who is in charge of that person –(Interruption)

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much honourable colleague for giving way. A lot has been spoken about boda boda. What I did not want this House to do is to generalise all motorcyclists to be boda boda. 

The information I would like to give to my honourable colleague and this House is that I was one time arrested by police when I was trying to have a consultative rally in my constituency. The people who grabbed me from my vehicle were riding boda boda. They eventually bundled me up and pushed me in a vehicle belonging to the police. 

When I saw the minister condemning boda boda motorcyclists, I saw him condemning himself because police is using boda boda to - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you now debating or giving information? 

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker and colleagues. As I conclude, honourable minister, we would like to see from you a strategy and not just this statement on how you are going to handle security within the area so that there is a relationship between Uganda’s intelligence and the money we give you – we need the output -(Member timed out.)

2.31
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to give four suggestions to the minister. This morning, I went to one committee where the Executive Director of KCCA appeared. I asked the same question on boda boda cyclists. She said they have so far registered 54,000 boda bodas and that they already brought a statutory instrument, which was in your office for signing. 

However, in political science, we are told and trained that when Government is under pressure, you put commissions of inquiry. The purpose is to reduce the pressure. As time goes by, people will forget. We know what commissions of inquiry are especially for those of us who studied political science.

The advice I would give the minister, since we are all counting on you, is that it has become practically impossible to govern Uganda. You find civilians are pointing at generals, boda bodas warning police officers; enforcement of law and order has become practically impossible because you have liberalized the politics of this country. District police officers are arrested in public when trying to enforce law and order in any particular scene.

It is now becoming very demotivating for police officers to front themselves in certain scenes. Now you see the IGP himself running to all the scenes, which shows that he is over stretched. What I would advise is that we study the situation in Rwanda. All the boda bodas have designated uniform and the numbers are behind the helmet; there is no compromise. 

We have to gazette an area in this country, where boda bodas should move. If you are in green, you operate in Nakulabye throughout. If you are found in Wandegeya or Ntinda you should be arrested and given 20 years imprisonment because we cannot continue to romance with people’s lives – (Laughter)

We are laughing, but another person will be taken tomorrow. Probably, we are playing in their hands. We are complaining here yet they are watching us; planning to take more people so that Parliament complains. So who tells you that we are doing the right thing? Probably we are serving their objective to show that Government has failed to manage law and order. Therefore, hon. Minister, we shall support you without political sentiments like those being raised by hon. Kasibante. If we say information - (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order.

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When we come here to contribute, we are debating like Members who represent people outside here. The information I gave was very clear that police one time arrested me using boda bodas and I was seeing the minister here condemning the same people. He used to arrest me even when I did not have any problem with security. Is it in order for somebody to stand up and allege that the information I gave was only political and not constructive; that it was not helpful to bringing security in Uganda?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, when you were raising your information, I actually expected somebody to rise on a point of order -(Laughter)- but you survived that. That notwithstanding, you made statements and references to statements that the minister had not made. Therefore, when you are coming to equity, you should come with clean hands. (Applause)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Honourable minister, would you please come with regulations on boda bodas at the earliest? If we say by 4.00 p.m., there should be no boda bodas anywhere in the city, it is by 4.00 p.m. We politicians should be the last to talk about unemployment. Why is it that we do not have boda bodas in Arusha and life has not come to an end? 

Therefore, honourable minister, we are waiting for the regulations. We are behind you; we are not just coming here to blame you, that would make the assailants happy and go home smiling that we have succeeded in what we did last night.

Lastly, I would suggest that Gen. Elly Tumwine needs a careful thought. Every day, you witness at least seven killings in the newspaper including beheadings. In Luweero today, a police station was over run; in Gulu, Kitgum and everywhere in the county. It may be a deliberate attempt by some few individuals to bring down the regime. However you should not do it by killing people. You remember in our history where there was a time they were killing medical doctors like Dr Barlow and several professionals to discredit the image of the Government. Therefore, you people should go back to the drawing board, especially the generals of this world and think because for us we are just -(Member timed out.)

6.11
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you, very much, Mr Speaker. I beg your indulgence to give me an extra second as I talk about somebody I first met during the Christmas festival of 1981.

For the last 34 years, I have known Joan Namazzi Kagezi and I will not have a second chance to pay tribute. I thought I need to put this on record for a lady I knew so well.

In 1981, our family relocated to Kansanga Kiwafu Estate. Our immediate neighbour was Mzee Sserwada Kaggwa who was then the headmaster of Kalinabiri Senior Secondary School. He is the father of the late Joan Namazzi and they were living in the immediate neighbourhood.

Joan at that time was in Senior One in Namagunga and I was in Senior One in Kiira College Butiki. For six years in our high school, we used to communicate during school times and during holidays, we would meet regularly, exchange notes and novels. In 1987, we were lucky to be among the 45 students who were admitted to law school - to be admitted together. And for three years at the university, we sat in the same class.

We also participated in politics because I was a member of the Makerere guild representative council where Joan sat by virtue of being a chairperson of Mary Stuart Hall. After passing our exams with honours, we joined the post graduate law school at Law Development Centre. And for a whole year, we sat in the same class. However, at the same time, we used to live in the same block because the hostel was one. Girls were upstairs and we were on the basement floor.

We did our interviews to join public service on the same day. And at that time, before you qualified at LDC, Public Service used to advertise. We sat for interviews for three positions, I sat for: Immigration Officer, State Attorney and Magistrate Grade I. Joan did three also: Land office, State Attorney and Magistrate Grade I, and she was offered two jobs to choose from. The same applied to me; I was offered three jobs to choose one. I chose State Attorney and Joan chose Lands Officer; at that time they used to be called registrars.

Mr Speaker, I joined the ministry in the Directorate of Public Prosecution and Joan joined Lands Office. After some time, she did not like the job of registrar, so she joined the Directorate of Public Prosecution, a job she has held till she died. This very beautiful lady, very humble, very hardworking, very respectful was literally an angel. 

Mr Speaker, Mr Kagezi, who was ahead of us eventually fell in love with Joan Namazzi. They tied the note and were blessed with children. It is unfortunate that around 2006 – 2007, Mr Kagezi passed on. 

We used to talk so much about our growing up together, she had this very beautiful handwriting, and I still have some of the letters she used to write –(Interjections)- do not get me wrong. We did not have any other relationship other than ordinary friendship. However, death is okay, because all of us will die anyway. But to be killed in the presence of your children is traumatising. Those children will never be the same again.

As hon. Tashobya and hon. Odoi said, this is the time for Government to assist this family without a father, without a mother -(Applause)- this is what we call for. I am sure Gen. Aronda and Brigadier Katirima know what it means to lay your life in the line of duty; on the frontline.

There is no difference between a soldier killed at the frontline and Joan; we need to honour this lady. Why should anybody fight a system of justice?

What this lady was doing was promote a system of justice and that was the crime for which she was killed in front of her children. This country, lawyers, ladies, people from Buganda, mention all people of good will, we have lost a true Ugandan.

I will come to the second point about the ministerial statement, and I have my own suggestion. Honourable minister, one of the vehicles of criminality is boda-boda; but also mobile phones. Today, we have many mobile phones which are unregistered. For a crime like this to be committed, I am sure people were ringing, “She is here, there, she has gone to pick the children -”

If they had registered phones, it can also help in investigation. We set deadlines long ago; they passed but still people have unregistered phones promoting criminality. Government should take immediate steps to sort out some of these loopholes.

Mr Speaker, I know some colleagues are asking for guns; my own view is do not; please do not. Guns in the hands of untrained people are dangerous. Go to the USA and see the statistics. The people dying because of those guns are more than those killed by terrorists. Do not ask for guns colleagues, please. 

Any slight mistake, you can kill somebody and you will regret it. As politicians, we live in situations where there is competition, where we are literarily angered and provoked daily. You cannot start having us carrying guns. My view and advice to Government is, be reluctant to issue guns to people who are not trained please -(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, hon. Abdu Katuntu, and I really want to thank the honourable Speaker for letting this through. The information I would like to give is probably threefold but very brief.

One is on the issue of unregistered phones. I know of places where they sell phones in this town and they give you a sim card to use for one day while you process registration. I am also informed there are places down town where there are multiple sim cards that have been registered in people’s names. You just go, buy a phone, and pick that card and go. That is about sim cards.

The second bit is about guns in people’s hands. I think we are forgetting one segment; I like somebody’s passion about road safety, I like the whole idea of regulating boda bodas, but let us be honest; we have also armed so many boda bodas. Half of the boda boda cyclists in this city serve as security operatives; they are armed. Therefore, we need that angle also to be addressed.

Lastly Mr Speaker, I would like to pray that the minister will bring a statement in regard to the many people who have died in Teso. That is my prayer.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, I will not take long but I think the point is well made. Unauthorised guns in the hands of untrained people; even authorised guns in the hands of untrained people are very dangerous. You just walk on the street and everybody has something protruding on the hip.

When you look at the history in this town, many civilians have shot people. It is just there being recorded. Police or the government should come up and regulate arms in the hands of unauthorised people.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, your bonus was in relation to the earlier part, not this one.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, we also need - you see when the minister comes up, he is in a tricky position. He wants to show the public that they are in control and they do not need to panic. However, do not give a picture that things are all well; that things are rosy the security are on top of the situation, that is also wrong.

We are living in very dangerous times. You can never be on top of the situation. The security threats we are facing as a country, as a people, are so high that you need to seriously tell the country that we are in trouble. Please, let us take clear means. Then we can work with you - but to come and say – (Interjections) - thank you, very much.

6.25
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Medard Sseggona): I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker and also to thank my colleague, the minister, for the attempt to address the concerns that have been raised. As shadow minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs, also standing in or holding the portfolio of shadow minister for internal affairs, I would like to send my condolences to the family of the person I have known for years and have always referred to as my senior colleague.

Mr Speaker and colleagues, I can really feel for and sympathise with the minister and the police, because you cannot be everywhere at the same time; you cannot. However, what humble men do in such situations is to humble themselves and speak the truth. One of the tenets in such a situation is to concede and proceed to the next point where you feel stronger.

One, as I said earlier, it is not true that this particular state Attorney who according to the minister’s statement had been specialised as an officer handling these serious crimes, was given any police protection; no. I have met her several times; I have talked to her and I know that is not true. Possibly, this is the point of reflection to say maybe we need to offer protection to a particular line of our service men and women.

If these guards were there, they would have provided an important lead in the investigations. We would know their names and where they are as we speak. What were their briefs upon deployment that somebody who is endangered leaves her home in a government vehicle to go where the risk is high and then they remain home? Are they trained as VIP protection agents? I doubt.

If we have simple civil servants, resident district commissioners; you find a Resident District Commissioner having two, four to five armed people including soldiers –(Interjections)- you can name them. All those people and these persons who are handling say, highly sensitive cases – by the way, I do not even want to suffer the temptation of saying that this was because of the cases she was handling. 

However, those who are specialised in security are telling us, they foresaw this. We read in the papers, as hon. Latif Ssebaggala has mentioned; some body stated earlier “I am under threat.” No action was taken; I think that was dangerous.

Secondly and I would like to thank the minister, thank you. Mr Speaker, the question of access to and use of firearms has come up; it is not coming up for the first time. This has been in the public domain and we have been raising these questions and the government has not done anything. You find these simple NRM mobilisers, simple informers who are not trained, semi illiterate fellows carrying guns and pistols. Some of them even carry AK47 guns.

The minister mentioned all the efforts in arresting the suspected perpetrators, etcetera. As shadow Minister for Justice, I am concerned that you arrest these people and you have the information, two, three weeks down the road, you do not take them to court. We will suffer the temptation of thinking that you are politically trying to achieve something. If you get them and they have been killing Ugandans, and you have the information, then take these people to court for heaven’s sake.

Finally, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, the social-security system in this country should not be about Joan Kagezi such that when somebody is killed or when someone dies, that is the end of life to that person’s family. Servants like this one; we have seen soldiers or their widows coming to us as Members of Parliament to beg. They have laid their lives down for the country, yet we have no system to help them. I have heard on many occasions the President saying, “Oh, the government will contribute to this; the government will educate the children”, and that is the end of the story. They have been coming to ask about how they can access the President to fulfil his pledges.

It must not be about the individual person called the President. There should be a system in our country that guarantees that if I die, my children’s lives will continue and for that matter therefore, I can put down my life on the line for the country. Where are Mayombo’s children today? And all those other young men who died on duty; where are their children? You ask the soldiers in this House, they do not know. I thank you.

3.31
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank my colleagues for the views, concerns and the challenges they are pointing out. I will straight away go to the late; she was a person – a person passed on and it is very difficult to attempt to blame her; it would be very difficult and quite inhuman.

I personally did work with her as a Chief of Defence Forces and she was indeed, as a colleague said, at the frontline from way back when we started combating the terrorism of the LRA, ADF and then later on these ones of Al-Shabaab. She was there and while we used guns, she used her court skills to do her part in the courts of law.

We gave her guards way back in 2011; she had guards and recently even when all those concerns came up of the recent Al-Shabaab cases, the commander of the VIP Protection Unit did interact with her about having police officers in a pick-up, but her security lapsed. It was at that time that she chose to drive herself in the vehicle and then -(Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very, Mr Speaker. First of all, let me say that this lady was my family friend. Her husband was my colleague and I know how they met. The clarification I want to seek is, on Sunday, this lady was at my home and one of the issues we raised was about security. She said she had been promised. Now, the clarification I am seeking is, where are the guards? I have been to her home and there are no guards. Where were the guards? 

MS SANTA ALUM: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable minister. The clarification I am seeking is that very many high profile persons in this land have guards, both at home and those who move with them. In this case, which one are you talking about, are you talking about the bodyguards who remain at home or the ones who normally move with her?

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Mr Speaker and colleagues, I just want to make it absolutely clear that the government knew of the roles she was playing and did provide security for her. However, as hon. Okupa said, once in a while people will choose to do their own things and they want to be free and by themselves. However, things have turned out in a bitter lesson learnt. And in the next round of putting a robust security system in place for the people of that calibre, we will make sure that they are persuaded to seriously adhere to the security agreements that are put in place for them. She had protection.

The other point is on the question of the firearms. Under East African Community and IGAD arrangements, measures are in place to ensure that all firearms are numbered and restricted. 

Now, there are those like the ones which were snatched from two police men between Bugiri when they had gone to guard. It has been proved that some of the firearms have been scammed from the government personnel themselves like the Police, Securiko, Army and some of the intelligence officers.

Also having had wars over the centuries; with the insurgences in Karamoja, LRA and all these that have been around, there is a possibility that some firearms trickled into the population. However, again measures are being put in place to ensure that all firearms are controlled, numbered and no one can access a firearm to commit a crime.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, on the question of firearms, we need to ensure that tighter measures are put in place so that every firearm is accounted for.
 
On the boda bodas, we will take advantage of the previous studies that have been done and move quickly in the direction of what hon. Odonga Otto said to ensure peace. For instance, they have two numbers, you know they still have one number behind; but others who have controlled them, have one number behind and another in front. They have uniforms which are numbered and then zone lights.

I think we have taken some time to pursue them to be disciplined, but no amount of effort can persuade these guys to get organised and do some serious activity. I think that again we will come here for further discussion once we have finished working with all the stakeholders.

On the overall strategy, a colleague asked what is happening – that I talk about the strategy of ensuring that this is done away with.

Firstly, there are three levels; level number one is using human security. The human beings are intelligence, as the police and the army are called upon. Those are in place with their mandate, according to the Constitution: the UPDF ensures that there is security, integrity and sovereignty and then the internal forces, police and intelligence, give us internal security. 

As and when is necessary, all of them coordinate, so that a strategy is in place and it is strengthened and our borders are secure from one area to another. Gone are the days when we had insurgencies and terrorists – time came when we had to help others abroad to ensure that these terrorists are combated and kept there.

We will ensure that the internal security is being further strengthened. By beefing up police numbers from a tiny force of about 13,000 in 1996, we have now built it up to almost 50,000 and they have quite adequate force that will be providing adequate security district by district and even in the urban areas. With the police building up their intelligence, we are sure that the internal security will be contained. 

However, we are also not going to rely on human beings alone, we are going to rely on technology. A colleague talked about CCTVs, a procurement is already on the way and we are soon acquiring CCTV cameras for Kampala and other big municipalities to ensure that if a situation like that which happened during the Boston marathon – if you kill, the CCTV cameras would capture you - (Interruption)

MR BIREKERAAWO NSUBUGA: Thank you very much, hon. Minister. During CHOGM we bought so many CCTV cameras. Can you tell us where these cameras went? 

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Well, passage of time, but we intend to apply modern technology in this area -(Laughter)- technology is going to reinforce human security. 

I will also come to you; we have already finished processing data and printing of identity cards. We are going to embark on massive distribution of identity cards to ensure that they become one of those weapons in the hands of the security personnel. At any point, if someone is pursuing you, on suspicion, they can stop you and say “Who are you, can you prove who you are?” So identification is going to be enhanced with the distribution of identify cards.

Communications - I totally agree we have been working with the Uganda Communications Commission. I do not know what challenges they have. However, with these, the Executive Director - he must tell us his challenges to complete this registration of the sim cards. It is a challenge and we intend to overcome this as soon as we can. Technology will reinforce human beings to ensure that our people have the security that they deserve. 

A colleague said it was preventable, yes it could be preventable if those policemen were carried on the pickup, but they were not. What we are going to be doing is - to reinforce being on top of the situation – to put deterrents to ensure that it does not take long to capture someone who has killed. 

MR ROBERT KASULE: Sorry for the interference but where have you placed MPs? Maybe we need a special meeting with your ministry such that you brief us on how we should behave. Do we need special information that we should not give the public? In your communication strategies, do you also have us as Members of Parliament because we are also vulnerable? We do not want the same story to emerge after some time and you also say that you should have protected us and yet one of us is gone.

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: I agree with my colleague, hon. Katuntu, that we should not go into that area. When we fought the insurgency in the North, there was a question that arose on whether we were going to guard every home, road or school. We said that the only guarantee we were going to give was to make sure that there was no LRA in Northern Uganda.

When we agree with what you have said, the teachers and doctors will come and ask us to arm them. We cannot create a garrison state. We are going to make sure that all these few criminals are captured and brought to book so that we make sure that the deterrence measures are in place so that the MPs live in a peaceful and secure country without having to turn around the corner and everyone else is asking for a gun. 

We will provide adequate policing, ensure that the intelligence is doing its work and then the crime preventers –(Interjections)- we are considering that the crime preventers –(Interjections)– they are not going to be political but they are going to help us in the neighbourhoods. For example, somebody must have seen the person who shot Joan Kagezi but because somebody somewhere has no phone or even if they had one, they would not have known whom to call. 

We are going to make sure that the police give out several telephone numbers so that if one sees and calls, then one is sure that the call will be received and there will be response. 

Once brave crime preventers are suspicious of somebody or something in the neighbourhood, they will call someone to report. In street security, we call it “See something, say something” We are going to make sure that we intensify community policing, crime preventers integrated with the regular security forces communicating robustly so that there are no gaps.

MR ATIKU: I thank you, Mr Speaker and the Minister for Internal Affairs for giving way. When I was growing up –(Interjections)- of recent –(Laughter)- I used to see and it is a fact – I used to see the LC I of my village organising village meetings every Tuesday where all the heads of households were invited. If you missed attending such a meeting, you were made to explain in the following meeting. 

In these meetings, they used to address issues to do with visitors in the village, the crimes committed and all sorts of things. Somehow, that system controlled issues of security. So when you are talking about the crime preventers and the rest –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The clarification?

MR ATIKU: I would like to know from you as the Minister for Internal Affairs on when you are reviving these mechanisms that initially controlled the insecurity in our villages?

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: I thank you. We have a system in place and that is why you find that there is a structured intelligence network from the GISO all the way up to the headquarters. 

It is true that there were some positive structured meetings but I think that changed over time when the LC systems weakened because of the elections that did not take place among others. From the village, there is a system all the way to a sub-county and we are going to ensure that the activities of the sub-county and district security committees are intensified all the way to the national level.

Hon. Alaso has talked about a situation which we are going to give another check-up with a multi-sectoral team. But the people who are resident there, the police and others say that they have not heard about it. However, I put into place a joint team yesterday led by the police with the military commanding Teso and Karamoja to go on the ground and find out when these killings happened but they were never adequately reported.   Mr Speaker, a report will promptly come to your office and the House on what happened in Teso.

There is also some killing in the Lango region which I am going to quickly check out and find out whether action has been taken or somebody has slept on the job and yet no action has been taken.

On the concern that things do not seem to be together, I say that things are together because we take national security very seriously. There are incidents like a terrible terrorist attack in the heart land of Paris or some person crashing an aeroplane in the Alps, you wonder what has happened to the first world. There are those incidents that come not because states are not up to it but states can be surprised.

So these isolated incidents will not become some trend and remain isolated. The Government of Uganda, using its security forces will take action on these isolated ones so that there is confidence in the population, MPs –(Interruption)        
 
MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, I had restrained myself even as the minister was making statements that I would not ordinarily agree with. So when the minister responsible for my security tells me that these incidents will remain isolated, I get concerned and would like to ask whether he is in order because I thought the target would be not to be there.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, did you actually say that they will remain continuously isolated?

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: We are struggling to have a situation of zero crime but it is not possible for the time being to ensure that there is total zero crime. Even countries like Singapore grapple with a few serious crimes here and there especially in these times of violent extremism which the world is struggling with. 

We are determined to ensure that there is zero crime. With the resources and training in place, crime will happen from time to time but it will not continue. This is about making sure that we all unite and make sure that in this country, there is zero crime.

On the question to do with the responsibility of Government towards families of the dead, it is not true that soldiers are going around begging –(Interjections)- it is not true because we, first of all, have the biggest SACCO in the country to the tune of about –(Interjections)– yes they get loans from the Wazalendo SACCO and so by the time you serve and retire, you have a fall-back. There is an army shop where you can go and even the take-home was increased. So I think it should take an undisciplined soldier to go to hon. Sseggona to say “Please”, otherwise, there is sufficient care taken. 

For Joan Kagezi, like the leaders who have passed on, Government has taken responsibility to look after their kids and even the people who are around them.

Mr Speaker, I once again commit that the internal security forces will guarantee the people of Uganda security and will make sure that Uganda remains stable and remains a country that is investable so that our development partners and others come; to foster our forces of social economic transformation. We are committed, and we will take all the views we have heard from here to inform the additional measures we are going to take to ensure security of the country. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister for the statement and for the interaction with Members. Thank you, Members for your concerns but we need to pause. Also, we expect you to come back with those statements about those cases that have been mentioned. Some were mentioned last year but we have not received a statement to-date. Thank you.

This is how we should cooperate on matters of national security. Security is for us all. Insecurity anywhere in this country is insecurity everywhere. So we should try and stop this problem.

Honourable members, you recall that on the 26 of March, a motion was moved in this House for a creation of a select committee. A decision has been taken and I now communicate to the House that the terms of reference have been drafted and the following members have been appointed on this select committee in relation to the Nonve Forest Reserve in Buwanuka Parish, Kakiri Sub-County, Wakiso District. 

The honourable members appointed are:

    i. Hon. Felix Okot Ogong
    ii. Hon. Nabbanja Robinah
    iii. Hon. Kakooza James
    iv. Hon. Mutebi J. Balikudembe
    v. Hon. Anywarach Joshua Carter

This select committee will be chaired by the hon. Felix Okot Ogong. The terms of reference of this select committee are:

    i. Inquire the current status of Nonve Forest Reserve in Kakiri;
    ii. Whether the purported de-gazettement of Nonve forest reserve in that parish, Wakiso district or any part thereof was done in accordance with the laid down laws and procedures; 
    iii. Make appropriate recommendations to Parliament.

Honourable members, the honourable members of this committee have already received their communications and are expected to commence work immediately, and are expected to report to the House by Tuesday 14 April; that is in less than two weeks since all the documentation and all the issues had already been zeroed down and the members can come and guide us on how to proceed.

I put the question to the constitution of the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Honourable members, the House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 6.54 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 2 April 2015 at 2.00 p.m.)



