Thursday, 30 April 2015

Parliament met at 2.13 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting and I wish to thank you very much for the work you have been able to do this far, and for the concentration and the commitment you have given to this work of the budget. Given that this is a new regime of the budgeting process and there was a bit of challenge with time, what you have done so far is commendable. Therefore, I commend and thank you for what you have been able to do. However, that is just the beginning because by next week we should be ready to move to other things.

When the plenary broke off, we received a sad occasion from hon. Cecilia Ogwal, the Chief Opposition Whip; she lost her mother and so was hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi, Minister of State for Health, who also lost his beloved mother. Our parents are responsible for making us what we are and therefore, it is such a great loss to these colleagues and many of us went to Kikinzi and Dokolo where the burial of the two mothers were done. Honourable members, I ask that since this is the first sitting of Parliament, let us raise and observe a minute of silence.

MR LATIF SSEBAGGALA: Mr Speaker, may I request that we include in the Supreme Mufti who passed away during the days we were not here?

(The Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you hon. Ssebaggala for bringing that up. I wish to explain that the resumption of plenary of this Parliament has been necessitated by the tight schedules requiring the passing of the budget and the recently enacted Public Finance Management Act, 2015.

I wish to commend the sectorial committees for processing the activities of the budget for the financial year 2015/16 despite the challenges encountered and reported to me. The handling of the budget process this year has been cumbersome due to the transition of migrating into the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 which instituted various changes which we are trying to manage.

I hope in the next financial year, the Executive as well as Parliament will have streamlined all activities and the procedures necessary to ensure that the budget process is done properly and processed in time.

For the benefit of the members, I would like to share with you information relating to the budget cycle detailed under Public Finance Management Act, 2015, Section 9(5): The minister with the approval of Cabinet submits the budget frame work paper to Parliament by 31st December of every year. Section 9(8) of the same Act, Parliament approves the budget framework paper by 1st    February and that is what we are supposed to be doing today many months later.

Section 13(13), the minister and heads of other votes submit to Parliament policy statements for the proceeding financial year that is of course 2015/16 by the 15th March. 

You will recall that this was done on the 1 April 2015, 15 days after the event. Section 13(3), the minister on behalf of the President presents to Parliament a proposed annual budget of the preceding year by 1st April; this we were able to do in time.

Under section 14(1) Parliament approves the annual budget workshop plan, Appropriation Bills and other Bills necessary to implement the annual budget for the next financial year by 31st May. Honourable members, this is the only timeline left for us to fulfil in time and this one, we must not miss it. We should endeavour that at least this particular provision is respected in this financial year.

Under section 13(5) the annual budget shall be effective as of 1st July and of course the usual motions for Committee of Supply which has already been moved will be able to supply all this by the 31st May so that by the time they read the budget, it is done. That is the formality; they put the question and everything passes, so that by the time the financial year begins on the 1st July, we are ready to move.

As reflected on the Order Paper, the Constitutional (Amendment) Bill, 2015 at long last has been received and hopefully will be read for the first time this afternoon. I wish to congratulate Cabinet and especially the honourable Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs for this achievement. This matter has generated and continues to generate a lot of debate within Parliament and the entire nation.

I wish to call upon all Ugandans and especially the honourable members to remain calm, reasonable and listen to each other’s views on this important debate, until consensus is generated to determine the Bill’s outcome.

Honourable members, the time for lamentation and accusations on this matter is unnecessary as doing so would result in further loss of time. Time is not on our side and we need to hasten our steps to see that Parliament processes these items of business as early as possible. For the said reason, we have to take certain measures to first track the process.

The following measures will go a long way in helping us achieve this:
    1. The Executive and all its agencies are readily available to meet the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs when called upon. I am requesting that the Rt hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business ensures that maximum cooperation is accorded to the committees by all the concerned authorities within the Executive.
    2. After the handling of the ministerial policy statements under its mandate, the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs should as a matter of priority handle this Bill first. It should chart out a comprehensive programme for processing, The Constitutional (Amendment) Bill, 2015 and where possible sit from Monday to Friday without interruption. 
    3. Further, my Office will impose an embargo on all travels for honourable members, whether local or abroad to enable the committees do as much work as possible within the limited time available.

Honourable members, I request for your understanding and cooperation in this very important national duty on which the people of Uganda have set their eyes on us to achieve at this time. I thank you.

2.24
MR NELSON SABILA (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): I rise on a point of national importance, which touches on the agriculture ministry and specifically on crop production. Bukwo District is a cereal growing district where maize and barley are popular. In July last year, we had an outbreak of the serious Maize Lethal Necrosis Disease (MLND). 

As we talk now, it is the planting season but the disease has already started and has affected many maize plantations covering about 50 per cent of the district mostly in the sub-counties of Kaptererwo, Suam, Senendet, Bukwo, Bukwa Town Council and Riwo. If not checked, it is threatening to wipe out the entire maize field in the district and that will be disastrous for all of us as people of Bukwo and the government. I do request that the ministry takes up immediate measures to send a team of experts in a bid to stop the further spread of this disease otherwise it is going to wipe out the maize.

The other issue is the supply of other seeds for cassava, potatoes and beans and then in the long run, the disaster preparedness ministry will have to dispatch their relief because the gardens that have now been affected will not recover.

There is a pesticide that can be used to kill the flies and the ministry is aware of that, but I am surprised that since last year, they have not taken the measures to combat this disease and I do request that they do it immediately.

The other is about the many farmers who have adopted barley growing as alternative to maize. However, the problem is that the type of seed that is being supplied by Nile Breweries limited is questionable because last year, the people planted barley but during flowering, it was realised that there were a lot of wild oats in the seeds and it was contaminated. So I believe that the ministry should take up the responsibility to ascertain the source of these seeds so that our farmers do not always suffer losses when they plant. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you. Does the Chief Government Whip have a response on that?

2.26
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): I thank you very much. I would like to thank my colleague for raising this issue. When we receive incursion of diseases, our technical staff at the districts, especially in the agriculture section like the production officer or District Agriculture Officers are required to make an on-spot inspection and make a report quickly that is supposed to be submitted to the agriculture ministry and then the ministry can see what first aid can be done. 

If it requires another team of experts from the ministry, then they can dispatch the team. This is how we have been handling the issue of caterpillars where the district production officers have been sending stock and sending reports to us. We then organise for pesticides for them to collect. I will request my colleague to inform me whether such a report has been given to the agriculture ministry so that I can follow up.

Secondly, on the quality of seeds, we are monitoring the seed suppliers and I recall that the last time we were here, I also indicated that some of the seed companies have been black listed. If we find out that a seed company is supplying poor quality seeds, then we can deal with that company so that we save on the wastage. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you. Honourable member, you will now handle that with the minister so that practical steps are taken and deal with this matter.

2.28
MR IDDI ISABIRYE (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge): I thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I rise on a matter of national importance. On 26th of this month at around 10.00 p.m., my people in Bunya County South in an area called Ibunda were affected by a natural disaster where the winds destroyed about 361 houses. Many families have been left homeless, property was destroyed and mostly children were affected.  Many people have been admitted to hospitals and health centres. My prayer to the Government through the disaster ministry is that the families that have been affected be helped to make sure that at least they are settled.

Secondly, this is the second time in a period of two years where a similar problem is happening in the same area. I tried to write to the disaster ministry but I was advised to write to the district authorities such that they carry out the valuation. This was done and submitted to the ministry but nothing was really done. I would like to request Government to ensure that at least the affected families are helped. I thank you.  

2.30
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): I thank you very much. Let me also reiterate the point about the committees at every district which are supposed to handle disaster.

The Chief Administrative Officers in all the districts are the chairpersons of the District Disaster Committees. When a disaster strikes, it is this committee that is expected to sit very quickly and make an assessment before contacting the Office of the Prime Minister.

I have noted that hon. Iddi Isabirye has informed us that this was done but no action was taken. I promise to get in touch with him and get a copy of the submission he made so that I can do the coordination role and also follow it up. I thank you.

2.31
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): I rise on a matter of national importance in relation to the Odyedo Landing Site - the shooting to death of Mr Geoffrey Aloka of Aber Bedo Village and Mr Jimmy Okello of Akukuru Village all of Odyedo Parish, Awelo Sub- County in Amolatar District.

These killings were done by a soldier who was part of the four soldiers purported to be carrying out operations on illegal fishing on Thursday, 9 April 2015. This followed confrontation between the community and the task force that degenerated into the killing of these two people, and this arose from complaints of extortion, sale of illegal fishnets and confiscation and sale of fish. 

Mr Speaker, the information that we have is that this group came from Kaeyi in Apac District and that a set of army uniform was recovered and they are under Police custody in Amolatar District. A case file NO. CRB 253/215 has been opened in Amolator Central Police Station. The unanswered questions that Government help us on are:
    1. Why deploy the army and not police as provided for in the fish Act?
    2. To what extent were they prepared to handle the operations with professionalism?
    3. I wish to applaud the Army leadership for promoting discipline in the force. It is now the desire of my people and myself to know whether this solider has been apprehended and appropriate action taken. As it is at the moment, there are about three groups that undertake these operations in the lake.

We have the beach management unit; we also have the authorised officers and we have the soldiers; but they carry on their work in a way that is not coordinated. Their reporting mechanism is not clear. We also want to be informed about the plans that Government has to streamline these operations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, I think you still have the historical competence to handle this matter.

2.34
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much Rt. hon. Speaker. First of all, I want to pass on my condolences for the people who have been shot by the soldiers as my honourable colleague has informed us. It is true I interacted with the honourable sometime before this Parliament opened. What I did was to consult with the Chief of Defence Forces to find out whether action has been taken.

I also want to note that since a case has been filed the matter will definitely be followed up. On the issue of why Police and UPDF, these two institutions have been cooperating in a number of operations or special missions and this is one of the areas where we have borrowed the support of Police or UPDF.

This is an area where people have been staying on the islands for over 40 years and their character is that of people who do not follow laws because they are in an area which is hard-to- reach. That is how UPDF was informed of the crimes that were being committed on the site and that is how UPDF was brought in.

As I speak, we are streamlining the operations in the fisheries sector. We were given four senior police officers to come and sit on the planning unit in the Ministry of Agriculture in a bid to come up with the ministry’s enforcement police and very soon our colleague who is holding this portfolio will be informing us on how far we have gone. 

However, what I left in place and I know it is happening is that the planning unit is now fully established in the ministry and we have four senior police officers sitting on that unit. So very soon we will be informing this House on the coordination of enforcement in the Ministry of Agriculture.

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. Two months ago, I raised the same issue about my delayed petition and you assured me that it is going to be handled; the petition which is being handled by the Committee on Natural Resources. Up to now, almost four years later, the petition has not come to the Floor of Parliament and I am under pressure because it was very sensitive. People abandoned their property and they are asking me what has been done by Parliament.  That is the procedural issue where I want you to intervene.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the chair of natural resources here or the vice chair or any member of the committee? Can we have an update on what is going on about this particular petition? 

MR WANGOLO: Mr Speaker, I am a member of the committee but up now, we have not received the petition; so we do not know where it is. When I checked in my pigeonhole, I saw a copy; may be it was delivered by somebody.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: A copy of what?

MR WANGOLO: A copy of the petition.

MR SSEBAGALA: Mr Speaker, the petition was presented four years ago and hon. Werikhe assured me that they were almost through with it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is in the pipeline?

MR SSEBAGALA: The oil pipeline from Eldoret passing via many constituencies, including mine.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member let us consult on this and we will do something about it before we raise it again.

2.40
MS JOY ATIM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. Since last week our district is experiencing certain things that are queer. Communities always apply for police outposts in their areas due to circumstances that are beyond them; sometimes there are thugs and there is insecurity in such areas.

Recently, Police has been withdrawing police posts from the community and the community members are so worried now that there is nobody to protect them. To make matters worse, the Central Police Station in Lira District is being fenced off and this is of great concern. People are worried about the fencing of a police post because if there is a problem the Police have got to rush to the police centre; but it is already fenced.

When we asked, they said that they are protecting the police because the Al Shabaab are robbing guns from their policemen. We are asking, what is the role of the police? Are they sleeping; should the communities suffer at the expense of the police who are supposed to guard them?

This is a matter of concern to the community, out posts are being withdrawn; central police is being fenced off and the community is scared. Could the minister respond to this issue?

2.34
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My colleague has raised the issue of the looming insecurity. She also raised the issue of fencing off the central police. I want to believe it is for security reasons that the Police is trying to make this security provision.

I assume that a gate will be left for people to get police services. It is obviously for security reasons that the Police post is protected because it is also a target. We have seen what happened in Kasana Luwero where four people came and slaughtered our police officers from behind where there was no fence.

I believe that it is for security reasons that the Police post is being protected and fenced. What we have to maintain is for the Police to be accessible; that there is a gate and the services can be accessed. Regarding the closing of the small police posts –(Interruption) 

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As far as I am concerned, we have Prime a Minister’s question time on Wednesday. However, questions that are raised for specific sectoral answers are being turned into a platform for the Chief Whip to enjoy. Therefore, to every question that is put up, instead of making an undertaking to deliver the questions to the respective minister, she has turned them into a debate as if it is some sort of a Chief Whip’s question time. That is how she has ended up giving very academic answers to various specific issues. 

Mr Speaker, is the Government Chief Whip moving procedurally right to turn issues of national importance that require specific answers from ministers into a platform for her to shine? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think by the colour of the dressing of the Government Chief Whip, she intended to shine. (Laughter) I have looked through the rules and I have not found any rule against shining in Parliament. (Laughter)

Honourable members, a member has raised a matter of concern on behalf of the people of Lira and they need some answer. That is why the Government Chief Whip, who is now doubling as the Leader of Government Business, is trying to supply some interim answers. We are waiting for her to conclude. How she was going to conclude was going to be important.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, all the answers I have given, the ministers holding those portfolios are not present in the House currently. Whenever any minister is not present, the Government Chief Whip who is standing in as the Leader of Government Business must use the opportunity to do the needful. (Laughter)

As I conclude, Mr Speaker, I have taken note of the closing of the small police unit and I am going to liaise with the Minister of Internal Affairs. I was just assuming that they are reorganising themselves -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not safe to assume.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: I am sorry. However, I am undertaking to take all these issues because I am facilitated by a staff who is here taking notes. I will follow up the matter and get in touch with the colleague who has raised this issue. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, before the Leader of Opposition raises his matter, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have youths from Child Life Network Uganda. They are represented by hon. John Ssimbwa and hon. Nabilah Naggayi Sempala who is the Woman Representative for Kampala. They are here to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. (Applause)

We also have in the gallery this afternoon, a delegation from National Catholic Commission for Justice and Peace. They are from Nigeria, Kenya and Uganda. They have come to observe the proceeding of this Parliament. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. (Applause)

2.47
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Wafula Oguttu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. There is a matter we think is important for us to get clarification from the minister. This is on the ongoing registration of voters. If the Minister of Justice can look at it a little bit. 

We are all aware that this matter of registration is important. When we were debating the Citizens Registration Bill, we were very clear and there were a lot of controversies on clause 40, part 2 that the Citizens Registration Bill would not supplement, subtract or replace the voters Register. It was a big argument and we agreed the Electoral Commission may get information or data from the National Citizens Register.

We have been shocked to see in the media that the Electoral Commission is retiring its own register and now using the citizen’s registration register. Citizens who have been voters and some who are even candidates for years and have voted several times, if they do not or have not registered as citizens, they will automatically not vote. This is because their names do not appear in the current register, which the Electoral Commission is handling.

We would like to know from the minister whether that is true. If a citizen has not registered yet as citizen he has a voter’s card, will that citizen vote? Is that citizen on the voters’ register? If not, we would like to know under what law that citizen may not be allowed to vote. This is because we know that after sometimes, all of us as citizens will be required to have identity cards. However, so far, we are in a transition and there are others who have not yet got those identity cards; maybe, most of us here also have not yet got those cards.

Secondly, when we were registering citizens, it was moved from our side by hon. Alaso that the period for registration should be extended. As Parliament, we passed a resolution that indeed, we extend the registration of citizens to February. The Government did not follow this resolution and ended the registration in December. 

We have now seen from the on-going exercise that it was a mistake that was made. Many people have not yet registered and that is why they are extending it for four days.

We would like to ask the minister in charge that the period should be made longer. More so, if the registration of citizens is going to count for everybody to be in the voters’ register, we would like to appeal to Government that this exercise is extended for not just four days but for another two weeks. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

2.53
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to add something on what the Leader of Opposition has stated. It is true that the Electoral Commission data has been de-gazetted as of 31st March. At the moment, it is only those who are registered under the National Identity Card project that are eligible to vote. 

More so, the data centre for Electoral Commission is no longer with the Electoral Commission – (Interjections)– I personally went to Electoral Commission political parties’ desk and all the data is not with Electoral Commission. Even some of the staff of the Electoral Commission had missing names including their Chairman. His name was missing in the National Identity Cards register. He had to go and take a new picture under the new National Identity Card registration. 

Most names of several staff of the Electoral Commission did not return from the National Identity Card registration. Most of them had to go to Kololo to take their pictures. Those days, you could just access the data from Electoral Commission and update the Chairman or staff of Electoral Commission. You could walk to Electoral Commission and find out your data but if you walk there now, there is no data. You have to go to Kololo or where you initially registered from. 

At the moment, where Electoral Commission does not have the data and legally, it is Electoral Commission supposed to manage elections and data for voters but they are not in charge. What is the fate of those whose names were in the de-gazetted register? Most people took it casually that if their name was already in the Electoral Commission data base, even if they did not take their picture under the Identity Card registration, they would still vote. 

Even in the local areas, people are not aware whether - there are people who are seated comfortably knowing that their names are in the Electoral Commission data base. They are not aware that they have to cross-check whether the Electoral Commission data is harmonised with the National Identity Card data. (Interruption)

MR WANGOLO: Thank you very much, my colleague. Mr Speaker, this is the fact. I registered and somebody maliciously deleted my name from the system. When I went to check, my name did not appear in the data base. The names of all the people I went with appeared in the data base. I asked myself, “what happened?”

In addition, I again registered but I did not sign. They told me to use a thumb print - the machines were not working. I wonder what will happen.  

Therefore, this is a very serious issue. We need to take a decision now as Members of Parliament to help Ugandans take their democracy ahead. Thank you. 

MR MUGUME: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Col Besigye, Former President of FDC contested three times as a presidential candidate in this country. His name is not in the register. We have checked in Rukungiri. His name is not on all the registers within the district. You can imagine a person -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which register? 

MR MUGUME: At his polling station in Nyakagyeme for Electoral Commission. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, conclude. 

MS AMONGI: Let me conclude, Mr Speaker.  We need to save ourselves. What we had passed, we had hoped that even if they were going to share the data, the data related to elections would be with Electoral Commission. We thought they would manage it for elections and not for us to go to the ID centre to get data. Even now, the staff being recruited are not being recruited under the budget of Electoral Commission; the staff being recruited for updates are under Ministry of Internal Affairs. Therefore, what work is now - constitutionally the work, which should be done by Electoral Commission is now with Ministry of Internal Affairs under the ID project. 

Can we, as emergency and a vital matter first shift and ensure that Electoral Commission has a data centre and manages it? Can the minister in charge of this line tell us how harmonisation of the old register and the new National Identity Card registration has been done?  The majority of the people who were relaxed, whose major issue was to vote and they did not register for the National I.D are unable to vote as it is now. 

Is it possible that we extend the time because so many people are going to miss out on this exercise? This issue of extending the time up to Monday is not going to help. We need to agree as a national agenda and consensus building that let us harmonise this matter of data for Electoral Commission being with Electoral Commission. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.00
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kahinda Otafiire): Mr Speaker, I am surprised the Leader of Opposition has not sought engagement with us to get correct information rather than depending on rumours. 

The National ID register is a source of information. It is one of the sources of information for the Electoral Commission. There are other sources of information. We treat the ID register as the authentic registration of the citizens of Uganda. If your name is in the register, you automatically qualify as a voter. If your name is unfortunately not in that register, there is a window for you to register so that you can participate in elections.

What the honourable member of Parliament was saying that people relaxed – no, it is compulsory that we should register the citizens. If you relax and –(Interjections)– when you were talking, I kept quiet; why don’t you let me talk? 

It is imperative that you get yourself a national Identity Card. Ignorance of procedure does not protect you from suffering your constitutional rights. Why didn’t you register? (Mr Kassiano Wadri rose_)That is not withstanding hon. Kassiano Wadri. We are going to have –(Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, honourable, let the minister first finish the statement and then you raise the clarification point. 

MR OTAFIIRE: Why don’t you stand up and answer as minister if you know better? (Interjections) I am giving you information and you are not –(Interruption)

MS EKWAU IBI: Mr Speaker, we all came to this House through the same procedures. Each of us is here as a people’s representative. 

Is it in order for the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to shout down Members who have concerns and at the same time, talk to Members as if he is addressing little children?  Is he in order, despite the position he holds and the portfolio that he represents? Is he in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you insult a mountain, it will insult you back by echo. The minister is making a response; you are not allowing him to respond. Let him finish and then you make the clarification point so that we follow what he is saying, but in the middle of his speech you are arising on points of procedure, information and the like, we cannot follow! I as a Speaker, I am interested in following what he is saying so that in case issues arise, I can rule on them. 

He has not finished, you want clarification, procedure and order among others. How do I proceed? Let us have an orderly process. Let the minister respond and if there are outstanding issues, we will raise them. 

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I would like to be guided and be told the procedure. If a person is holding the Floor and he resumes his sit, will a person be procedurally right to stand up on a point of clarification when he has already finished and he has resumed his sit?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, this matter is not a matter where resuming the sit can rescue you. No, we have to weigh matters and see. I as a Speaker will not allow the minister to run away with information that is incomplete. This is a matter that is important. So, let the minister finish making his submission and if there are outstanding issues, we raise them. (Mr Tayebwa rose_) Member for Bushenyi Municipality, would you like to sit? 

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) KAHINDA OTAFIIRE: Mr Speaker, I thank you for your wise ruling. Honourable members, with due respect to the Leader of Opposition, we are cognisant of the fact that there are missing gaps in the register. There are some of our citizens who did not register; there are those outside the country and those who do not have the opportunity to register.

That is the reason why we have allowed a period, a window for people to register and get on to the voters’ register. We are going to display the tentative register and if one is not on that register, then one can complain. 

The fact that Col Besigye is not on the register is one reason we are going to display it and then he will know that he is not on the register and he will produce  – because when you register as a citizen, you are given a receipt and a chit. He will produce that chit and make his case. He could say, “Look, I registered in this place, why is my name not on the register?” He could sue Government. He can sue the Attorney-General for refusing to register him as a citizen. That is not the road we are taking. Honourable members, I can assure you that we are going to make sure that as much as humanly possible, that every Ugandan who is eligible to vote will have an opportunity to do so.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would wish to thank the honourable minister Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire for the explanation he has attempted to give. (Interjections) Yes, I know why I have said that “explanation he has attempted to give.” I am very careful with selection of my words.

When the project for the registration of citizens in this country started, the roadmap was that the whole process was going to be for four months. That it was going to last up to around February. For reasons best known to Government, it was cut short.

Not only that, Members of this House informed the minister of the challenges that were being faced by the officials who were engaged in doing this registration exercise.

First of all, the process delayed and started three weeks late in a number of areas. Secondly, the machines were faulty; thirdly, machines could not be charged yet, at the beginning, on average, they hardly registered 20 people per day. This was as result of the officials not being conversant with the usage of the machines. All this was raised. This was so that Government in its own wisdom and bearing in mind the advice given would be able to take these issues into consideration and extend the period of implementation of this project. Unfortunately, as I said earlier on, it was instead reduced by two months. 

As if that was not enough, when they started this updating exercise which was supposed to be for one month, it started on the 7th April and it was to end on the 30th April. This has been awash in Government media both TV and papers and it is only today that they have accepted to extend for four days. Surely, with all these problems that people have failed, from all these various parts of the country and as echoed by people from here and in the field, surely, is it possible for us to have a comprehensive registration exercise in four days? When we are supposed to have these machines move from parish to parish, village to village, is it possible? I will appeal that Government be realistic.

My brother Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire be, the one that I always have known, practical. Appreciate the problems of these people who have not registered yet and the cries from all over the country. It is not only one particular area. 

If some Members of Parliament have gone and checked and are not there, surely, how about – if Engineer Kiggundu can walk from his Jinja Road office to Kololo, how about the other person from Terego, will he have the courage and the means, to walk from 	Terego to come to Kololo? Let us be practical, let us take this consideration and be fair to the citizens of this country and we extend this exercise. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Leader of Opposition for raising this very pertinent issue. I am aware that the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs has accused the Leader of Opposition of basing his argument on rumours and I find that very unfortunate.

May be to remind the honourable Minister of Justice, he said that under the law, all of us are supposed to have registered as national citizens. The laws he is talking about came into force on the 26 March, 2015, long after the process of registration had ended. This is the very point we are making to Government, that you have rushed with the process of registering without an enabling law. Arrogantly as the minister has been, they said, “No, for us we are going ahead with the process.”

Now, he is alleging here that this is compulsory. It could not have been compulsory before the law. That is point number one. Point number two, Mr Speaker, this goes to the core of the independence of the Electoral Commission. That they can discard their own register which they have had for a long period of time and copy data from the national ID project – you see when you look at the law, the Electoral Commission law, we have a register which should be updated all the time.

To de-register a registered voter, you need a process, you need tribunals. That process has taken place at a military installation in Kololo. Gen. Otafiire, you could be a military officer, matters of Electoral Commission are a mandate of the Electoral Commission. What has happened, Mr Speaker is, the Electoral Commission    -

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIRE: Retired military officers are no longer military officers –(Laughter)– I thank you.

MR KATUNTU: Well, that coming from Gen. Otafiire is not surprising. However, the point I am trying to make is that the Electoral Commission has absconded from its core responsibility of registering voters. It has resorted to an institution which they have no control and power over. That is quite unfortunate!

Thirdly, to be a registered voter, you need to apply. You go registering while knowing very well that I want to be a voter in station X. They just got data for whoever was 18 years and above and put them on the voters’ roll, including those who may not have wished to vote. To apply to vote, you need to fill in details, which are all provided for under the Electoral Commission Act.

All of us are cooked, including my colleagues opposite me. You would not know who your opponent is and how he/she is manipulating the process. This has nothing to do with the Opposition. What we want is a credible voters’ register where the Electoral Commission, which is mandated, takes full responsibility. 

As of now, it is a military exercise. It is Gen. Aronda and Col Kweri –(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Will you take the information, honourable member?

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, thank you. That is why I yielded the Floor. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and hon. Abdu Katuntu for giving way. During the registration of citizens, they registered Ugandans who were 16 years old -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And above.

MR SSEMUJJU: Yes, and above. Therefore, the 16 year olds are also appearing on the registers that the Electoral Commission purports to be displaying and updating. The information I would like to give to hon. Abdu Katuntu is that we have nearly over 2 million people who, under the law, cannot vote but they are also on the register now.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform this House that in my constituency alone, I have done a careful study of every polling station. So far, 7,320 voters have been deleted. The process is not yet complete so you never know who they have deleted. Maybe they have deleted their own voters.

As hon. Katuntu is saying, under which law and procedure did the Electoral Commission go to my constituency and delete 7,320 voters? Under Article 61, they have the powers to compile, maintain and update the register but they have failed in their responsibility to compile because they have depended on the register of Ministry of Internal Affairs. They have failed in their powers to maintain the national register and that is a core function of the Electoral Commission. 

Now they are telling us that this is an update. What are you updating? Update from a base that already exists. This cannot be a voter registration update. Rather, it is an exercise that I cannot describe because they have done away completely with the other one. 

Honourable minister, what are you engaged in? It is not compilation, maintenance or registration of voters’ update. We warned you when you were passing the law -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you still on information?

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Mr Speaker, I seek information from hon. Kivumbi. How were they deleted?

MR KATUNTU: No, the Floor is mine. Generals do not behave like sergeants. The Floor is mine. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you a sergeant by any chance? (Laughter)

MR KATUNTU: Actually, a field marshal. As I conclude, the point I am making is that under the law, the Electoral Commission has a register, which it should continuously update by getting those who were not eligible at that time to be added on the roll and those who may have: one, passed on to be deleted and two, those who have changed residences and wish to be changed to other stations to be registered. Actually, those who have changed location are still registered voters but the only change is the polling station.

What the Electoral Commission has done is to actually discard a lawful register and in lieu, adopt another in the guise of compilation. Hon. Otafiire talks about compiling from sources. Can you give me any other source other than the Electoral Commission registering real or prospective voters? By the time that law was enacted, we did not have a national data bank. Therefore, which source was envisaged without this national data bank?

This legal engineering will not help the process. It is a flawed process and what we need are lawful legitimate voters to be properly registered. These deadlines you are giving are going to make matters worse and lead to contests in court yet time is not on our side.

Lastly, and before I resume my seat, during the debate on Clause 40(2), which the Leader of the Opposition is referring to, we had a heated debate here. Mr Speaker, you do remember -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which debate was this, for the record?

MR KATUNTU: The Registration of Citizens and Persons’ Board. Mr Speaker, the Attorney-General came and said, “Do not mind, we are not replacing the voters’ register. The Electoral Commission may” - and they started over emphasising the word ‘may’ – “look at it for purposes of verification. Well, we have this, what is happening on the national data bank….” The Attorney-General said this, the Minister of Internal Affairs said the same and so did the honourable Minister for Karamonja, hon. Janet Museveni. 

Now hon. Otafiire, you are making your colleagues to not look very good and to look like they lied to this House because all of them are on record on the Hansard saying, “No, we are not doing any replacement.” Instead, you have done the opposite of what your colleagues were saying.

Mr Speaker, I think you need to intervene at this point and guide Maj. Gen. Otafiire because we know what we intended in the law. Moreover, I am schooled in this thing, maybe more than the General and we really need to guide him.

MS NALULE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. With due respect to the responses given by the honourable minister, I would like to make a plea that almost all the lists that were returned to the stations are missing out on the names of persons with disabilities. Honourable minister, this is not a rumour. I can give you the telephone numbers of the leaders of persons with disabilities and they can tell you what is happening.

They are saying that when they go to the stations, they are told that they should do something but imagine somebody who is physically disabled and may be a blind person. They are told that they have to move and make good the register. Honourable minister, I can see you are shaking your head but this is a serious –(Interruption).  

MS ASAMO: Thank you, hon. Nalule for giving me space. Mr Speaker, the purported list for persons with disabilities contains able-bodied people. Last week, I went to 12 districts and found that the names of people with disabilities were missing. However, they appear on the general list where they registered for IDs. Some of them have been deleted and they are calling us, as Members of Parliament and we do not know what to answer.

We called Electoral Commission, which said, we should write that down. These people have their old voters’ cards, which are not being recognised at the stations. Just imagine that you crawl there to check on your name and find it missing. I think there is a problem with the register and we need to specifically handle it critically. Thank you.

MS NALULE: Mr Speaker, we really made an effort with hon. Alex Ndeezi to write to the Electoral Commission and we handed the letter to the chairman. Even yesterday, I made an effort to talk to the chairperson and he sounded very tired. He said, “Try to see how you can go about this problem. Maybe advise your colleagues to go back to the centres so that we can make the register good.”

Anyway, I would like to plead with the honourable minister to have affirmative action for persons with disabilities so that - I know it is a constitutional right but what I am saying is that the ministry should do something to ensure that our people are on the register. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, listening to these issues and being informed, I do not know how true it is, that the deadlines for the closing of the verification exercise have been paused. Would you like to get sufficient time to come back to this House to properly guide us on what is happening so that we can agree on a way forward?

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have patiently listened to the concerns of the honourable members but I would like to inform the members that we harmonised our sources of information. The Uganda Registration Services Bureau, the Electoral Commission and the drivers’ licencing have all been united into a single database, which we shall sort out.

If you remember, on the registration form of the ID, there was a voter polling preference so we are sorting out all these. I am going to consult the various departments that are involved in this endeavour and then I will come back to you next week.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, there is the issue of the process ending on Monday and we can only resume this House on Tuesday. What happens? Are you going to do something about this? We do not want to look like we are imposing timelines on the Executive but at the same time we would like you to respect the sentiments of the members.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Mr Speaker, as you know, tomorrow is a public holiday so the only time we can do something sensible is between Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday next week. I promise that given some time, we should come back to you with something meaningful on Thursday.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What happens to the deadline?

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: I am going to talk to the Chairman, Electoral Commission to see how we can extend it and ensure that our people register as necessary. The register is for the convenience of conducting our elections and there is no reason as to why anybody should inconvenience citizens. 

The timelines are put because we would like to cover a cut-off point. You cannot allow people to register ad infinitum. We put a cut-off point, if it is not convenient, we extend it. We are here, we are not going anywhere. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, it clearly turns out that it is not convenient at this moment to have that timeline of Monday. Since you have asked for Tuesday and Wednesday, probably you will come back on Thursday to guide the House on what the processes are and what is going to happen. I would like you to give us a definite position on the deadline of Monday.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: We shall come back to the House on Thursday.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What about the Monday deadline?

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: On that, I will have to discuss with colleagues in the Electoral Commission. I can do it now, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: With a view of having a -

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Yes, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us keep it like this and if there are issues that come by Tuesday, we will come back to this issue again. If there are matters that have changed and there have been no extensions, we can review this matter on Tuesday. Let us leave it at this for now and take the word of the minister that this extension will be secured so that we have a comprehensive report from the minister on Thursday and we can have a debate on this subject.

The understanding is that the deadline will be extended from Monday until an appropriate date. Let us leave the issue of the voters’ register like that. I think it is affecting young people, older people and persons with disabilities. (Hon. Sebuliba Mutumba rose) On this same issue? [Hon. Sebuliba Mutumba, “On the budgetary implication”] That is for them to sort out, that is not for us to go into. 

If there are budgetary implications, the Executive will decide on what to do. As the House, we are not going into that. All we are saying is, when the minister comes back on Thursday, nothing should have happened that has inhibited the process of registration of persons. We do not want to go to those other details that might lead us somewhere else. Can we close this matter here and we expect the minister to act on this and guide us on Thursday next week? Thank you.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE ANTI-TERRORISM (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

3.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I would like to move that the Anti-Terrorism (Amendment) Bill, 2015 be read for the first time. I have got the certificate of financial implications for it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. That Bill stands committed to the appropriate Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs to handle expeditiously. The timeline is known but if they can do it before, that would be better for the House.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

3.32
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kahinda Otafiire): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2015” be read for the first time. I also have the certificate of financial implications. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. In my earlier communication on this matter, I made some guidance and direction to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to handle this matter expeditiously, as soon as we complete the process of the budget, so that we have this debate as soon as practical and we can dispose of this matter because it has been on hold for a long time. Therefore, it is committed to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to handle expeditiously as it is a matter of concern to the public. Procedure from the Leader of the Opposition.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable minister, thank you for finally bringing the amendments, which fall short of what we expected of you.

Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure that before the minister brought the Bill, several stakeholders, including the Inter-Party Organisation for Dialogue (IPOD), the Inter-Party Coordination Forum under the Electoral Commission, Citizens’ Coalition, Free and Fair Organisation who were involved in that schedule and various other stakeholders brought their views to Government officially and formally. They also brought these views to the Speaker. 

All these views have been largely ignored by the government. Is it procedurally right, Mr Speaker, that because the Speaker has never mentioned these petitions, which were brought to the Office of the Speaker about the electoral process, for us to bring those from the Speaker so that they can go to the committee or it should be proper for us as the Opposition to lay our alternatives on Table so that they can both go to the committee?

Either way, we think the citizens’ views should be respected and it is unfortunate that the minister and his Government have totally ignored a process, which has taken four years. People have given their views and he brings something, which is just administrative and not really any serious constitutional issues, which will help us have a free and fair election. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, the Leader of the Opposition. Honourable members, I did, on behalf of the Speaker, receive a delegation from the Opposition with a document, which they called a “compact on the views of the citizens” on what should be contained in the electoral reforms. It was not a petition, it was a presentation of a document that was presented to the Speaker’s Office and we are hoping that there should be a mechanism for having these documents find their way to the committees. I do not know whether it will be by a petition again or by another document being laid.

I need to consult on this and give proper guidance, probably on Tuesday so that we see how to handle all these other issues that have come from the sides to see how it would fit. The presumption was that all the concerns that should have come, should have gone to the Law Reform Commission and should have been processed and forwarded to Cabinet and then brought here.

Therefore, if there are gaps, we should be able to find a mechanism for supplying the gaps so that the whole debate can encompass the whole process. There should be a process but I think, let me consult my team on this then we can have proper guidance on how we are going to handle all these other documents that have been sent to the Speaker.

I also recall that hon. Otada also submitted some documents and so many people have submitted several documents. I have not received the one from Bukoto South unfortunately but I received the one - I think we might need to be properly guided. I do not want to rush into this but give proper guidance on Tuesday and then we see how to incorporate all these other things so that we can see whether it should be brought formally or whether it should go to the committee for discussion. I think let us be advised properly on this then we see how to proceed. We will make this communication on Tuesday.

3.38
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Reading through the Constitutional (Amendment) Bill just tabled, it has far reaching implications touching on the sovereignty of the people and I would imagine that as we have been doing with other Bills, since the object of this Bill is to amend the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, there is no way we can do it in-house. It is pertinent that we do consultation with our electorate and other stakeholders.

Mr Speaker, this House has been yearning for the presentation of this Bill in time, something that was never done and incidentally, we seem to be squeezed on time but at the same time, we cannot keep it to ourselves that we shall sit here and determine such matters of great public importance without the appropriate discussions and consultations. For instance, if -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the point is made without even going to details but this is hardly the time to raise it because what has happened now is that the Bill has been read for the first time and it has been sent to the committee. There should be a process of consultation of course but we cannot say, now the Bill has been sent to the committee and members are also supposed to go - there should be another process that should guide us in terms of when and the necessary support to enable members go and do that. 

That will be communicated later but for now, this is the first reading of the Bill and it has been sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. Your issue will be addressed in the process of how we handle this Bill.

3.40
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You have talked about the Constitutional (Amendment) Bill, 2015 -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I have not talked about it. It has been laid on Table and sent to the committee.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, thank you. Usually during elections, there are some amendments we do, which are in relation to the election process. When is Government also laying the amendments to the Election Act because there are so many fundamental issues, which were raised in the last Parliament and the minister then said, we shall handle it in the next Parliament. Nothing has been talked about this. If we are amending the Constitution, it is okay but there is this one, which deals with elections. When will the minister -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, even without referring it to the minister, once these particular constitutional provisions are amended, they will require implementing legislation that will also require amendments to those laws. Therefore, you do not want to bring separate amendments at separate times to deal with the same law. Once the Constitutional (Amendment) Bill is passed, there will be implication on the electoral laws and that is when those will be done. Just like we did in 2005, the two Constitutional (Amendment) Bills were discussed, finalised and then the electoral laws were brought after that to implement the changes that had happened in the Constitution.

That might be a better way of sequencing it rather than having some little set of amendments on the electoral laws then after the constitutional reforms, you bring another set of amendments. It might not help the process.

3.42
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise guidance. The situation in which we are at the moment will drive us into another cycle. The electoral process has started and we are still talking about amendments, including the enabling law that will touch the core of elections, that is how the Electoral Commission mans the entire election.

Now we are going back to the same cycle where we will have a law like the one on citizenship registration talking about what is compulsory for a citizen then the command comes out later, even before citizens can take charge of that command as enacted by law.

Therefore Mr Speaker, I would request that in a bi-partisan manner in this House, we realise that elections are the core of democracy and if we do not make the playing field as harmonised level and acceptable as possible, then we loom to destroy the democracy of this country. 

I would like to plead with the Minister in charge of the Electoral Commission, Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kahinda Otafiire, to prevail over the Electoral Commission to at least halt the process for about three weeks until we go through these laws effectively and then they can know the budgetary implication of what we are going to do. Assuming this House comes up with a law saying this and that and yet they are advertising that ticking of the ballot papers is done in basins and yet we may say that it is done in rooms, what financial implication will it carry?

In a bi-partisan manner in this House, if we do not guide this country using this platform then we shall destroy elections, which are the key core of democracy. Please, let us come out correctly with sober minds and we come up with the best for our nation by requesting the Electoral Commission to go slow and halt the electoral process because if the referee in a game is doubted, if the rules of the game are not clearly laid down and agreed to by all parties, then the game may not take off. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you. I do take cognisance of the use of the words “sober minds” and I do not take it to mean that sometimes we are not sober. This House is sober all the time. (Laughter) So I take it that it is a figurative and not literal term that you have used and the Hansard readers should not take it literally. Did the minister want to say something about the issue?

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I have listened to the concerns of the honourable members and we are going to take remedial action over their concerns. If necessary, we shall engage with them and then see how to guide the country forward. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you. Honourable members, you will also recall that there is a law in place and there is an institution mandated to implement the law as it is now. We cannot say that they stop because there is a law that they are following so until we change that framework for them, they cannot stop. 

I do not want the minister to be tempted to issue directives to an independent constitutional institution and then bring conflict later. Let us respect them as they are following the law as it is now. Should we make any changes then they have to revert to the law as it has been changed. That is what happened in 2005 when we were changing the Constitution and so many other laws but it never stopped the Electoral Commission from planning based on the law that was in place then.

LAYING OF PAPERS

    A) TREASURY MEMORANDA

I) ON THE REPORT OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE FOR FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2009

3.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay Treasury Memorandum on the Report of the Local Government Accounts Committee for the financial year ended 30 June, 2009.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

II) ON THE REPORT OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE FOR FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2009 (SELECTED MUNICIPALITIES)

3.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay Treasury Memorandum on the Report of the Local Government Accounts Committee for the financial year ended 30 June, 2009 for selected municipalities.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. I thank you. 

III) ON THE REPORT OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE FOR FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2010

3.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay Treasury Memorandum on the Report of the Local Government Accounts Committee for the Financial Year ended 30 June, 2010.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Those Treasury Memoranda stand committed to the Committee on Local Government Accounts. The Treasury Memoranda are questions that were asked by the Auditor-General on which this committee reported to this Parliament and this Parliament took some decisions on those issues and now they are responding to these issues. They are now appropriately referred to the Committee on Local Government Accounts to look through the responses and see whether they are satisfactory and guide us on how to proceed with the outstanding issues, if there are any.

MR SSEKIKUBO: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I note with deep concern that the Treasury Memoranda are for the financial years ending 2009, which is about six years back. As you all aware, this Parliament has, year in, year out, been making reports and coming up with recommendations. Can the government undertake to update the Treasury Memoranda and come up with the latest? I can imagine that if the latest was for the financial year ending 2013, at least we would know that we are in tandem. 

Currently, they are still handling matters recommended by the 8th Parliament and the 9th Parliament is coming to an end without any of its reports being concluded or reported on by Government. I do not think that, that is a serious way of doing business. We would like to be assessed as the 9th Parliament other than being tied to the 8th Parliament without moving forward. I do not think that, that is the best way in matters of public management.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, these are responses to what this House decided on what the Local Government Accounts Committee recommended and passed by this House. You will recall that most of those things were in arrears and so it is not about Government selectively responding to the ones in the past. They are responding to what the House has passed.

If you recall, most of the reports from the Public Accounts Committee and the Local Government Accounts Committee are for this period. For example, if you look at the one that we passed recently, it was relating to 2011 and not even 2013 and yet we just passed it the other week. That is part of the problem as we deal with backlog. Therefore, this is not very untimely.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity. I happened to have been the Chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee from 2006 to 2011. I would like to make it clear that my committee completed the backlog and did its work to the end. If you are talking about backlog, you do not have to talk about PAC during my time. I wanted to make that record clear and this is very clearly stated on the Hansard of 10 May 2011.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. This is the Local Government Accounts Committee and there may be some issues. I was just trying to explain why there may be backward appearance of some of these Treasury Memoranda.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the reason as to why I raised this is because you are talking about the Public Accounts Committee and I happen to have been the chairperson.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. 

MR KATUNTU: First of all, I would like to congratulate Government for coming up with these Treasury Memoranda because in the period under review, I was the Chairperson of the Local Government Accounts Committee. Since that time, many reports have been tabled and debated in this House but we do not have the Treasury Memoranda. I think the point that hon. Ssekikubo was making is that Government should speed up its efforts such that they update their reaction on whether they acted on the recommendations of Parliament regarding the accounts of those committees.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the point is well made. These matters must be as current as possible to the extent that they respond to the latest reports from these accountability committees. I think the point is well made. Thank you.

3.53
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Wafula Oguttu): Mr Speaker, I would also like to appreciate the new spirit of Government of bringing the Treasury Memoranda. I think this is the first time in my four years in Parliament to hear that one has been brought, although there is a law. We should commend you for that and I hope it is going to be the practice from today. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the point is well made. These matters must be as current as possible to the extent that they respond to the latest reports from these accountability committees. I think the point is well made. Thank you.

3.53
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Philip Wafula Oguttu): Mr Speaker, I would also like to appreciate the new spirit of Government of bringing the treasury memoranda. I think this is the first time in my four years in Parliament to hear that one has been brought, although there is a law. We should commend you for that and I hope it is going to be the practice from today. Thank you very much.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE SECOND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN DRAFT FOR APPROVAL BY PARLIAMENT

3.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the second National Development Plan 2015/2016 to 2019/2020 for Parliament’s approval.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It is accordingly committed to the appropriate Committee on Finance to handle expeditiously. As you know, these are the documents that guide the planning for this country. Let the committee look at it and advise the House on how we proceed with this matter within the time frame of what the law says. Thank you.

3.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table an addendum to the ministerial policy statement for Votes 008 and 130 for the financial year 2015/2016.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, is it from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development? Who is implementing the law on Public Finance Management?

MR BAHATI: I just want to emphasise the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What implication does it have on our programme as Parliament? Let the minister help us because these are documents that we should have received long time ago and you told us that by 1st of April, we should have received them. Today is the 30th of April where we should have started approving the reports from the committees and now you are bringing more work at this time when the reports are ready. Where am I going to take this one? Where am I going to send it?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, on the 1st of April, we laid a ministerial statement for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and it had some issues to correct. We wrote to the Clerk in consultation with the Speaker. We found ourselves in that situation and we were advised to write to the Clerk and we did so. This information was channelled to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development and they have been looking at it but we had to formally come and lay it on Table. That is the truth that we have.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson of the committee, is that true? Member for Budadiri West, are you the chairperson?





3.57
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Robert Kasule Ssebunya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is a fact that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development had an addendum on their policy statement because it was brought hurriedly so they had some information missing. If he wants to formally lay it on the Floor of Parliament then he is on the right track.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, thank you very much again. I think any policy statement to be looked at must be one that has been laid before Parliament. The reason is that every Member of Parliament is free to attend any committee. As much as I sympathise with my chairperson, as a member, I have not seen the addendum unless they gave it to the chairman alone. In any case if they brought it, he must also tell us the day they brought it because we respect our chairperson. This is unless they only gave it to him and not us. 

The principle is that a policy statement is an important document, which must be laid in the House and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is the owner of the budget. If it can make a fundamental mistake and we are yet to deal with tax issues, then we are in problems. 

Therefore, I do not think I will accept what my brother, hon. Bahati, said. He was good when he was at the back. Now that he has gone to the front, he has turned very quickly and this is very dangerous.

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a member of the Finance Committee. When the minister came with the addendum, he wanted to persuade the committee to accept it and it becomes our working document but the committee said, no. Since it was not laid on the Table, there was no way we could be persuaded that such a document from the minister or from Finance becomes our working document in the Finance Committee and honestly as a committee, we rejected it.  

Therefore, we have not used it as the minister is saying that we have been using it as the Finance Committee and that he is just formerly laying it here. If he is to lay it here and this House accepts it, then from today, it will go to the committee but we have not used it as the Finance Committee. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We should be very careful about precedents we are about to make that some business gets to the committee without passing through this House. All budgetary business should go through this House and then the House, through the chair, refers it to the committee. Back door reference is very dangerous and it actually offends the rules. 

This is because anybody would start taking business to the committee and it eventually ends up here and many Members who have had the opportunity to read the policy statement do not have that sort of figure. Then we have a problem because of reference made to figures that were laid on Table and referred to the committee and yet the committee has different figures and information. Business does not run that way in a respectable House.

Even if we are to turn a blind eye on this particular one, this House must make this decision now; that, that sort of thing should not happen again. Ministers should never ever run to the Clerk and then they start dealing with the chairman and then other members start disowning documents. They make us look ugly. You are causing a conflict between the chairperson and his own members in a committee that has been working together and bringing reports here because of your inefficiency as a ministry. We will not allow that and I really pray, Mr Speaker, that you actually caution the Executive not to repeat this sort of thing.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members and honourable minister, I think the point is well made. Honourable members, you will recall that ministerial policy statements never used to be laid before Parliament. We would find them in the pigeon holes and there was no record of the dates when they came. That is why I think I was in the chair and I directed that from that period, all ministerial policy statements should be laid on Table so that the date of their receipt is recorded. It became the practice and that has been respected. 

Let us also recognise that the day the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development said they were going to lay the statement, they actually did and that was on 1 April 2015. That is when we received the ministerial policy statement and we are in a transition. 

Therefore, I will take this in the spirit of the transition, which has brought in some difficulties in the way we have been handling business. That is the only spirit under which I create this exception. There shall be no exception again in the way we handle business that goes to the committee because they will create confusion in the future. 

Therefore, understand that this is an exception created because of the difficulty we have had in implementing the transition between the two laws and we will take it in that spirit. Let the records capture that statement and that document stands referred to the appropriate committee. If there are responses that are required from the Opposition, they should be handled in that same spirit. I am hoping that this document does not have significant implications on the whole work that has already been done by the committee. It is so ordered. Thank you.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE BUSINESS LICENSES (MISCELLANEOUS REPEAL) BILL, 2015

4.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I move that the Business Licenses (Miscellaneous Repeal) Bill, 2015 be read for the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the Minister of Local Government. Are you seconding your own Bill, honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development? He is seconding his own motion. Seconders include the Minister of Defence, Minister without Portfolio and the Minister of State for Ethics. Honourable minister, would you like to speak to your motion?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, the Bill seeks to repeal Section 9 of the Rivers Act, Cap 357 in order to abolish the requirements for the steam vessels on rivers to be licensed. 

It also seeks to repeal the Liquor Act, Cap 93 and the Industrial License Act, Cap 97, to amend Section 12 of the Produce Protection Act by repealing the words “Imposing fees”. This Bill was sent to the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Mr Speaker, we are now ready to consider the Bill for reading for the second time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the motion for second reading of the Bill. It has been properly seconded and properly spoken to. As we recall, this matter was referred to this committee. Let us hear from the committee and then we can propose the question for debate on the principles of the Bill.

4.06
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Anthony Okello): Mr Speaker, this is the report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on Business Licenses (Miscellaneous Repeal) Bill, 2015. 

Mr Speaker, the honourable minister has talked about the object of the Bill and I am not going to go into that. Allow me to go straight to the observations and recommendations.

The committee has examined the above proposals and notes as follows: 

Certificate of Incentives

Section 23 of the Investment Code Act provides for Certificate of Incentives to be obtained by any foreign investor who qualifies for incentives under the Act. 

Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to repeal the Certificate of Incentives. The committee was informed that following a policy decision to place tax incentives under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Certificate of Incentives, as provided for under Section 23 of the Investment Code Act, was rendered redundant. 

The committee observed that Government should implement the law as is. It is important that express provisions of the law are not rendered redundant by policy changes.

The legislative framework on incentives should be well defined and predictable to avoid abuse. The committee recommends that the proposal to repeal the requirements for a Certificate of Incentives should be rejected and further recommends that the Investment Code Act should be reviewed as a matter of priority.

Certificate of Remittance

The Bill further seeks to repeal section 10 (6), (7) and (8) of the Investment Code Act, which regulates foreign investment. Sub-section (5) requires a foreign investor involved in trade to:
    a) Incorporate a company with the Registrar-General as it is required by law.
    b) Deposit a sum of $100,000 or its equivalent in Ugandan shillings at the Bank of Uganda, which shall be specifically used for importation or direct purchase of goods for the business. 

Under sub-section (6), upon compliance with sub-section (5), the Bank of Uganda then issues a Certificate of Remittance to the foreign investor. 

Under sub-section (7), a foreign investor who obtains a Certificate of Remittance under sub-section (6) then lodges an application in writing to the Immigration Department, which shall contain the Certificate of Remittance and other information that may be required by the department.

Under sub-section (8), it is upon receipt of a Certificate of Remittance and the immigration law that the Department of Immigration issues an entry permit to the foreign investor.

The minister submitted that the Certificate of Remittance is currently redundant and serves no purpose in a liberalised economy and therefore proposes that the above sub-sections 10 (6), (7) and (8) of the Investment Code Act be repealed.

However, the committee notes as follows:
    a) Repealing the requirement for Certificate of Remittance is tantamount to encouraging briefcase foreign investors in the country. This issuance of a certificate is proof that the $100,000 has been deposited with the Bank of Uganda.
    b) While there may be interpretation problems arising out of the certificate being a prerequisite for obtaining an entry permit that fact is not justification enough to render redundant a requirement to deposit $100,000 before an investor is allowed to invest in Uganda. 

The committee therefore recommends that the proposal to delete this section be rejected and further recommends that the Investment Code Act should be reviewed as a matter of priority.

Certificate of Approval to Externalise Funds
Sections 31 and 32 of the Investment Code Act provide for a Certificate of Approval to Externalise Funds. The minister submitted that this certificate is currently redundant and serves no regulatory purpose. 

However, the committee notes that currently, foreign investors can obtain foreign exchange and make transfers at commercial banks without approval from the Bank of Uganda in order to repatriate profits and dividends and make payments for imports and services. 

However, under sections 31 and 32 of the Investment Code Act, where the foreign investor benefits from incentives granted under the Investment Code Act, repatriation is only upon authorisation given under the Certificate of Approval to Externalise Funds. 

The committee observes that it should be a requirement for any foreign investor who benefits from incentives granted under the investment code, to obtain authorisation given under the Certificate of Approval to Externalise Funds before the investor can externalise (repatriate) any funds. This will help us curb capital flight out of Uganda. 

The committee recommends that the requirement for a Certificate of Approval to Externalise Funds should be maintained and subsequently amends the Schedule to delete the second row, columns one and two, reference to the Investment Code Act, Cap 92.

Licenses under the Liquor Act, Cap 93

The Schedule to the Bill seeks to repeal the Liquor Act, Cap 93, which regulates the manufacture and sale of intoxicating liquor. The justification given by the minister is to the effect that the provisions on liquor licenses, as provided for under the Act, are not enforced and are out-dated. 

Secondly, that the regulatory aspect relating to liquor can be dealt with under other laws regulating product quality, traffic and road safety regulations, trade licenses and child protection provisions. 

The committee observes that there is need to review the Liquor Act to ensure effective regulation of the liquor industry in Uganda. 

The committee recommends that:
    1. The proposal to repeal the Liquor Act be rejected.
    2. Government should introduce amendments to the Act to bring it in line with the current regulatory framework in the liquor industry.

Industrial License
The Industrial Licence Act, Cap 97 regulates the establishment of industries through issuance of licenses. Section 5 requires anyone who erects, establishes, or operates any factory for the manufacture or for sale of any such scheduled article, to obtain a license from the Industrial Licensing Board established under the Act. 

The minister stated that this creates overlap with other licenses that regulate processing and manufacturing establishments and therefore under the Schedule to the Bill, proposes to repeal the Industrial Licensing Act, Cap 97.

However, the committee notes that there is need to integrate all licensing centres and the repeal of the Industrial Licensing Act, Cap 97 is not the solution. There is need for a more holistic review of licensing in the industrial sector. 

Probationary Society Regulation

Sections 6, 7 and 8 of the Cooperative Societies Act provides for probationary registration of cooperatives. The committee observes that cooperatives should be awarded full registration once they satisfy the requirements of the law. A study of the Law Reform Commission recommended the adoption of formation committees to assist prospective cooperatives evaluate their viability for registration and improve their capacity to qualify for registration. 

The committee supports the proposal to abolish the requirements for probationary registration of cooperative societies by repealing sections 6, 7 and 8 of the Cooperative Societies Act, Cap 112. 

It further recommends that Government should embark on a complete review of the Cooperative Societies Act so as to bring this in line with the evolved world of cooperatives. 

Investment of funds approval

Section 45 of the Cooperative Societies Act provides that a registered society may invest or deposit its funds only;

    a) In a registered cooperative bank.
    b) In any registered society, company, or statutory corporation approved in writing by the registrar.
    c) In any bank or financial institution incorporated in Uganda. 
    d) In and upon such investment and securities as are by the law allowed for the investment of trust funds.
    e) In such other modes as specified by the by-laws of the society and approved by the registrar.

Some of the provisions in section 45 with regard to where cooperatives are permitted to invest or deposit funds are out of date. Cooperatives should be able to make their own investment decisions.

The committee supports the proposal to repeal section 45 of the Cooperatives Societies Act, Cap 112. 

Contributory Provident Funds Approval

Section 47(4) of the Cooperatives Societies Act provides for a Contributory Provident Fund approval. However, the committee observed that retirement benefits are governed by other laws such as the Retirement Benefits Regulatory Authority Act. It is also important to note that Government is moving towards the liberalisation of the retirement benefits sector, which emphasises freedom of choice. Therefore, it is not necessary to give the registrar oversight over retirement benefits of employees of cooperatives.

The committee supports the proposal to repeal section 47(4) of the Cooperatives Societies Act, Cap 112.

Angling License

Section 11 (2) and (3) of the Fish Act, Cap 197 provides for the requirement of an Angling License for non-citizens. However, this license is idle and is currently not being issued. 

The committee notes that currently, the Fisheries Department issues a recreational license, which covers the activity this license seeks to regulate. 

The committee supports the repeal of the Angling License by repealing Section 11 (2) and (3) of the Fish Act, Cap 197.

Requirement to export hides and skins in specified manner and place
Section 3 of the Hides and Skins (Export Duty) Act, Cap 339 prohibits exporting hides and skins from Uganda except by rail from Kampala and Mbale or through exporting centres appointed under Section 7 of the Hides and Skins Trade Act. 

The committee notes that the objective of the requirement to export, in any manner or place, was to regulate trade by controlling the region of origin of the hides and skins because each region has different kinds of animals. Three hides and skins regions were recognised; Kampala, Mbarara and Northern Region of Uganda. 

However, with liberalisation of the economy, export centres are no longer in existence. Businesses may export from any region, which renders this license redundant.

The railway is also no longer the only means of transporting hides and skins. Therefore reference to it as the only acceptable means of transporting hides for the Export Section 3 of the Hides and Skins (Export Duty) Act is out of date. 

The committee supports the abolition of the requirement to export hides and skins in a specified manner and place by repealing section 3 of the Hides and Skins (Export Duty) Act.

Statutory Declaration of Compliance with incorporation requirement

Section 22 (2) requires a statutory declaration by an advocate, director, or secretary to the effect that all requirements for registration of a company have been complied with. 

The committee notes that this requirement adds an unnecessary procedure and cost to incorporating a company of compliance with all requirements as all requirements are checked by the registrar upon submission of registration documents. 

The committee supports the proposal to repeal section 22(2) of the Companies Act, 2012. 

In conclusion, the committee recommends that the Business Licences (Miscellaneous Repeal) Bill, 2015 be passed subject to the proposed amendment. I beg to report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

MR OKELLO: Before I sit down, Mr Speaker, allow me to lay on Table the report of the committee; the original copies, the minutes of the committee meetings and the original copy of the Bill. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill was already laid before the House. That is why you had to handle it. So we do not need to lay it again. 
So, let the records capture the minutes and a complete report of the committee. Thank you. 

Honourable members, I now propose the question for your debate, on the motion that the Bill entitled, “The Business Licenses (Miscellaneous Repeal) Bill, 2015” be read the second time. That is the motion for you debate on the principles of the Bill. Debate starts now.

4.23
MS JOY ATIM ONGOM (IND, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As the Chairman was reading this Bill, I realised that most of these have laws in existence but the biggest problem is implementation. It seems the minister just wants to repeal these laws because of lack of implementation.I do not know whether if we repeal these or amend, some of them will be implemented.  

A case in point, Mr Speaker, is point 2.2 about the certificate of remittance where the Bill seeks to repeal Section 10 (6), (7) and (8) of the Investment Code where it requires a foreign investor, who wants to do trade to incorporate his company at the Registrar General’s office. It is a requirement but in Uganda, you will realise that the investor comes and starts business without registering with the registrar of companies. This is really unfortunate for this country. I feel we should not repeal this law. It should be there for us to trace who the investor is, what they are investing in this country, what profit we are getting from that investor, as a country, instead of somebody being there and we do not know the record of such a person.

Above all, this deposit of $100,000 is realistic. Here somebody comes as a house help and when he reaches this country, he becomes an investor competing with local Ugandans in selling Mandazi. This is unrealistic. Let them deposit that $100,000 for us to know they are really competent to invest in this country and employ our Ugandans in those businesses.

So, we are saying - the committee has requested us not to accept this. But I would like to urge members that we leave this fee to remain as it is and if anything we should even increase this fee of $100,000 for us to assess if they are really investors and have not come to Uganda to grab our land but to help create employment for our unemployed Ugandans.

If you check 2.3 on the certificate of approval of externalization of funds - sincerely our Ugandans are working abroad and there are really tight conditions for them; very tight conditions for them to bring the resources back to this country. We need the monies; it is an investment in this country but conditions are too tough. For Uganda, the conditions are just relaxed. Somebody goes to change the money in a commercial bank and it goes out of this country. We are sincerely losing. It is better for it to pass through Bank of Uganda so that we know how much is being repatriated and how much we are benefitting as a country. This will help Uganda in planning. I think this is food for thought for the Minister of State for Planning. How much are we taking outside Uganda and how much are we benefitting? We feel this law should remain and only put to trust these people. Government too should employ – we have employed people to work - the implementers should really work. Why should money be changed from commercial banks without it going through the Bank of Uganda? This is cheating the country. Thank you so much.

4.28
MR PETER OKEYOH (NRM, Bukooli Islands County, Namayingo): Thank you, very much Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Chairman for the report. I would like to support the report that is repealing the annual fishing license. 

The fishermen are undergoing a lot of taxation. So, adding on the annual fishing license would be an extra burden. The fishermen, on every litre of fuel they use, they pay a tax. That is why I am saying introducing this annual license will be an extra burden for them and yet Government invests very little in these people.

I also would like to support the Chairman on the laws regarding the liquor. We all go to our constituencies and see the burden of having this liquor sold in small sachets. It has destroyed our nation and our people. Therefore, I would like to support the committee’s position for need to look at the old laws and amend them to protect our youths.

Further, I also support the idea of putting stringent measures on investors. We have opened our doors and gates to foreign investors and you find that any Dick and Harry can come to Uganda, under the pretext of being investors but in the following week, they open up supermarkets next to a Ugandan owned one competing with our people. So, I think having a strict law that will protect our people and we should maintain a threshold for a person to be called an investor in Uganda. 

When you go to the Directorate of Immigration at the Ministry of Internal Affairs, you realise that the people there are really burdened. They are told to clear so and so claiming they are investors. They are pressurized to clear even briefcase investors. I think enough is enough. Although we are interested in having investors, there is need to have meaningful investors to bring meaningful investments that will help us in the development of our country. I support the report. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.30
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee and the committee, for the report they have presented. I would like to agree with the committee on probation cooperative society regulations or registration. Cooperative societies are becoming very big and enterprising entities in promoting business. Therefore, before any cooperative society is registered, it should fulfil all the requirements. For that purpose, there would be no need to think that they should first be registered on probation basis and later on be allowed to register fully. That is why I would like to support the committee on this position. 

As for the investment of funds, in other parts of the world, for example in Kenya, which is a partner state in the East African Community, it is now the cooperative societies that are doing business on behalf of members. You buy a truck and hand it over to a cooperative society and they will run the business and only pay you. This is because they are able to invest in any business there.

So, to make these cooperatives enterprising and to make them beneficial to the people, it is good for us to repeal this law. This will help cooperatives to invest on behalf of their members. 
I also agree with the committee on the fact that the Cooperatives Act be amended so that cooperatives are free to invest anywhere and in any business they feel is beneficial for their members.

On liquor, I think the only problem in this country is enforcing the law relating to it. Otherwise to leave people free to take any kind of liquor and get drunk at any time and to produce any kind of local liquor would be very dangerous to this country.

So to say that we repeal this law - I think the minister was only being lazy in enforcing this law and ensuring that there is order on drinking local liquor. I therefore strongly support the committee on its position. 

Mr Speaker, I do not know whether we don’t want to control how our funds or the money made here - the foreign currency gets out of the country - to say, “Let us not control it.” Anybody can externalise funds without control, knowing very well, as the committee has proposed, anybody can walk in to the bank - unlike in other countries where if you want to buy foreign currency, you are told to first produce your identity card and passport, regardless of whether you are a citizen or a foreigner.

However, in Uganda, when one gets to any foreign exchange bureau, they just present the cash, whether it is in local shillings or dollars and they are given cash without asking who they are, what they are doing here and where they want to take it. Nobody cares about the amount of money one wants to exchange.

I think we need to retain this law for us to know how much money - we have even passed a law requiring a certain amount of money one is supposed to carry in cash when they are moving out of the country or coming in. People are supposed to be clear about the purpose of the money and what they are going to do with the money.

So, for one to think that because they are coming to invest in the country they cannot follow certain procedures is wrong. It will be only in Uganda where a person will walk in and try to invest even when they do not have money and even walk or even dupe Government into some business. In some cases people have come in here as investors, entered contracts with Government, got some advances from Government but they do not have money. 

Just in Namanve Industrial Park, there are people who came here as investors, they got plots but they cannot develop them because they do not have cash to do that. So, I support the committee that an investor must deposit a certain amount of money so that they can be seen as very serious investors. I therefore support that this Bill be passed with amendments as proposed by the committee. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, can I put the question to the motion for second reading then we go and deal with the proposals for the details of what we need to change and what we do not need to change? Please let us go to the next stage to deal with the provisions as they are now; principles of the Bill - you will say something when are dealing with the actuals. 

I put the question to the motion that the Bill entitled, “The Business Licenses (Miscellaneous Repeal) Bill, 2015,” be read for the second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 1 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3

MR OKELLO: Thank you so much, Mr Chair. In clause 3, on the schedule, we propose the deletion of the second row, columns one and two in reference to the Investment Code Act, Cap 92.

The justification is that it should be a requirement for any foreign investor, who benefits from incentives granted under the Investment Code, to obtain authorisation given under the certificate of approval to externalise funds, before the investor can authorize or repatriate any funds. This will help to curb on capital flight out of Uganda and the certificates provided by the above section are still relevant.
We also propose for the deletion, in the third row, columns one and two in reference to the Liquor Act, Cap 93.  The justification is that there is need for a specific legislation regulating the manufacture and sale of liquor. A repeal of the Act is not a solution.

We further propose for deletion the fourth row, columns one and two in reference to the Industrial Licensing Act, Cap 112. The justification is that there is need to integrate the licensing centres and the repeal of the Industrial Licensing Act, Cap 97 is not a solution. There is need for a more holistic review of the licensing in the industrial sector. I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable Members, those are the proposals from the committee. The committee is proposing that in the schedule - there is one schedule - the Investment Code Act should not be tampered with, the Liquor Act should not be tampered with and the Industrial Licensing Act should also not be tampered with. The rest we can amend. Maybe the minister can say something on these proposals from the committee before I take any discussions that are outstanding?

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. On the second row about the Investment Code Act - in 1996, we repealed Section 25 of the Investment Code Act, which allowed grant of tax holidays to an investor as now referenced in Section 163 of the Income Tax (Amendment) Act. 
Therefore, certificates of incentives issued under the Investment Code became redundant because we are no longer giving the tax holidays. That is why we are proposing that these be repealed because they no longer apply. We repealed it in the Income Tax (Amendment) Act.

On the liquor, I agree with the committee that actually we need to improve it. But on the Industrial Licensing Act, this has also been redundant for many years as its purpose was suspended by other laws regulating, processing and manufacturing establishment. So, on these two, I have some reservations in terms of repealing them –(Interruption)

MR EBIL: Of recent, the Minister of Finance was meeting the miners and oil companies and he talked of giving tax holidays to them. I do not know, if we repealed it in 1996, why is the minister granting tax holidays to the companies involved in the oil business?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, you have only spoken in relation to certificate of incentives. You have not talked about certificate of remittance and certificate of approval of externalised funds. These are still under the same law, the Investment Code Act. Do you want to guide the House on what the position is?

MR BAHATI: It is extremely difficult to implement a requirement that an investor deposits $100,000 if you are going to transfer because we are running a liberalized economy. We must accept that. While we can capture especially when an investor comes in; we put a requirement for how much you can invest to be qualified as a foreign investor, to require that somebody deposits money before you transfer it, is extremely difficult in a liberalized economy and it is not going to be implemented.

However, when somebody is coming to invest - yes we can do that but if somebody is taking away the money to deposit a certain amount of money is extremely difficult to enforce.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let us have the minister of defence.

DR KIYONGA: Mr Chairman and honourable colleagues, just to add on what hon. David Bahati has said, we are having very deep discussions in Cabinet over this issue of the Investment Code and I think we are going to amend it fundamentally. Therefore, I think we need some guidance, Mr Chairman, on what to do. This is because when we finish discussing the Investment Code, things will change, for example the references, sections and so on. If now we delete this and save that, when we eventually finish, things may not harmonise.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Then why don’t you withdraw it? Save us time.

MR KIYONGA: I do not know if I have understood, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What I am saying is: if that is the position, then they can as well withdraw this amendment and we wait, instead of -

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, it is true we are considering the Investment Code (Amendment) Bill and some of these issues are in there, but we also had this Bill before us. To be smarter and a bit professional, we concede that we can withdraw this specific amendment on the Investment Code and then come back with the main Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In other words, we delete it from this schedule? Honourable members, we are deleting the one on investment so that it is not in the schedule. The Investment Code will remain as it is for now until a more comprehensive proposal for amendments is brought. I put the question to the deletion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can you respond on the liquor issues. Did you agree that the liquor provision is deleted from the Bill?

Honourable members, the committee has proposed deletion of the Liquor Act from this schedule and the minister has also agreed that it should be deleted. Can I put the question to that deletion? I put the question that the Liquor Act, Cap 93, appearing in the schedule of the Bill be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now you need to address the Industrial Licensing Act because that is where the objections were.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, the Industrial Licensing Act requires anyone who erects, establishes or operates any factory for the manufacture for sale of any such scheduled articles to first obtain a licence from the board. This creates an overlap with other licences that regulate the processing and manufacturing establishments.

We have some reservations about deleting this from the issue. We think that this should be repealed because it has been redundant for many years as its purpose was superseded by the other laws regulating processing and manufacturing establishments.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Do you have a list of these other laws? You need to persuade the House so that we can take this position. You can consult on the issue of which laws regulate this while we take other views.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, very much, Mr Chairman. First of all, I would like to thank the Minister of Finance for the amendment he is trying to bring, which will ensure that businesses can be run very well. If businesses run very well, then the owners can make money and the country will develop. That is why some of the amendments were agreeable, for example my colleague talked about the cooperatives. They are trying to handle that part that deals with business; they are not handling the entire law as such. They are dealing with the parts the issues that are hindering business as we move. 

The Industrial Licensing Act is basically for industries. With industries you must have a good building and things that determine what you are going to manufacture or process. That is why there is a law specifically to make sure that you meet those standards, so that you are able to get a licence in that area. When you get that licence, I am sure there is no hindrance in the law that will prevent that business from operating and which would cause the minister to want it to be repealed. 

In the current state, unless there is reason that maybe there is a law which we made that would change “industrial” to “manufacturing”, then we can go by that. However, since there is no law saying we are changing “industrial” to “manufacturing” or to another name, we cannot amend. I think the committee was right to say that we cannot repeal this unless there is a specific law which deals with industries. 
MS ATIM ONGOM: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I seem not to understand but I feel that such a law would help. If we repeal it, then I do not know which law would come up to help in this case. Anybody can fulfil the requirements of the construction of a factory and maybe erect it very well but in a place not fit for it. Somebody can construct a factory in a residential area. Where somebody has already met the requirements of an impact assessment and others, they can erect a factory where it is not supposed to be.

There is, therefore, a high need for this law so that anybody who wishes to construct a factory or manufacturing plant does it in a specific place where it is supposed to be located. If it is in a residential area, you may be infringing on the rights of other people. So, let this law stand. I support the committee’s position. Thank you.

MR AYOO: Mr Chairman, I would like to know from the minister as we repeal the Industrial Licensing Act – Normally, it is after you have brought a new law in place that you would ask for the other law to be repealed. When we repeal this one, what are we going to rely on? I thought the minister would help us understand if there is anything better than this, so that we can move faster. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, can you guide us further on this matter or we move to take it out of the Bill?

MR BAHATI: The point we are making, Mr Chairman, is that this licensing requirements have been decentralised. If you want something to do with environment, it is now under NEMA. For something to do with land, it is now under lands. We are trying to remove from the law things which are redundant. It is not fatal but we think it is a smarter way of doing things and the House can make a decision.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The purpose of the industrial licence is to regulate the establishment of industries. As you are aware, the industrial licensing board is supposed to ensure quality assurance whenever anybody is coming to establish an industry. They are also supposed to ensure that there is compliance with the processes that are required in establishing an industry. 

Somebody asked during a committee meeting, what would happen if an investor comes to establish an industry within a residential area, because there is nobody to ensure that procedures are rightly followed? The information that came to the committee is what we have reflected here. There was an issue of creating an overlap with other licenses that exist. However, this is just a flat statement; what the committee had wanted were details. 

If the minister wanted to help the committee, he should have given us details of the legal provisions that regulate the establishment of industries other than the industrial licensing law, and then the committee would consider its position. That is why the committee recommended that - (Interjection) - Let me finish. The recommendation of the committee is not in bad spirit. The committee is saying that we integrate. If it is true the minister is saying there are other licences to regulate the industrial establishment, the committee is saying let us integrate all of them and then we see how to move forward in another proposal that could probably come from the ministry.

Therefore, Mr Chairman, I believe that the position of the committee is the right way to go. We should delete the Industrial Licensing Act, Cap 97, from the schedule that has been presented here.

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. What the chairman of the committee is trying to emphasise is something that is non-existent. When they decentralised these licences, if you are going to get a licence for setting up an industry, for example, for something to do with environment, you go to NEMA; for standards, you go to Uganda Bureau of Standards; and for registration, you go to Uganda Registration Services Bureau. There is nothing like an industrial board now in existence. Therefore, if you say that it should be maintained, it is wrong because we cannot maintain something that is not there.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am wondering as to why we are saying it is not necessary and that it has been redundant.  Why are we removing it after all, if it is not causing any impact? What do we intend to cure if it has not been a problem? Should we be here at all discussing that?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think we might not have to do a law revision at this time. If it is about putting provisions that are similar, that we might have to leave to the law revision committee when it is updating the laws, and you can point this out to them. If it is not contradicting anything, why should we- For the avoidance of doubt, should any situation arise where there is a gap somewhere, will this not be something to fall back on?

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, I think the position of the committee is not necessarily superior to ours but it is right. We can consider and move forward. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You do not take defeat very gracefully. (Laughter) Honourable members, the proposal now is that the reference to the Industrial Licensing Act, Cap 97, be deleted from the schedule of the Bill. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, as the minister brought amendments to make business better, in that same light I am looking at the Cooperative Societies Act - Sections 6, 7, 8, 45, 47(4) and there are some others that deal with business. If you left them, you will have done nothing for the cooperative societies. 

There is supervision and inspection of affairs, for example. Here, you have left all the powers with the registrar of the cooperative societies and yet you have said that cooperative societies should operate as corporate bodies. As a corporate body, if there is anything that comes up, you go to court. However, here you have left the registrar to have powers to come in at any time to seize cash and books of a primary society, to close and appoint somebody to be a caretaker manager without questioning, and so he becomes a board chairman, AGM and whatever. I say this based on the experience of Bugisu Cooperative Union where the registrar was in office for more than four years. He took everything and this has cost the farmers and Government. This was as a result of the operation because nobody oversaw it.

Mr Chairman, you are aware that if a company has a problem, it goes to the courts of law. The courts will deal with that matter by maybe saying, “we appoint an auditor and you will take care of the charges; we give an order to stop such operations”. However, here is an individual, without a court order or anything, making cooperative societies close. That is why all unions and primary societies have gone down, because one single person can even pick money and make the entity close. 

Therefore, Mr Chairman, I want to move an amendment, which I have already talked to the minister about and he is agreeable to it; he said he wants these businesses to move. I would like to add to this list 51 and 52. The justification is: to allow cooperative societies to work effectively. If there is any dispute, they are free to go to courts of law to settle their matters. This will improve business.

Mr Chairman, one of the worst things as to why cooperative societies are collapsing -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, I think the point has been made but now we have to process it properly. This matter was not brought to the committee and, therefore, we need to have concurrence on it properly, so that we know that we are not making any mistakes. It was never debated at the committee level; was it? If it was not, what I am saying is that it is a legitimate point but can we process it properly and then we see.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, you know we have been in a hurry; it was brought but they said that since the report had been written already, we would deal with it at the committee stage. I am sure members of the committee are here and my chairman is there together with the Minister of Finance and they can agree with me.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Chairman of the committee, there is this proposal for the deletion of sections 51 and 52 of the Act.

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, he brought it to the committee but he came today and we told him that he was a bit late and that we had not internalised it. We then told him to bring it up on the Floor as a clause for the whole House to consider. We did not make a decision on it and that is why he is bringing it here.

MR AYOO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. While in one of the meetings of the Committee on East African Community Affairs, we were told that a Bill is being prepared to review the overall operations of cooperative societies in the country and streamline them. So I do not know if the minister is not aware of that; we may take a decision in an amendment and repeal some laws but tomorrow the same thing appears in the main Bill on cooperatives. Maybe we could get clarification on that so that we can take an informed decision.

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I agree with hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s submission. This single person in the Ministry of Trade who oversees the operations of cooperative societies has actually caused problems in these cooperative societies. 

Recently, there was a general meeting in my constituency. When the representative of the registrar saw that the person going to become the chairman was not his friend, he proposed that they make amendments in their bylaws for them to look at other people to be vetted for becoming chairpersons. People were already in the house ready to vote! Therefore, I agree with hon. Nandala-Mafabi that that amendment be brought so that the operations of these cooperative societies are properly managed.

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. When you critically look at Section 45 of the Cooperatives Act and you relate it to sections 51 and 52, they have a direct and inverse relationship and all of them – (Interjection) – Yes, they move together; they have that inverse relationship. All of them have also become out-dated, especially with the implementation of the SAPs, the privatisation and liberalisation of the economy, which the minister is fully aware of. If we are to leave the cooperatives to be free and transact their businesses, in the wisdom in which you brought section 45, then sections 51 and 52 should closely move together. I therefore second and support hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s suggestion that we include these two because now, the economy is very open and cooperatives need to move on. 

Also, as hon. Michael Mawanda has also submitted, if the registrar has interest in a particular cooperative society, even if just one member out of the 1,000 members of the cooperative society raised a concern, the registrar will come in, suspend management and everybody in the cooperative society and he will eventually take over. You cannot rule out the possibility of the registrar having individual interests in a particular cooperative society.

Mr Chairman, if the cooperatives are to operate freely and move on, I kindly request and beg members in the House to support us on this amendment that 51 and 52 move together with 45. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, when matters come like this to the House and they have not gone to the committee, where issues are discussed and stakeholders participate, it becomes a bit complicated and that is why I would like to exhaust this.

Honourable minister, is what the member for Kwania said about the review of the whole cooperative law true? If it is true, are we curing anything if a review is coming? Can you help us on this? If there is a review, how soon is it likely to come? 

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairperson, it is true that there is a review of the law guiding the cooperatives. This institution of the registrar has some weaknesses but it also has some strengths, which include having somebody who oversees the cooperatives, which is very important.

As an institution, I think that as you have said, this amendment has just come to the Floor of the House and we have not really consulted to know the impact that it will have. So, it will be very difficult to accept this. I would rather propose that we can actually move with this one that we have. Since the review of the law guiding the cooperatives is coming soon, we can substantially dip into that law and make some substantial amendments. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, you cannot have your cake and eat it. If there is a review, then you withdraw entire proposals so that there is no tingling with the Cooperative Societies Act at this time. You can then come with a comprehensive proposal that covers all these issues and it is debated properly, instead of proposing piecemeal when there is a review coming, just like we did with the investment code.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, instead of making a decision on something that we have not consulted on and knowing that there is a review coming, I oblige to withdraw and we move forward.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposal now is that we should not deal with the Cooperative Societies Act at this stage since a review is coming so that when it comes in a comprehensive way, we handle this at this stage. 

The proposal is that we delete reference to the Cooperative Societies Act, Cap 112, from the Bill so that we deal with it comprehensively in the review.

MS ALUM: I thank you. I think the House has seen the merits of the proposal of hon. Nandala-Mafabi and the minister also says there is a review coming. However, we have not been told when the review is coming. It may even go to the next Parliament. So how do we now deal with this problem where we are faced with this and we have been provided with these options as suggested by hon. Nandala-Mafabi? I think there is a need for timelines so that the minister tells us when this proposal is coming before the House so that we are comfortable.

MR BAHATI: The status of the law is that it is now in Cabinet and we undertake to process it so that it comes here in the month of May.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Was the member for Kwania saying that a decision has been taken at the East African Community level?

MR AYOO: We were only considering proposals to amend the cooperatives Act to improve on our cooperatives so that they can engage in business across the region. Cooperative societies from Kenya are planning to come and flood Uganda because we have stifled ours. We only can borrow from banks and we cannot invest and yet there are opportunities. So after realising that Cabinet was also considering amendments, that is when I raised the issue about that process. How do we do piecemeal legislations here when we are expecting a bigger review of the entire law? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So it is already in Cabinet. 

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, for us to move forward, I would request hon. Nandala-Mafabi to concede on his proposal to amend further and then we deal with this to solve the problem within the cooperatives. At least they agree that this solves the problem within the cooperatives; we can wait for a bigger review to include his proposal. I beg to move.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Under the Constitution of Uganda, Article 29 is about the protection of freedom of expression, movement, religious affiliation, to mention a few. Clause 1 (e) says, “freedom of association, which shall include the freedom to form and join associations or trade unions…” This means that people are free to associate. When I register a company to do business, the Registrar of Companies only stops at registering or deregistering that company. If there is an issue, we go to court. 

With the cooperatives, this law was good as long as there was monopoly. What happened the day we ceased monopoly in Uganda? You are trading in coffee but as a co-operator, your hands are tied and the other person who is also trading in coffee - that is why we have poor quality coffee - is free to do anything in the business. This is because he has registered his company under the Companies Act. So, it is like playing football with hands tied and you are expected to win. You want to remove poverty from Uganda but you are playing like that.

In that regard, when the minister brought these proposals, I thought his interest was to improve business for the cooperatives. If that was his motive, he would have gone further to look at what we have raised. The registrar, as my brother, hon. Michael Mawanda, has said, can close a meeting or refuse to allow a meeting to take place at his will. 

I can give you an example on that. Bugisu Cooperative Union had no annual general meetings for four years and so the registrar became the annual general meeting, the board and everything. This brought disaster and yet we are here in Parliament advocating for cooperatives to help is move out of poverty. Incidentally, it is only the cooperatives that will take away poverty from the people of Uganda.

So in that regard, the minister either agrees with this or we stay this and we go to the committee – (Interjection) - I will take the information.

MR TAYEBWA: Mr Chairman, I am a member of the finance committee. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi brought this information to the committee and we agreed in the committee that it was a nice suggestion but we had already concluded with our report. We therefore advised him to bring his ideas to the Floor of Parliament and if the House agrees that we take up his suggestion, we would take it on.

I would like to, therefore, suggest that we include his suggestion in the committee report other than again returning to the committee level. This is because we had already received this information at committee level and we agreed but we had already concluded writing the report. I thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The reason as to why I am raising this is because section 51 says that any officer, agent, servant or member of a registered society who is required by registrar, or any persons authorised in writing by the registrar to do so shall at any time, at any place produce all money, securities, books. Supposing I produce these documents at night and they take them, what happens? You will go to prison.

Section 52 also says that the registrar can cause to suspend the chief executive officer or officers and immediately appoint a caretaker manager. There is no time limit for a caretaker manager and there are no functions. The caretaker manager can come and stay there for five or ten years and we are talking about cooperatives.

Mr Chairman, either the minister agrees or the chairperson agrees that we go back to the committee.  If it is possible, we can amend this. I know many Members belong to SAACOs and their villages have SACCOs. The reason SACCOs are having problems - In fact, Mr Chairman, there is a conflict between cooperatives and Ministry of Finance on SAACOs. The SAACOs argue that since they operate as financial institutions they have to be under Ministry of Finance but cooperatives argue that the SAACOs are cooperatives and so they should be under the Ministry of Trade. That is why there is a struggle and it is the reason that law may never come here. 

I have been dealing with cooperatives and I know what I am talking about. I can tell you that if we do not help these poor people at home, then we are finished. 

MR EBIL: Mr Chairman, I think my honourable colleague had very good ideas but he should have written a minority report. What I see now –(Interruptions)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I rarely stand to raise points of order in respect of my colleagues like hon. Fred Ebil. However, today I have to because I think he does not know what we are going through. 

I was at the committee and hon. Odoo Tayebwa has said it. I raised this matter and we talked to finance, but they have betrayed us. We know how we shall deal with them at an appropriate time. The committee allowed me to bring this matter to the Committee of the whole House to deal with it, only to come here and be abandoned by our chairman. I see my brother, Fred Ebil, raising a point of order against me, but is it in order for him to say that I should have written a minority report when I already agreed with my chairman, though he has since turned against me, to present this matter here?  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, a minority report is based on a decision taken by the committee to which a minority group has a different opinion. There was no basis for the Member for Budadiri West to have raised a minority report because there is no majority report on this issue.

MS NTABAZI: Thank you so much, Mr Chairman. The reason hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s issue came to this House is because they did not reach a consensus on it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is not true.

MS NTABAZI: The agreement, which they reached, was that they bring this issue before the House.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The information that is on the record of this House is that he brought those issues but they had already finished the report. There was no time. So, let us proceed with it that way instead of amending it without leave of the Speaker.

MS NTABAZI: Thank you for your guidance. I still want to know from the minister, if we included what hon. Nandala-Mafabi is proposing, would we lose anything?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, you have created this institution of a monster in a competitive world. That is the point being made by the honourable Member for Budadiri West, who possibly was a victim of this monster.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, hon. Nandala-Mafabi knows the advantages of being a cooperative society over a limited company. They are different and distinct. If there was no difference, then we would not even be talking about cooperative societies. The spirit is different. A cooperative society has some benefits that you can get and even Government can come in. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi knows about the Bugisu Cooperative Society and how we are trying now to help it.

I think the proposals from the hon. Nandala-Mafabi are valid but they can only be handled well if we review the entire cooperative societies’ law. Therefore, I beg the House that I withdraw this section of the amendment and we proceed with others, so that when we come in May with the Cooperative Societies (Amendment) Bill then we will be able to handle that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, it might be a better way of dealing with this so that it is comprehensively handled just like the Investment Code, instead of dealing with one bit then you come back.

Can I put the question to this proposal to withdraw? I put the question that the reference to the Cooperative Societies Act, Cap 112, be deleted from the schedule.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, given the fact that now every law is being withdrawn, unless the law is about public finance, I think we may have to review all the laws. The Fishing Act - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There may be other issues but they were not pointed out by the committee. So, we cannot begin anticipating those that have not come out. If you have a specific issue, raise it and not generally.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I am saying this because I have a colleague who was also talking about fish.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The one who spoke about fish was in support of this provision. The Member for Bukooli Island is here in the House and is very interested in seeing this matter repealed.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Chairman, with his experience, let me ask my colleague, the hon. Nandala-Mafabi, to always be prompt in committee meetings so that the issues he would want to raise here can actually be raised and dealt with at committee level.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That should be the spirit in all our proceedings.
 
Clause 3 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON I put the question that clause 3, as amended, do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.





The Schedule

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the schedule, as amended, stands as the schedule to the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The schedule, as amended, agreed to.

The Title

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the title to the Bill remains as the title to the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House report. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Bill entitled, “The Business Licences (Miscellaneous Repeals) Bill, 2015” has been considered by the Committee of the whole House and been passed with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question for the adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE BUSINESS LICENCES (MISCELLANEOUS REPEALS) BILL, 2015

5.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Honourable colleagues, thank you very much for the orientation. I beg that the Bill entitled, “The Business Licences (Miscellaneous Repeals) Bill, 2015” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Business Licences (Miscellaneous Repeals) Bill, 2015” be read the third time and do pass. I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED “THE BUSINESS LICENCES (MISCELLANEOUS REPEALS) ACT, 2015”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, honourable minister. You have been able to process this Bill. This is your maiden operation -(Laughter)- and you have passed it without amendments. I congratulate you.

Honourable members, I think we will rise at this stage. This House stands adjourned to Tuesday at 2 O’clock. Thank you, honourable members, for being here. 

(The House rose at 5.26 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 5 May 2015 at 2.00 p.m.) 

