PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTSECOND SESSION - THIRD MEETINGTUESDAY , 25 APRIL 2023PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA8276Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT Tuesday, 25 April 2023His family will also be joining us as we do this noble cause. The Prime Minister has already confirmed; she will be linking up with the LOP to follow the usual parliamentary practice of how we pay tribute.Secondly, most of you saw in our groups and in the media very annoying videos of inhumane treatment and assault of our honourable colleague, Hon. Susan Mugabi, Woman MP for Buvuma. Sometimes you ask yourself: “Who is in charge?” I think the previous Wednesday, the Deputy Prime Minister, Rt Hon. Nakadama, was on the Floor here saying; “How can anyone stop a Member of Parliament we are assigned as Government?” The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development wrote to all the Women MPs to celebrate the International Women’s Day in their districts. So, who is stopping them from doing that? It is bad. The Prime Minister promised that no Resident District Commissioner (RDC) will do that and she was going to follow it up. Yet, the next day, Soroti was stopped. We are in a situation where RDCs are proving to be more powerful than a Prime Minister. I think that is where we are going.As the leadership, we took it up. Today, we had a meeting with the Speaker who has taken up this matter as a woman. (Applause) And we, as men, have a duty to protect our women; so I joined her. (Applause). We want the Prime Minister to bring a statement to the House. We IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentSECOND SESSION - 30TH SITTING - THIRD MEETINGParliament met at 2.01 p.m., at Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, I welcome you to today’s sitting. I can see the front bench is filling up. Clerk, prepare for me the rota so we can read among the ministers who are supposed to be here and then see the next action to be taken. Otherwise, Parliament starts at 2.00 p.m.; so we should be here. I had to sit in my waiting room to wait just two or three minutes to see if our colleagues could join us.Leader of the Opposition, welcome back. You had a very able team that represented you here; I must report that they did a good job. (Applause)Honourable colleagues, as you may all know, on Sunday, we laid to rest the late Permanent Secretary in the Office of the Prime Minister, Mr Keith Muhakanizi at his home in Lyantonde. The President accorded him an official burial and because of that, tomorrow at 10.00 a.m., we shall have a special sitting to pay tribute to him. I request you, honourable colleagues, to come in large numbers so we can pay tribute to this hero. 8277THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 25 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.shall have an extensive debate on this matter on Tuesday next week.Honourable colleagues, we did not want someone to say: “You have rushed me.” The Speaker will be chairing that session. Therefore, honourable colleagues, let us keep our fire for now until that time, when a comprehensive statement is here. The matter will be still hot because our colleague is still in hospital. I shared it with the Prime Minister; so there is still room for that.On Sunday, I led the Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Malaria (UPFM) together with their partners and very many of you colleagues including our senior colleague, Hon. Nathan Byanyima. Hon. Santa Alum - Hon. Aza refused to walk; he decided to run. (Laughter) We walked to spread awareness on the fight against malaria. It was unfortunate that no Minister of Health joined us, yet we were supporting their cause. Next time, we hope you will join us because all this was supplementing the efforts of the ministry. The senior officials of the ministry came. Next time, we will be happy if we can have the ministers because we are complementing their efforts. I am told they are having celebrations in Bugiri. I request the minister to make a statement to the House, which can come from the speech they would have delivered in Bugiri, so we can come up with more efforts on how best to support the Minister of Health in the fight against malaria. I actually told the congregation about more efforts including; bush clearing, planting mosquito repellent trees and creating awareness on the use of mosquito nets. Otherwise, some of them are using mosquito nets to make local brew, fishing and others are making sponges. Some are making gowns for weddings. (Laughter) I am telling you, all this is happening.  Honourable colleagues, reducing this just to mosquito nets has not helped much. We must put up more fight because malaria kills around 52 Ugandans per day and 95 per cent of people dying of malaria in the whole world are in Africa. So, this is a very big concern. In fact, we lose around Shs 2.4 trillion due to the effect of malaria on our economy. So, the minister should bring a statement and we see how best we can bring our efforts together as House.On the same day, we donated blood, and I received a very interesting report. The team from the Nakasero Blood Bank told me the maximum they have gotten here when they organise blood donation drives is 20 units, but on that day, they got 108 units. (Applause) Honourable colleagues, you cannot tell the numbers of lives we saved. I donated, but I would like to encourage you to go to Nakasero Blood Bank and also donate. Otherwise, they told me they have a 24-hour open centre at Nakasero. Anytime you need to donate, just go there. I was also told it is very important to donate every three months because the body manufactures more blood. So, let us donate. We have doctors in this House; they will guide us in future.  Honourable colleagues, when you donate blood, you save a life or lives. We received a petition from medical interns who are having issues and I am happy to report to you that yesterday, the Speaker met with them. I received their petition and it was forwarded to the Committee on Health. So, it is being processed and the moment it is processed – and we want it to be processed expeditiously – we shall bring a report to this House and debate that matter. Today, at 7.00 a.m. – I had been invited by the music promoters’ federation, under the creative arts federation. So, I addressed them and we had a very strong discussion on how best we can support this sector. They appreciated you, especially Hon. Rachel Magoola and Hon. Hillary Kiyaga. They also mentioned Hon. Kayemba-Ssolo as one of the people who support them.8278Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT We discussed very many issues and they promised to work on a petition, which they will bring here for us to handle. After that meeting, I held a meeting with members of the Parliamentary Forum on Road Safety, together with their partners from Makerere University School of Public Health and Global Health V olunteers. Every day, it is estimated that, in Uganda, we lose 12 people to accidents on our roads. So, the cost, both financially and in human life, is very huge to our country. We have been talking about this, but we need, in our budgeting, to look at how best to support the implementation of the road safety strategy. I am told that out of the Shs 6 billion which was needed, they provided only Shs 600 million. I committed that we were going to link up with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and ensure that, indeed, we provide more money for this.Also, we have been focusing on road carnage, but we have our people drowning in the lakes. We do not always focus on the issues of the islanders, honourable colleagues. We have children going to school in boats and fishermen who are drowning. Even when you go to police stations – I am told Makerere researchers found there were no statistics. In the 10th Parliament, we passed the Maritime Act, but up to now, the regulations operationalising that Act have not been brought. So, it is just lying idle. So, I need the Minister of Works and Transport, on Thursday, to give us an update on where he has reached in working on the regulations to operationalise the Maritime Act so that we can start using it, as a country.Honourable colleagues, I have touched very many issues, but I felt I needed to give you an update on what we have been working on, as the leadership of the House. Any reactions?2.16THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Beatrice Anywar): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We greatly appreciate the update. I am concerned about the health of Members. In Eighth Parliament, I wrote to the Speaker then and requested that we create a gym. We had lost a Member of Parliament because of health-related issues. I am happy that we now have a gym, which is operating. I do not know how many of us are utilising that gym. I am not utilising it myself. However, Members ought to be encouraged to be concerned about their health – the available opportunities like the gym as well as the donation of blood. I started donating blood at 16. Most people do not know that it has a health impact. The more you donate, the more you replenish your blood. I have been fighting in my own home with my sons to go and donate blood after every three months. Mr Speaker, because of the concerns the leadership of this Parliament has for Members, let us be encouraged to use the gym. We also have sports going on. Even for the blood donation, we could have the Red Cross come and camp here after every three months so that no one can say: “I did not have time.” As leaders, we should also contribute to the health of many who are out there. I am here to testify that donating blood is healthy. I encourage my colleagues to take it upon themselves to donate and replenish their blood. I am not a doctor, but a mother and a “nurse”, in my own way. I appreciate this communication and encourage all of us to take it up. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. It will be two minutes each. [The Deputy Speaker]COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR8279THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 25 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.2.18DR EMMANUEL OTAALA (NRM, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the update. I would like to begin by thanking you for providing practical leadership. When you led the walk against malaria, it was clearly a demonstration of translating theoretical leadership into practice . (Applause)Malaria is the number one cause of anaemia and the number one killer of children below five years, most of whom die of anaemia. Malaria is also the number one killer of pregnant mothers. You talked about the opportunity of going to Nakasero Blood Bank any time and I would like to applaud you for that guidance to this House. Today, Nakasero Blood Bank has come here. I believe this is a great opportunity for all of us to go and donate blood. People still have misgivings about donating blood. I have just come from donating blood. When I met a few honourable colleagues, some were saying: “For me, I am 50 years; I cannot donate blood.” (Laughter) I told them I am even older than 50 years. So, I want to encourage more honourable colleagues to go and donate blood so that we save lives. The second point that I would like to talk about is in respect to the issue of the interns that you alluded to -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is a matter before a committee. So, it is an issue we cannot comment on here – Rule 80 of the Rules of Procedure. Hon. Nyakikongoro?2.21MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (NRM, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank you for this communication. I am touched by the issue of road carnage, particularly the lives that we have lost. I am happy that the Minister for Kampala is here. I do not know whether you have got time to visit Mulago Hospital, especially the casualty ward. Most of the accidents in Kampala are caused by boda bodas. We have had regulations, but I do not know whether their implementation has failed. The boda bodas have even made us fail to walk on the walkways, yet it is part of exercising. We sit in Parliament and meetings, but we cannot get opportunities to walk on the streets because of the boda bodas. Even when you are walking on the pavers, they may find you there. It is more challenging especially when you see those who disregard traffic lights even when police officers are there; they may knock you and you end up paying them. I do not know what will happen apart from people losing their lives. Otherwise, the misbehaviour of these boda boda riders, particularly their failure to respect traffic lights - maybe this oncoming project will help us - Members of Parliament should support it. Otherwise, we are losing lives because of boda boda riders in Kampala. Thank you, Mr Speaker.2.22MR JOEL SSENYONYI (NUP, Nakawa Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate your guidance on the fact that Government should come up with a statement about our colleague who was assaulted. With your guidance, I would like to request that Government broadens that statement a little bit because we should not only get concerned when it is Members of Parliament who are assaulted. Ordinary people, many times, whether during arrests or that kind of thing, are manhandled too. Yesterday, we saw how intern doctors who are asking to be deployed to work - as they were trying to bring a petition to Parliament, were badly handled. So, it cuts across and so, it would be good that Government addresses this issue comprehensively. Why are arrests conducted in such a beastly manner? I am sorry to use that word. So, it would be good if we broadened it. Our concerns should not only surface when it happens to one of us because indeed, it can 8280Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT happen to anybody. Therefore, let us also be concerned when it happens to any other Ugandan citizen. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Okay, let us hear from the Member from Kalangala – Hon. Moses Kabuusu, give space to the honourable lady.2.24MS HELEN NAKIMULI (NUP, Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for being gender sensitive. In your Communication from the Chair, you talked about the lake. I do not know why there is so much unfairness when it comes to the lake. One time we talked about putting marks at the dangerous spots on the lake, and the minister told me to remind him, which I did. I even wrote a letter reminding him and he said; “We are going to go around and do a survey,” but as we speak now - I think it is a month now - we just got an accident. Thankfully no people died. The boat capsized but they managed to swim till they were rescued by passersby on the lake.Therefore, we need assistance on this; it should be taken urgently because the lake, much as we use it, is dangerous. We have a season where people cannot travel safely because of the strong winds. Mr Speaker, they should handle it with the urgency it requires. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the Hon. Kabuusu supplement on that.2.25MR MOSES KABUUSU (FDC, Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. The Ministry of Works and Transport made a commitment that they will build rescue centres. Accidents are incidents that are not planned, but some accidents, after their occurrence, can be managed. The Ministry of Works and Transport promised to build rescue centres at least in some of the districts on the lake: Namayingo, Buvuma, Kalangala, Koome Mukono, and some other districts that have islands.However, Mr Speaker, there are no signs of the rescue centres or that there are any efforts of them being built. We cannot continue having accidents, year after year and we come to mourn or to inform Parliament. This Government should be urged or we should be seeing some efforts that when our people, especially those in the lake, get into accidents, there are efforts by Government to rescue them. Thank you.2.26MR JONATHAN EBWALU (Independent, Soroti West Division, Soroti): Mr Speaker, I want to thank you very much for standing with the women. I watched, with a lot of pain, the situation in Mityana, what happened yesterday in Buvuma, Soroti, and other areas. These are women Members of Parliament.Mr Speaker, there is something I want us to interest ourselves in. You will notice that all the functions where people have been dispersed involved women Members of Parliament and not from the Opposition. The NRM women Members of Parliament have had smooth celebrations at their functions. Why? A woman is a woman whether NRM, FDC, or DP. I want to suggest that going forward – I know the Prime Minister is going to come and tell us that they will look into this and that - Parliament adopts a resolution that states that apart from the national celebration presided over by the Head of State, all the district functions be presided over by the women Members of Parliament. This will help us solve this problem. There is one thing I am not comfortable with - and that is of inviting ministers to preside over functions in the districts. This undermines the authority of women Members of Parliament in those districts. I had a situation where Hon. Alice Alaso, while she was the woman Member of Parliament for Soroti District, the RDC then, called Ben Etonu, rushed to Arapai to preside over a function. Hon. Alice Alaso literally went and [Mr Ssenyonyi]COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR8281THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 25 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.sat on his laps and said, “You show me your things if you are a woman.” (Laughter) I do not want to go into that. Let all functions of this nature be presided over by the women Members of Parliament. Thank you, Mr Speaker.2.28MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In your Communication from the Chair, following these incidents, you asked “Who is in charge?” I want to raise this as a reaction but also as a matter of procedure under rule 143 and it specifically relates to the Anti-Homosexuality Bill. We passed this Bill, with the full participation of the Government, represented by the Deputy Attorney-General. However, there is a letter circulating from the Deputy Attorney-General, saying that this Parliament forced him and yet he sat here and the Speaker kept on asking him to offer legal advice as the Constitution mandates him.I, therefore, want to find out from you, as the presiding officer, the mechanism that you used to force the Attorney-General to concede to clauses as we passed them. However - I sit on the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs; members of this committee have been told on a WhatsApp group that we should go for a COVID test because the committee is going to meet the President over a Bill that has not been returned to Parliament. Prof. Apolo Nsibambi, the former Prime Minister, used to call this the disease of “Presidentialism” because the Bill has not been returned to Parliament but some committee members are falling on each other in an attempt to rush to State House to meet the President.You asked, “Who is in charge?” So, we want to be told whether the Speakers of Parliament have been overthrown. Related to that - the good thing with your experience as a former minister - the functions of Cabinet and ministers are stipulated in Article 111 of the Constitution.I want to find out, Mr Speaker, because under Article 113(3), the President may assign extra activities to the minister - whether the President can use this Article to assign ministers to give company to his children when they are going to attend parties in Kigali or at the beaches in Mombasa - because last week we saw two ministers - of security and constitutional affairs - giving company to the President’s son as he went to attend his party. The President has a number of children. Do not be surprised when tomorrow, you see Hon. Nankabirwa and Mama Mabira giving company to a daughter who is going to a beach in Mombasa. (Laughter)However, Articles 111 and 113 of the Constitution stipulate what the functions of the Cabinet and ministers are. Can we be told whether the President can, under Article 113, assign ministers to give company to his children?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Ssemujju never disappoints. We have been missing you, and welcome back from Mecca. (Laughter)Honourable members, beyond one being a minister, they do have their personal relations; private relations beyond being a minister. Secondly, ministers, if they are travelling in an official capacity, get clearance from the Prime Minister. So, they do not get it from the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker. I do not know if there are ministers who travelled and are enjoying a certain birthday. If they are, I will ask why they did not also invite me -(Laughter)- because all of us should have enjoyed. The Prime Minister is usually in charge of ministers. However, on the issue of the Bill which you have talked about, it is really a point of concern which I had raised when we were handling the Museum and Monuments Bill, 2022 here, where we had -8282Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT I was in the Cabinet when it came there, and ministers did not complain on any issues. It came here, we discussed, no minister complained on any issues but then, I see the President saying, “The ministers are saying A, B, C, D is not in line.” I then said, “But ministers are Members of Parliament and we have the Attorney-General here, and that is why each one of us is given a chance.”When I saw the letter of the Deputy Attorney-General, I was concerned because it clearly conflicts with the Hansard. The Hansard is very clear; he was agreeing. (Applause) If, maybe, he had written that as a ministry, after assessment of the Bill, which means he has gotten advice beyond what he could provide here and beyond what he could foresee at that time. However, he wrote- We cannot force anyone here to submit on the Floor. We have taken interest in that matter. As the leadership, we will meet the Deputy Attorney-General over it, so that we first understand what he meant by saying he was forced and then, we will see the next step to take on that matter. (Applause)I request that when we are in this House, all of us are Members of Parliament and even a minister is a Member of Parliament. So, when we agree on a Bill here, we agree. If you do not agree, indeed you state your position. If you refuse to concede here, we put a question. When you are defeated, you can go to the Executive and say, “I explained; they did not listen to me but I believe this is A, B, C, and D.”However, when you say you agree with us and clear us, and when we seek your advice, you say, as the Attorney-General, “Everything is okay,” but then you go and write otherwise, then that is betrayal of colleagues. (Applause) We shall share with the Deputy Attorney-General and understand each other more. We do not want to escalate it; the focus is on the Bill. If we now divert from the Bill into fighting with someone, then we shall have lost focus. Let us first secure our Bill properly. Leader of the Opposition?2.36THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to initially acknowledge the immaculate job of the LOP-Emeritus who did a wonderful job –(Applause)- a confirmation of the fact that we have no deficit of able men and women on this side of the aisle, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)– that is for another day, sir. (Laughter)Mr Speaker, having said that, we take your guidance on the matter that you have picked as the leadership of Parliament, relating to the brutalisation of our women Members of Parliament. However, I would like to ask that as the Prime Minister comes to make a report on it, some matters are very urgent; they may not wait until Tuesday because the community is really scared as to whether they have a Government. For instance, when I went to visit Hon. Susan Mugabi in the hospital, she was with her sister who was equally brutalised, and with bruises. She told me she was fondled by police officers, you know; that her breasts were squeezed and was almost laid bare but because she is not an MP like Hon. Susan Mugabi, her case did not come to the media. Secondly, the Member’s mother was beaten and slept in jail. This is not coming through. Even her father was jailed and released in the night; for being the father and mother of the MP? The mother was beaten up and slept in the cells. This cannot wait, Mr Speaker. The Minister of Internal Affairs should tell us whether he in charge. In the immediate, say today is Tuesday - Tuesday next week is very far for these criminals to be still among the people. (Applause)Mr Speaker, the army was involved and they were shooting all over the island. They [The Deputy Speaker]COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR8283THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 25 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.were shooting in the water, the forests; these are insane humans; they should really be somewhere gazetted. This cannot wait for the Prime Minister. We have tomorrow and Thursday. The ministers in charge of these beasts should be coming to report whether they are still amongst humans –(Applause)– because we cannot be leaders in this country when this is going on. Certainly, the Minister for the Presidency needs to come and explain whether she gave some more powers to the RDCs beyond what we know. When MPs are elected, they are elected to do the job for which they are elected and nobody can assume their role. Whether you are taller or fatter than the MP, he is the MP. Whether you are older, you are not. (Applause)Mr Speaker, I am only pleading with you to order some of the ministers, before the Prime Minister comes, to come and make preliminary explanations as to what steps they have taken to get some of these fellows away from the public. How do you jail an old woman for just being the mother of an MP? Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. LOP, we looked at all this but found it needs the multi-sectoral approach. We asked which minister will now take the lead. So, we found we need contributions from the Ministers of Internal Affairs, Defence, and the Presidency and that is why we thought that the Prime Minister, as the supervisor, would easily be a better person to coordinate. However, let us make consultations tomorrow, then we shall see how best we can handle this issue quickly. For the urgency, I totally agree with you; only that we wanted to get a comprehensive response on the matter.On matters of national importance, I invite Hon. Kitanywa Sowedi. Let me start with the procedural matter; Hon. Ssemujju, wait.MR TEBANDEKE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My procedural matter is moved under Rules 7 and 8 of our Rules of Procedure. Article 91(8) of the Constitution states, “A bill passed by Parliament and assented to by the President or which has otherwise become law under this article shall be an Act of Parliament and shall be published in the Gazette.”   Likewise, Section 14 of the Acts of Parliament Act requires an Act passed by Parliament to be published into the national Gazette for the public to know the content of the Bill; the dos and don’ts. Mr Speaker, I am worried because the Fisheries and Aquaculture Bill, 2021 that we passed here, you informed us that the President considered and assented to it but it is not anywhere; not in the parliamentary library or public library, or on any other platform. According to Section 13 of the Fisheries and Aquaculture, Bill 2021 which talks about the establishment of the fisheries monitoring, control and surveillance unit, we removed the UPDF from operation.Mr Speaker, I watched the operation when Hon. Susan Mugabi, Woman MP for Buvuma - I was actually going to attend the celebration but when I looked at what was trending on social media, I declined. They were subjecting her for having petitioned the Government for such acts of omissions and conduct for failure by the President to assent to the Bill. In fact, I was a victim they were netting -My procedural issue is: Isn’t it procedurally right for the Clerk to always update us whenever any letter for reception of the Bill for the President for assent is effective so that we are served with it in our pigeon halls? Lastly, isn’t it procedurally right for you, Mr Speaker, to guide us whether the Fisheries and Aquaculture Bill was assented to in a “smuggling” manner so that we begin to look for it also in “smuggling” away because it is not anywhere? It is a ghost Bill. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleague, the narrative of your 8284Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT point of procedure and the conclusion are a bit different, but I picked what you are talking about. Usually, these Bills have commencement dates and most of them have regulations; so they gazette together with the regulations. However, allow me to go and cross-check with the Clerk so that tomorrow, I can give feedback on it. I really need to get clear information about it. MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition pointed to a number of ministers who should come and answer, including those who are hiding because of the iron sheets.(Laughter) These days, there are ministers who move on the boda bodas; they have abandoned official vehicles. We have a Prime Minister and the deputies and potentially, all of them are suspects that can be picked anytime.The procedure I am raising is: If the Government is in this state of panic - I can see the bodies of my brother Hon. Musasizi and Hon. Nabakooba here but I do not think their hearts are here. (Laughter) The bodies are in Parliament but the hearts must be somewhere.The Prime Minister, under the Constitution, is supposed to be the Leader of the Government Business. The word is “shall” but she is not here and the deputies who are also suspects are not here. You can see the other ministers looking at you but their eyes are not seeing; others are on boda bodas hiding. (Laughter)The procedure issue I am raising is whether the President must not brief Parliament because, Mr Speaker, you asked; “Who is in charge?” Now, who is going to handle Government business, if we have ministers and others seated in Parliament, but are not there?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Ssemujju is giving me a very big assignment. How can I look at someone and then conclude the body is here but the mind is in hiding. (Laughter) I do not have that expertise. What has happened to honourable colleagues can happen to any of us; I do not want us to celebrate it in any way. It can happen to any of us. We pray for our colleagues to go through this so that we conclude the chapter. The matter is being handled. I would like to say that since it is being handled by the courts, police and our own committee of Parliament, we leave it at that. I do not want any colleague to feel uncomfortable coming to this House because they will be ridiculed once they sit in the House. Let us leave it at that. Honourable colleagues, we need to move on. Hon. Zijjan, you are the last on this and then we move.MR ZIJJAN: Thank you. I rise under Rule 84 of our Rules of Procedure and I seek guidance, Mr Speaker, if that is not the appropriate rule. With regard to the conduct of armed forces as they apprehended our honourable colleague, the Leader of the Opposition has expressed his indignation. In his expression, he referred to members of the armed forces as “beasts”. And I share the same pain and anger with him. However, Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence as to whether it is procedurally right that we allow this to remain on the record of the Hansard. Wouldn’t it be procedurally proper to expunge the particular word “beasts” in reference to human beings? While they behaved in such a manner, they are human beings; they are husbands, fathers and sons. Therefore, their conduct notwithstanding, would you, Mr Speaker, guide this House as to whether it is proper we are content that this House refers to members of the armed forces as “beasts”? I beg to move.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, the Member is entitled to his opinion. You might disagree but the Member is entitled to his opinion. Those of us who studied literature studied something called “diction”; the choice of words. Sometimes how to express oneself is driven by emotions or anger, but I think the word “beast” is not appropriate. However, I know, the LoP usually [The Deputy Speaker]COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR8285THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 25 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.corrects such. So, LOP, you can have a better and most suitable word. I know that even when the Leader of the Opposition is annoyed, he is always a kind man.MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Indeed, Hon. Zijjan is a new Member here, but for those who know me, I communicate graphically. If I knew the names of those men in uniform, I would have described them differently. So, give me the names; I will give them the right descriptions. The fact that I do not know their names, but they were in a national uniform – they did not look like humans. If you give me the names, I will change the description.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nankabirwa, did you want to say something?MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was just wondering whether the Leader of the Opposition is going to maintain the kind of people who are guarding him because they are all armed forces under the leadership of the Commander-in-Chief. I wonder whether he will be secure to continue being guarded by such a group of people. Is this Parliament -? [Mr Ssemujju: “Order, Mr Speaker.”]THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, there is no one on the Floor. Honourable colleagues, I know that sometimes we can be angry. From the point, I could - even when I saw those videos, they were very disturbing. However, for the sake of the Hansard, there is a language we usually want to use. People can be brutal. I am going to invoke Rule 229 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament to expunge that component of (text expunged), but we should not lose focus of the literary meaning and characterisation that led Hon. Mpuuga to bring up this issue. Otherwise, you can see some of this conduct is forcing Members to use very strong language, which I know some would not want to use. I know Hon. Mpuuga very well; he would not want to use that language, but sometimes they are forced into a corner. 2.55MR SOWEDI KITANYWA  (NRM, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the escalating tension between the cultivators and pastoralists in Ngoko village, Hima Parish, Kitswamba Subcounty in Kasese District. The tension is as a result of the resettlement of the pastoralists in 2007. The Government resolved to resettle the pastoralists that had occupied Queen Elizabeth National Park on Government’s former pieces of land, that is, Hima Army Production Farm and Ibuga Refugee Settlement Camp. During the process of resettling the pastoralists, the cultivators, who were staying adjacent to the Government land, were displaced. As a result, the cultivators sought court redress. In 2016, they secured a ruling in their favour. The High Court in Fort Portal ruled, among other orders, that the cultivators should retain their land, which was equivalent to 766 acres. From 2016 to date, the cultivators have never accessed the land, yet there is a court order. The office –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prayers? MR KITANYWA: Mr Speaker, if you could, give me just a minute before I go to the prayers. The office of the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) worked with the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and Hon. Dr Sam Mayanja came to Kasese and made directives. Among the directives, he said the cultivators should be given their land. He even sent a team of surveyors to go and help the cultivators regain their land. Unfortunately, the minister in charge of the presidency, Hon. Milly Babalanda Babirye, 8286Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT directed that this exercise of resettling the cultivators be stopped. The cultivators have vowed to enter the land by force; they are even threatening to destroy crops, kill animals and do all sorts of destruction. My prayers are:1. We are requesting that the Government should immediately go and parcel out this land so that each of the warring groups can get their portion before we see a lot of destruction and bloodshed.2. The cultivators, who were displaced, have been living in a camp for the last 16 years without any support. I request that they should be given some relief.3.  Once the demarcation has been completed, the cultivators and the pastoralists should be given their land titles so that they stop fighting over this land. Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister for lands? 3.00THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT  (Ms Judith Nabakooba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I acknowledge that the Member brought the petition to my office and we have been working with him to resolve the matter in his constituency. Hon. Dr Mayanja went on the ground to meet the respective stakeholders and find ways of handling the matter peacefully. There is a Cabinet decision that even parcelled out the land between the cultivators and the pastoralists. However, when we went on the ground to implement the same, the two groups, again, did not accept what had been previously decided. So, we had to go back to sit with them, discuss and tell them the decisions that were made before, and we are still in those engagements. Once the engagements are done, the surveyors will go to the ground and parcel the land. Thank you, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, you can see that Hon. Nabakooba’s heart and mind are here; it is not only the body and so, we are doing very well. However, honourable minister, by the time a Member comes again, it means the progress on your side is extremely slow. So, you need to put in more effort, by addressing those concerns, and above all when there is a court judgment, I mean, where else would people go, if court judgments made in their favour cannot be implemented? So, you need to put in more speed, in terms of addressing the issue.Honourable member, this is a matter to which we cannot attach a timeframe of say, two weeks or what, but what we can do is - in one month’s time, come back. I am also going to ensure that I coordinate with the Minister so that we can follow up on this matter together. If not, then we will see other ways of helping the Minister.3.02 MR ABUBAKER KAWALYA (NUP, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I move this matter under Rule 49 (1); it is a matter of national importance. Mr Speaker, I wish to bring to your attention the disaster that occurred today morning, in which we experienced heavy rains in most areas of Kampala and the metropolitan area, and a case in point is my constituency, Rubaga North where over 500 homesteads lost their roofs. We had terrible and heavy rains in the morning, which affected most of the people residing in the areas of Kasubi, Lubya, and some areas in Nankulabye Parish. I have also received information from other parts of Kampala and Wakiso, as the Shadow Minister in charge of those areas, that they are also experiencing the same at the moment. [Mr Kitanywa]COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR8287THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 25 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.My prayer is that I request Parliament to instruct the ministry in charge of disaster preparedness to intervene in this matter, and treat it as a matter of urgency. Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to submit. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, these are matters upon which we do not need to instruct - they are matters of disaster and must be attended to. I am very happy that the Prime Minister has arrived. This is a serious issue for which I will even give - I need the Prime Minister to be the one to handle it. So, honourable member, let me give you another opportunity to quickly present it.MR KAWALYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to bring to your attention the terrible disaster that occurred in my constituency and other parts of Kampala in the wee hours of today, where we experienced heavy rains that affected over 500 homes. As we speak now, the affected people have nowhere to stay and they are stranded. I call upon the relevant ministry and the Office of the Prime Minister that serious intervention is carried out where we expect to receive items such as food and mabaati. We are all aware that there is the mabaati saga where people took mabaati meant for other people, for their own use. So, I call upon the ministry in charge of disaster preparedness and the Office of the Prime Minister to treat this as a matter of urgency. I beg to submit. Thank you, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable colleagues, sometimes you spoil these things by yourselves. You are here saying that mabaati were taken, but you want mabaati. What if one stands up and says that; “But you have just said the mabaati were taken?” (Laughter) Anyway, Prime Minister, if you still have some. 3.07 THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, indeed we are already aware that Kampala was affected yesterday and this morning. And we already had a meeting in my office - the senior top management meeting, because we continue to get reports in piecemeal. We have directed that the Executive Director of KCCA, together with officers from my office, go to the ground to assess the situation and come up with actionable points.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Yes, Hon. Osoru Mourine?3.08 MS MOURINE OSORU (NRM, Woman Representative, Arua City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concern here is about a fire disaster that occurred early last month in Etori Ward in Arua City. The genesis of this disaster started when a man who was doing bush clearing on his farm failed to notice that there were strong winds blowing. The wind ended up spreading fire to other people’s homes, leaving them with no room to pick up their property. So, most of the property was burnt together with their homes. My prayers are that the ministry in charge exercises some responsibility to restore confidence and hope in our people by giving them whatever relief they have. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, Rt Hon. Prime Minister?MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, I request the Member to get in touch with the disaster committee at the district or in the city so that they can send us details of what actually transpired and then we shall send them relief items; we still have something in our stores.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Yes, Hon. Rwemulikya?8288Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT 3.09 MR IBANDA RWEMULIKYA (Indepen-dent, Ntoroko County, Ntoroko): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I rise on a matter of national importance in regard to the failure by the Minister of Public Service to grant Ntoroko Local District the clearance to recruit critical staff. Mr Speaker, Ntoroko District secured a wage of Shs 2.9 billion for recruitment. The Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) of Ntoroko District has written several letters about the same but all in vain. I also personally wrote on 7 September 2022 and on 6 March 2023 about the same matter but with no response. Ntoroko District lacks critical staff in different departments, hence affecting service delivery. My prayers are that the Minister of Public Service should explain to this august House and the country, the reasons for his refusal to clear Ntoroko District to carry out this recruitment.Secondly, the Minister of Public Service should give Ntoroko District clearance to recruit with a view to saving the wage from being swept back to the Treasury at the end of this financial year. Lastly is that the Minister of Public Service should come and assure us of reverting the wage in case it is swept back at the end of this financial year. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I do not see your minister here.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Local Government are directed to go and make good what is in Ntoroko District. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you will give us an update on the issue on Thursday during Prime Minister’s Time. Hon. Sserukenya David?3.11MR DA VID SSERUKENYA (NUP, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to bring to your attention and this august House that one of my Imams of Hudah Mosque in Makindye-Ssabagabo was abducted. He had two wives and they are starving. We have tried everywhere but we do not know where he is. Another challenge is that they used excessive force to arrest him. I also want to bring to your attention that even Chairman Nyanzi was beaten badly from Kyenjojo; he is nursing wounds. Yesterday, our health workers were equally treated badly- that is a bad picture. I request the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs to come and explain to me where my Imam is, because it is really challenging; the other Imams wanted to come to Parliament, but I told them not to. They have to tell me where our Imam is, and why they are using excessive force to torture our people; Chairman Nyanzi was brutalised and is going abroad for treatment. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have mixed your issues properly; it is a real remix. Now you say someone was kidnapped and then you say they used too much force to arrest him. Please, always prepare your questions. MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I request my brother to go and report to the nearest police station- that is number one - because if they have no report at any police station then follow-up becomes difficult. Sometimes they report to some other offices we do not know.Secondly, I will also request the ministry - I do not know; they are not here, but I will request them –(Interjection)- Hon. Ssemujju – Mr Speaker, when my brother Hon. Ssemujju talks about me, it feels very -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, you see, the moment you start responding to honourable colleagues who are not on record – now in the future, someone COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR8289THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 25 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.who will read the Hansard will say, “But what was going on; was this person talking to themselves?” So, when colleagues are not on record, do not respond to them. It makes it better. However, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, help the colleague like you have committed to; work with him to address the matter. Hon. Kabuusu Moses?3.15MR MOSES KABUUSU (FDC, Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent national importance that relates to the fishing communities. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries gave a directive that fishnets measuring approximately 5.5 inches would be suspended from being used in a period ending 30th April. However, there were no guidelines issued by the Ministry of Agriculture on how the same directive would be implemented, given the nature of enforcement on our lakes and water bodies - that the army was deployed to enforce such directives. The general outcry is that when the army - the Fisheries Protection Unit - starts enforcing the directives, there will not be observance of human rights and property rights. My prayer is that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries comes to Parliament and issues guidelines on how enforcement of this directive will be made. Secondly, while enforcing this, strict observance of rights to property and lives should be adhered to, to prevent loss of lives, and property. Thank you, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable member, not every issue should come here. I think this is meant for people on the ground and very clearly known communities. I think what is indeed needed would be the guidelines, like you have put, and we do not have much time between now and the 30th. It would be for the minister either to go or to use the authorities on the ground - the fisheries officers and all of that - to go and explain to the communities, to sensitise; to use the radio to communicate to them and say, “No, we are going to do A,B,C and D to enforce this directive.”I think it would be much better than bringing the guidelines here. But Rt Hon. Prime Minister, let the minister take up this matter and engage the community so that we do not have a lot of skirmishes on this issue. Hon. Nyakato Asinansi?3.17MS ASINANSI NYAKATO (FDC, Woman Representative, Hoima City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise under Rule 49(1). There has been an outbreak of mumps in Hoima City, Kampala City and in some other parts of the country.Mr Speaker, mumps causes the cheeks of the children to swell with severe pain, but they also cause fever and high temperatures. It has been brought to my attention that schools have decided to send children back home for medication. The parents are stranded with these children because they do not know the right medication for this strange disease.My prayers: I pray that the Ministry of Health comes to this honourable House and explain the cause of mumps, and also explain the magnitude of the outbreak. Finally, the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Ministry of Health should work together to ensure that standard operating procedures are given out so that schools can manage. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Minister of Health, come on Tuesday. Hon. Peter, have you registered such cases in schools? I was thinking we could let the minister go study, working with you and –8290Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT MR PETER OGWANG: Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I am happy that my sister has given a statement. Maybe, let me get more details from her, then we will follow up. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, and we can see your cheeks are not swollen. (Laughter) Otherwise, we would have started with you. Honourable colleagues, the rest of the matters we shall handle tomorrow- our time is really not good. Honourable colleagues, I am going to amend the Order Paper to accommodate one urgent statement at the request of the Prime Minister. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, if you do not mind, just answer one issue then you go to that urgent question. 3.20MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Today morning, I arrived late because Buhweju roads have been cut off again. Whereas the Prime Minister directed that we be given priority and our road be fixed, the ministers have not respected the Prime Minister’s directives. I abandoned my vehicle at midnight in the middle of the road and used a bus to come to Kampala because I could not remove it. Of course, Sheema and Kashari are also in the same condition because that is where we pass. Even when we were told there was a presidential directive that our road is prioritised, they were not in the ministerial statements last time; there is no budget for them. In the meantime, the money for maintenance that has been provided for, only caters for the road up to the border of Buhweju, so Buhweju has been left out. Our concern is: What did we do? The road that was provided for starts from Kabwohe up to Bwizibwera; it leaves Buhweju out of the question. That is my concern.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I have been to Buhweju, like I told you, and I thank the Member for his report. It is not true the road will start from Bwizibwera and not go through Buhweju because the President directed that that road should be prioritised. I know that the ministry, through Uganda National Roads Auditory (UNRA), has been mobilising resources, including machines to go and start working on the road; I want you to be patient. Now that a problem has come and our people are stuck, I am going to direct UNRA to come to Buhweju.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, your statement?STATEMENT ON EFFORTS UNDERTAKEN BY GOVERNMENT OF UGANDA REGARDING EV ACUATION OF UGANDANS IN SUDAN3.22THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Mr Speaker, I have come with a statement for Members of Parliament and the country on the efforts undertaken by the Government of Uganda regarding evacuation of Ugandans in Sudan. (Applause) As you may recall, in 2019, President Bashir of Sudan was ousted following a series of protests regarding the rising commodity and food prices, including wheat and bread in Sudan. The army together with the Rapid Support Forces (RSF), a paramilitary force, who were previously loyal to President Bashir cooperated with the population and ousted him. A civilian government headed by the Prime Minister, Abdalla Hamdok, was ushered in, but later overthrown in 2021 by a joint coup of Sudan Armed Forces (SAF) and RSF. A framework cooperation agreement was later negotiated in 2022 with the hope of returning to civilian rule. The framework agreement also provided for security sector reform and incorporation of all forces into one national MINISTERIAL STATEMENT8291THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 25 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.army with eventual civilian authority and oversight. The creation of a national army, however, seemed to be contentious, and led to the recent clashes that broke out on 15 April 2023, after days of escalating armed manoeuvres by the rival forces. It is understood that tensions had run high for days amid a dispute related to demands from the army that the RSF would dissolve, and its members be integrated into the national army. According to the World Health Organisation, over 420 people are dead and 3,700 wounded, and countless others are stuck in their homes without major utilities, such as electricity, water, or food. It is also reported that some hospitals have run out of supplies and the aid agencies have suspended operations. The ongoing violence has affected operations at the main international airport, destroyed some passenger planes and damaged at least one runway. Other airports in the country have been affected too.Evacuation arrangements for trapped UgandansHis Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, after receiving a report that there are Ugandans stranded in Sudan, directed me to coordinate the ministries of foreign affairs, of works and transport and the External Security Organisation to work out an evacuation plan. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs requested Ugandans in Sudan to register through their association heads with the embassy in Khartoum. A list of those that are registered is hereby attached. The embassy also requested, where possible, those Ugandans who could, to converge at the embassy in Khartoum. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs through our mission in Khartoum was working and considering two possible routes of evacuation as follows:i) Moving Ugandans who would have converged at the embassy to Port Sudan, which is a distance of 1,000 kilometres away from Khartoum, where they could be facilitated to fly out;ii) Transporting Ugandans via the Gallabat border with Ethiopia to the town of Gondar. Evacuation arrangements for Ugandans would thereafter be made from Gondar Airport in Ethiopia to Uganda. Following close analysis, the Government of Uganda in coordination with our mission in Khartoum decided to consider option two, which seemed to be more reasonable since the distance is shorter and we have since done the following:i) His Excellency, the President guided that the evacuation plan should be through Ethiopia vide an Executive Order to me. This evacuation plan was in line with an earlier decision to continue constructive engagement with the Sudanese authorities to seek cooperation with Uganda’s evacuation plan. As a result of this engagement, the Government hired six buses to accommodate all the Ugandans, including diplomats, students, workers, and those visiting who were in transit to Mecca, to evacuate stranded Ugandans via Ethiopia route to Gondar Town via the Gallabat border. In this regard, I am happy to report that a total of 208 Ugandans have been successfully evacuated by road using hired buses to Ethiopia and are currently being cleared at the border between Sudan and Ethiopia.Mr Speaker, we have appealed to the International Organisation for Migration (IOM) to support the evacuation plans and efforts.We have also approached the UN Regional Service Centre to support Uganda’s proposed evacuation plans. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs, through the Defence Attaché at our mission in Khartoum, Brig. Gen Karara – I would like you to clap COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR8292Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT for that gentleman –(Applause)– mobilised Ugandans, through their associations, to coordinate the evacuation.Mr Speaker, we have established that 120 Ugandans were working in Khartoum, 122 were students, 14 were in hospitals, 19 were in transit to Mecca and six were on short visits.The Ministry of Foreign Affairs is in constant communication with three Ugandans who decided to use public road transport via South Sudan, two via Port Sudan and one World Bank official, who used the Ethiopian route.The Ministry of Works and Transport, through its agencies, that is, UCAA and Uganda Airlines, will evacuate Ugandans to Entebbe. Uganda Civil Aviation Authority has already given clearance to Uganda Airlines to fly to Ethiopia and pick the stranded Ugandans using our Airbus, which will carry them all at once.The embassy in Khartoum remains in constant contact with Ugandans who are unable to join the evacuation plan because of heavy fighting in Sudan and we shall keep this Parliament informed of our interventions.Mr Speaker, internal clearances for Ugandans at the border between Sudan and Ethiopia is still ongoing.  I beg to submit. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, I will pick around three or four Members. This is just for information purposes. So, let us not prolong it. Hon. Ssemujju?3.33MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There are lessons to learn – and I would like to thank the Government for evacuating Ugandans. (Applause) Al-Bashir stayed in power and sought to become a life president. That situation exists here.Secondly, Al-Bashir illegally created that Rapid Support Forces (RSF) the same way SFC was illegally created here – and I remember the brigadier from Bunyoro, who was in charge of professionalising the army, warning President Museveni not to create a special force like the Republican Guard in Iraq because it would be creating an army within an army. That situation also exists here.Can I ask the Prime Minister – if she is no longer hiding – to tell us whether, as Government, beyond discussing the evacuation, they are also discussing conditions that have created the chaos in Sudan? Uganda is potentially a few years away from falling where Sudan now is. You have a person who has been in power for 37 years, is about to become 80, has created an army within an army and abandoned what was provided in the Constitution – the peaceful transfer of power. Maybe in a few years, Sudan will be discussing evacuating its citizens from Uganda.3.35MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Independent, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is in times like these that citizens must feel that they belong to a country. So, what the Government has decided to do is a noble cause. (Applause) Having said that – having listened to the Prime Minister’s statement that they are engaging with the Government of Sudan, what about the RSF? This is because there are also Ugandans in the areas controlled by that team. Listening to the BBC yesterday and this morning, the other governments – the European Union, British, French and Americans are engaging both sides to allow their people to exit from whichever side they are in. Now that we have the 72-hour lull in the fight, there is need to engage so that our people who are in those areas controlled by RSF can also be evacuated.Yes, we are using our Airbus to evacuate our people, but we must also look at it in terms of the costs. Which would have been a cheaper option? For those who may not be able to come on the Airbus, it may be cheaper to engage [Ms Nabbanja]MINISTERIAL STATEMENT8293THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 25 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.Ethiopian Airlines to fly them in here than chartering a plane from here to go and bring them. Thank you.3.36MR JOHN MAGOLO (NRM, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On Sunday, the 23rd, a delegation of the Speaker was in Bungokho North in Mbale and they were handed a petition over a number of students who were studying in Khartoum. The petition was presented by a lecturer at IUIU. They requested Government to intervene. When I hear this statement about the evacuation of the students and other Ugandans, it is a demonstration of a Government that is concerned about its citizens. We appreciate that. We also appreciate the patriotism that has been exhibited – yes, it could have been a cheaper way for Ethiopian Airlines to bring in the people who are stranded, but when shall we also market the country that we care? The life of any Ugandan is costly and that is the price we are paying. So, I appreciate that. Thank you.3.37MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When I hear about the fire in Sudan, I always feel that Uganda should continue to champion the principle of being our brother’s keeper. Apart from evacuating Ugandans – which means we are focusing more on the security of our very own – what is it that Uganda is doing to stop that conflict? That, to me, is very important, because whatever affects one African country, affects all of us.Mr Speaker, what Uganda has done in Somalia and in the neighbouring countries has been applauded. Therefore, Uganda should do something to show that we are concerned about what is happening in Sudan – over and above securing the lives of our own.Finally, unless we, Ugandans, also have continuous mechanisms for conflict resolution, we may find ourselves – as my colleague has said – in the same situation. As an elder, what I am seeing is not right. If elders continue to be quiet, we shall all be responsible for what will happen in this country if we plunge ourselves into chaos. We are seeing people moving in parallel lines.Right now, if I am blocked from going to Soroti City, but there are others who are moving all over the country, people will judge: What is happening? Ogwal is harmless; she has no gun, but there are others who are moving all over the place. Mr Speaker, something, that is not right, is going on. And I think it is our responsibility, as Parliament and leaders in this country, to make sure the disaster happening in Sudan does not happen in Uganda. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Yes, Hon. Amero?MS AMERO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think it is worth giving credit where it is due. I want to thank the Prime Minister for the report and for evacuating our people. This shows a spirit of concern and love for our people.However, this goes as a reminder to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs: The ministry should endeavour to sensitise Ugandans who travel out of this country to always go to their embassies and register because that is their home away from home, so that in case anything happens, they can easily get in touch with these people. It is unfortunate that we are talking about only 280 Ugandans in Khartoum. However, there are very many people there who do not even know where they belong, where to go and how to start.I ask the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to take the lead in sensitising Ugandans who travel out of this country to make it a point that they register as soon as they get to wherever they go so that they get helped. Otherwise, most of our people are suffering because they do not have anyone to help them and do not know where to start yet the embassy is their home. 8294Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT In Bahrain, there are many Ugandans who are stranded because we do not have services given to them yet they are sending money to this country. So, we need to help our people out there. Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for these efforts of safely bringing back Ugandans to their country. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Yes, LOP?3.43 THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You had, with your indulgence, allowed me to remind the Prime Minister of her earlier response to Hon. Kawalya’s troubles in Kampala - that the Prime Minister’s assurance is not adequate because the torrential rains pounding Kampala and the entire country are still on the horizon. The Prime Minister said that they were doing an assessment but it might rain tonight. If I were the Prime Minister, I would have assessed with a truck of tarpaulins and some food because these residents have no dwelling places. So, when it rains tonight, there will be trouble.Secondly, you need to plan for a cholera outbreak; the red flag is on the horizon. When you hear these torrential rains in Kampala, be sure that the toilets have been equally flooded. I am sure you do not have emergency water; it is not part of your plans. If I were the Prime Minister, I would have emergency water plans in my Government. If I were a Prime Minister, I would have emergency toilets in these situations. Please assure the country; your submission on this matter is not satisfactory, I am afraid.Thirdly, on the matter of Sudan, I am ably represented by the submission of my colleague, Hon. Ssemujju. Mr Speaker, the RSF, as described and as we know them, was an ethnic militia created by Gen. Bashir. Those who have heard of the “Janjaweed militia”; this is the group. They were recruited and they slaughtered the people of South Sudan in Darfur. It was a matter of time that one day, they would turn on their own. So, as long as people who slaughtered your people in Kasese are still masquerading around, one day, they will turn on their recruiters and deployers. And as a nation, we must be on guard.I hope this House took note of the submission of the elder, Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, on some people having rights against others; that while unarmed citizens are unable to go around the country to raise their voices, some armed people are all over the place. That we have a serving military officer all over the place, claiming to be canvassing for the presidency, but we have a law prohibiting active UPDF officers from engaging in partisan politics, then you see Government ministers falling over each other over his promise, and then we have a Prime Minister unable to prevail over her ministers. This is a country out of turn. Therefore, the Prime Minister needs to inform this country and Parliament whether there is somebody in control. Otherwise, if we continue the way we are doing, we shall be compelled to inform the population to stop cooperating with people in uniform because there is no one in charge. So, you rise up and do what you want to do – and unfortunately, at this stage, we would have been hearing the work of the African Union (AU). The AU is an incubator of despotism in Africa; toothless - just a talking shop. They should have seen this coming. They are all over the place incubating and keeping dictators, and despots. Mr Speaker, I encourage the Prime Minister to continue doing what she is doing. She has accounted for 208 plus six. From your account of the registered, 76 are not accounted for. Now that there is no Government in Sudan, make sure you are in touch and report appropriately. [Ms Amero]MINISTERIAL STATEMENT8295THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 25 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.Lastly, there was a very clear red flag raised by students in the International Islamic University of Africa in Khartoum. They were making a lot of noise on social media. I hope there is somebody in touch with them. These being students on scholarship, they are easily traceable. We need to know their fate and probably get a clear report about them in particular, because we have a generalised report on students, and so, we are not sure whether this is the group that the country is sure their lives are secured.I thank you, Mr Speaker, and hope all and sundry take heed of what is happening in Sudan. It is on the horizon here; no doubt about that. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Right Honourable Prime Minister, do you want to respond?MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, through you, I want to assure Ugandans that the Government of Uganda is in charge. As the Prime Minister, I want to tell you that we are in charge. (Applause)I assure my brother, Hon. Ssemujju, that what happened in Sudan will not happen in Uganda in any way; it will not. I am on record on this Floor of Parliament.Therefore, Mr Speaker, I have taken the concerns of all Members of Parliament. The government will continue to engage with you individually, especially is ensuring that we bring back all our brothers and sisters who are in Sudan. Lastly, I assure you, the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament about our brother - because he talked about floods happening in Kampala. So, I tell him that I got a message that they are already in touch with the Executive Director of KCCA, and the Minister of Kampala is here; I saw him around. I do not know whether he has a report. Otherwise, the fact is that those Ugandans who were affected will be helped. Thank you, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Next item?MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF ROADS IN KAMPALA CAPITAL CITYTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister for Kampala?3.51THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY AND METROPOLITAN AFFAIRS (Mr Kyofatogabye Kabuye): Mr Speaker and the honourable Members of Parliament, I am here to present a statement to Parliament on the status of roads in Kampala.      As you may recall, during the 27th Sitting of the Third Meeting of the Second Session of the 11th Parliament held on Tuesday 18 April 2023, the presiding officer raised concerns about the social media comments which were flying around on the terrible state of roads and potholes in Kampala. He instructed that a statement be prepared for the House on the amount of money that was received for the construction and the maintenance of roads in the last three years, the roads that were constructed and maintained using these funds and the current status of those roads. As a matter of background, Kampala Capital City has a total road network of 2,110 kilometres of roads, of which 654 kilometres making - 31 per cent - are paved and a balance of 1,456 kilometres - making 69 per cent - are unpaved; they are either gravel or earth roads.      Most of the city’s paved roads were constructed over 35 years ago, and have therefore outlived their design life. In addition, the city’s roads are highly trafficked and overloaded with heavy trucks because Kampala is a residential area, the business area and the commercial hub which hosts various public and private offices and service centres with an ever-increasing population due to a high urbanisation rate.Mr Speaker and Members –(Interruption)8296Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure.MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, all the information that he is giving is in the policy statement. What I thought his statement would contain is a solution to the problem. However, to take us back to what you have already provided Parliament in the policy statement, the Kampala-THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we have a lot of information about this matter. Okay? Let us go straight to the real point; tackle the potholes, not history.MR KYOFATOGABYE: Mr Speaker, I thought Hon. Ssemujju was a media person; so being a journalist, he knows about the issues of the preamble. Mr Speaker, Let me move on down there as a matter of pressure, with the current preparations for the upcoming Non-Aligned Movement Summit, and the Third South Summit of G-77 and China scheduled for January 2024, the required road improvement interventions will further set back the infrastructure improvement work plans and budget by approximately Shs 270 billion. All this is aggravating the road crisis in the city from the budget and the road conditions. There is that table and the objectives; it can be reviewed by Members. Mr Speaker, going back to the requirement of the statement as you stated and directed that time: In the last three years, KCCA received the funds from Government of Uganda and the status of funds is here in table two - that is GOU releases and also Uganda Road Fund. Since Members are aware, let me go to another state down there. We are saying, out of the funds received in the last three years, 28.27 kilometres in the last three were worked on-THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, here, we are not only accounting to Members; you are also accounting to the public. The public would like to know how much has KCCA received. When we say the funds, the people want to know how much in total.MR KYOFATOGABYE: In the year 2020, the budget for road upgrading was Shs 34.9 billion and all of it was received. Uganda Road Fund was paid Shs 27.4 billion but only Shs 24.6 billion was received; making a total of Shs 59.5 billion out of Shs 62.3 billion which was budgeted for.In the year 2021/2022, the budget for GOU Capital Development was Shs 47.4 billion and all of it was received. The Uganda Road Fund was Shs 24.9 billion and only Shs 11.7 billion was received, making a total of Shs 59.1 billion against a budgeted figure of Shs.72.3 billion.In this current year, 2022/2023, the budget is Shs 48.2 billion. So far, Shs 15.9 billion has been received as at 31 March 2023. And the Uganda Road Fund is Shs 24.9 billion but only Shs 14.8 billion has been received, making a total of Shs 30.7 billion against the planned Shs 73.1 billion.Mr Speaker, out of that money, KCCA was able to construct and upgrade a total of 28.27 kilometres in the last three years as indicated in Annex one. Here, roads which were made –(Interjection) - Be patient; I am going to the potholes under the status of the roads.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, please allow the Minister to do his work. MR KYOFATOGABYE: The roads were: i. Nabulagala Road ii. St Peter’s Church Kanyanya - Kawempe Division iii. Bajaber Road Link - Central Division iv. Mwanga II Road - Central Division v. Mutungo Tank Road - Nakawa Divisionvi. Walkways on Mutungo Tank Road - Nakawa Divisionvii. Ntinda II - Nakawa Divisionviii. Naguru Valley Vale - Nakawa Divisionix. Froebell-Bukoto Road - Nakawa Divisionx. Kabalega Close - Nakawa Divisionxi. Upgrading the Misagga Road – Nakawa Division 8297THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 25 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.xii. Upgrading George Kimbowa Road – Kawempe Divisionxiii. Construction of Naguru Close - Nakawa Divisionxiv. Radio Station Road - Makindye Division xv.  Kasenya Road in Makindye Division. Now this makes 13.34 kilometres which were completed. In addition, construction of another 14.9 kilometres is ongoing. These are:i. Lubiri Ring Road - Rubagaii. Zadoki-Lasto Lukoma Road - Kawempeiii. Upgrading Kayanja Road - Rubaga iv. Upgrading of Kizanyiro Road - Kawempev. Reconstruction of Mulago Cancer Institute Road vi. Nyayemuka Road - Kawempevii.  Upgrading St John - Kawempe viii.  Church Road in Kanyanya - Kawempe ix. Upgrading of Malinga Road - Centralx.  Upgrading of Katuso Road - Makindyexi.  Reconstruction of Natasha Road - Nakawa xii. Upgrading Misagga Road in Nakawa.So this now makes a total of Shs 28 billion and using the other funds we talked about in the previous -Mr Speaker, with the funds obtained from Uganda Road Fund, KCCA has continually carried out routine and periodic maintenance on over 400 kilometres of city’s paved and unpaved roads, annually. The scope of maintenance of works carried out includes pothole patching, manual and mechanised desilting of the city drainage, grading and regravelling of gravel roads, annually. The drainages which were worked on and some are still being worked on under the Road Fund are:i) Drainage improvement or Nakasero –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, that list is too long. Just capture that. Let us go to the pothole status on page 5.MR KYOFATOGABYE: The list is composed of about 32 drainage systems which are being worked on. Further drainages are being constructed in Kiyaaye, Kinawataka and Nsooba. Mr Speaker, on the construction of this drainage, allow me to tell you that the Shadow Minister for Kampala Capital City has raised an issue of flooding. Indeed, some work is being done in the parishes he is talking about, that is, Nakulabye and Kiyaaye drainage systems. In the same period, we received funds from donor development partners. The World Bank funded KIIDP 2, where KCCA received an equivalent of Shs 367.8 billion for the reconstruction and upgrading of a number of roads within the city. A total of 51 kilometres of roads’ length, equivalent to 66 kilometres of the two-lane length has been constructed. These are:i) Fairway Junction,ii) Kira Road in Nakawa,iii) Kibira –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do not mind about those details. MR KYOFATOGABYE: Makerere and Bakuli. Thank you, for your guidance, Mr Speaker. In addition, again under KIIDP 2, KCCA constructed 1.6 kilometres of Lubigi primary drainage channel and 3.2 kilometres on Nakamiro Channel.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of order?MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, you have, not once or twice, guided the Minister for Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs to address the problem we are experiencing but he has continued to behave as if he is presenting 8298Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT a dissertation; all the information he has been loaded with, he must finish, continuing to refuse to heed to your guidance. Is the minister in order to avoid answering questions about the crisis in Kampala, as guided by the Speaker, and continue to bore this Parliament with information already supplied in the policy statement? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, your name is very strong – Kyofatogabye. You are now giving Hon. Ssemujju an opportunity to call you out of order. (Laughter)However, you are reaching the pothole status, I can see. Go straight to it.MR KYOFATOGABYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The pothole statusThe operational strategy for managing the potholes, which has been going around – indeed, we need to acknowledge that we have been having a challenge. A number of potholes have been identified, which are attached to the list. Mr Speaker, to save time, allow me to I just mention the square meters of potholes on different roads in each division.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you read your statement. MR KYOFATOGABYE: This is what I am reading.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I am following page five. MR KYOFATOGABYE: …Using KCCA’s in-house teams, immediately start pothole patching in all the five divisions of Kampala targeting to patch an estimated 13,500 square meters of paved road area. The proposed schedule of roads where this intervention has been proposed is herewith attached in Annex I. A schedule of requirements for this exercise is also herewith attached in Annex II. Annex I in Nakawa, we have 2,580 square meters of potholes, ranging on 13 roads identified, including; East Naguru, Bukoto, Ntinda, Mutungo, Luthili, Katali, Butabika, Martyrs, Bishop, Katazimiti, Moyo, Mukalazi Road and Ismail Road. In Rubaga Division –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, did you measure each and every pothole?MR KYOFATOGABYE: That is why I am giving the exact square meters. (Laughter) In Rubaga Division,THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you give us the radius?MR KYOFATOGABYE: As long as it does not go beyond a square meter. We have 3,420 square meters of potholes on 11 roads, that is, Kyadondo, Kivebulaya, Kabakanjagala, Lubaga, Butiikiro, Wills, Balintuma, Kitakule, Nsimbi, Bulange, Mugwanya, Wakaliga, Kawaala, Masaka, Kalema, Ham Mukasa and Nsibambi.In Makindye Division, we have 3,041 square metres of potholes. This was measured and assessed on 29 roads. I may not go through all the roads but at least know the figures including Ggaba Road and others.In Kawempe Division, we have 2,830 square meters of potholes on 14 roads, that is, Bombo Road, Gayaza Road, Mawanda Road, Tufnell Drive, Nabweru, Kyabando, Alice Kaggwa, Nkinzi I and II, Dwaniro, Binaisa, Kisasi and Nanfumbambi Road.In Central Division, we have a total of 1,629 square meters in the city centre starting with City Square, Bombo Road, Colville Street, Kyaggwe, Nile Avenue, Lumumba Avenue, Sezibwa, Macknon Road, Jinja Road, [Mr Ssemujju]8299THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 25 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.Dewinton Road, Kampala Road, Kimathi Avenue, Parliamentary Avenue, Lugogo By-Pass, Gadaffi, Martin Road, Yusuf Lule Road, Nasser Road, Nkrumah Road and Hajji Musa Kasule Lule. (Interjections)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Pacuto, the minister has done a wonderful job of measuring each and every pothole in the city. I want you to give him an opportunity to present his measurement. This is a very critical research. If we deny him an opportunity – Hon. Nsamba is guiding him. Honourable minister, try to move quickly so we conclude.MR KYOFATOGABYE: Using again our best performing contractors for road maintenance, we want to carry out section repairs because some areas have gone beyond. Even if you patch a pothole, it is like putting a patch on another, which is no longer sustainable. Therefore, we are going to do section repairs in areas covering an estimated 33,750 square meters on 37 critical paved roads which are severely depleted. The proposed schedule of roads where this intervention has been proposed is herewith attached.Again, these roads appear in different divisions. In Nakawa Division, we have Kigobe road, Kinawataka road –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, that list is too long.MR KYOFATOGABYE: Thank you. In central, for purposes of Members understanding, this is where we have areas like Martin, which is beyond pothole repair, but need sectional repairs.3. Using funds so far received, Mr Speaker, pay a reasonable portion of our outstanding debt to the above two framework contractors to be engaged for the proposed sectional repairs – I have already said that. On this note, Mr Speaker, allow me to inform the House that we are in the process of receiving Shs 6 billion for pothole repairs. From the looks of things, it may not be enough. However, work has started. As I speak now, Yusuf Lule Road has been patched. So, we are moving gradually. Mr Speaker, on the other issue of the drainage and external funding, I am happy to inform you that Parliament approved and appropriated funds from African Development Bank (AfDB), where we are going to improve 85 kilometres of roads in the city. Under this component, we shall use $258 million. The roads have been lotted into five. Lot 1 & 2 started on 5 December 2022. The roads under Lot 1 are Wamala Road in Rubaga, Luwafu Road in Makindye, Kabega Road in Makindye, Muteesa I Road in Rubaga, Old Mubende Road in Rubaga, Kigala Road in Rubaga, Kayemba Road in Makindye, Kivebulaya Junction in Rubaga and Bulange Junction in Rubaga. These roads measure about – well, Members can read that one.Lot 2 cover the dualling of Port Bell Road (6.5 kilometres) in Nakawa and dualling of Spring Road (3.4 kilometres) in Nakawa.For Lot 3 & 5, the effective date of commencement was 18 April 2023. The roads in Lot 3 are Sir Apollo Kaggwa Road in Central and Kawempe, Muzito Road in Rubaga, Suuna Road in Rubaga, Suuna II Road – connecting to Wakiso – and Kabalagala Road Junction in Makindye. Lot 5 covers Mugema Road in Rubaga, Masiro Road in Rubaga, Ssentema Road in Rubaga, Ssentema Road II – this one also extends to Wakiso up to Bukasa to connect with the outer belt road, which is being constructed by Ministry of Works and Transport – Nsambya Road, Kiwunya Drainage Channel in Rubaga and Nsoba Drainage Channel. Mr Speaker, Lot 4 is under the clearance of the Solicitor-General and this will take Kyebando Ring Road, Kisasi Road, Kasubi Northern Bypass connecting to Namungoona 8300Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT Roundabout, Queen’s Way Roundabout – working on the lower roads, not the flyover – and Salama-Munyonyo Road. In addition, under Lot 2, we shall have Mpererwe–Kitezi Road – this also connects to Wakiso and is intended to go, for the first phase, up to Kiti, connecting to Kasangati–Matugga Road, which is under construction by the Ministry of Works and Transport – Ntinda–Kisasi, Old Kira Road and Old Kira Road II.Mr Speaker, that is regarding the African Development Bank funds.  In addition, we have come up with a new programme called the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Urban Development Programme, which, again, is going to be supported by World Bank. Here, KCCA is targeting to construct over 100 kilometres of roads.However, allow me not to indulge a lot on this because it is soon coming to Parliament for approval. As I speak now, Cabinet has pronounced itself on it. This will do great work in improving most of the roads, including those in the metropolitan area such as in Kira, Nansana Municipality, Mukono Municipality and parts of Entebbe and Makindye-Ssabagabo. The programme is targeting to construct over 330 kilometres in the metropolitan area – in addition to over the 100 kilometres in Kampala.Mr Speaker, the budget has been talked about, but the only thing we cannot note here is that when you look at the projected road network in the next four years, if we got the budget we wanted, we would have reduced this figure by 50 per cent. The new effort is going to reduce the 1,456 kilometres by 185 kilometres – that is between the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Urban Development Programme and AfDB. Then, if resources can be obtained, we can half the balance of 1,296 unpaved roads by 50 per cent - if we got Shs 5.2 trillion in the next 10 years. That would include working on the drainage master plan, which is to cost Shs 610 billion. Mr Speaker, I need Members to appreciate the fact that if you make roads in Kampala and do not work on drainage, you would have washed and spread in the mud. Secondly, being a city, it moves with street lighting and beautification.As a matter of a way forward, Mr speaker, I need to note that the current funding levels of Kampala Capital City Authority are unsustainable and disconnected from the service delivery expectations. Without losing focus of the problem – like potholes, as Members also witnessed recently – unless the funding situation at KCCA changes, calls for better roads and associated drainage system will remain a pipe dream.Mr Speaker, it is evident that to impactfully improve the city roads and drainage infrastructure, Kampala City needs a master plan to revamp the roads and drainage infrastructure. This master plan shall require an estimated funding of Uganda Shs 800 billion, annually, over the next 10 years – which I talked about in our drainage master plan and the Kampala Development Plan. This should be supplemented with an estimated average of Shs 40 billion annually from Uganda Road Fund to meet the city’s roads and drainage maintenance needs.Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, as you remember, we said the Committee on Physical Infrastructure should also go to the field, make an on-spot assessment of the situation and, if possible, verify the measurements. (Laughter)It seems they did the job. So, I request the chairperson of the committee to use a few minutes to make a presentation on this and we open up the debate. We wanted to get information from the minister and our own team of Members here. We sent the Committee on Physical Infrastructure because we are now in [Mr Kyofatogabye]8301THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 25 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.programme-based budgeting. So, the budget for roads is now under the physical infrastructure sector. Yes, honourable chairperson.4.20THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr David Karubanga): Mr Speaker, thank you for allowing us to present this report and for allowing us to go to the field. Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the Report from the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, arising out of our on-site field assessment. I beg to lay.The report has been uploaded and indeed, the committee moved to the field. I want to be brief and request that straightway go to the recommendations. Yes, we made observations but most of these observations are in the minister’s report. We wanted to go directly to the recommendations if you can allow it, Mr Speaker.The committee went and sampled the roads and we realised that KCCA has completed some roads and some works were on-going. We also assessed the dire state of our city roads; I beg that I read out the recommendations, as captured on page 8. 1. The Ministry of Finance, Planning, and Economic Development should commit more funding towards the development and improvement of KCCA roads so that interventions are commensurate with the network coverage; 2. Further, Government should endeavour to release funds to KCCA on time to enable it effectively carry out its mandate and pay off its outstanding debt arrears to contractors in order to avoid interest on the accrued debts and court cases; 3. Mr Speaker, time in the procurement process, including the Solicitor-General’s approval of road construction projects, should always be expedited. Furthermore, once a contract has been signed, the Ministry of Finance, Planning, and Economic Development should always commit to avail funds earmarked for that project; 4. KCCA and NEMA should have plans for sustainable waste management, which should involve the sensitisation of the populace because we realised that there is serious blockage of the drainage structures due to waste;5. KCCA should ensure that roads that have been identified for improvement or related interventions should have a forward-maintenance provision in the contract. This is because we realised there are potholes on many roads, which are being undertaken and if we had a forward maintenance intervention, these potholes would not be there; 6. Furthermore, KCCA should ensure that contractors provide comprehensive traffic management plans for all its projects and these plans should be enforced. Any contractors found contravening the same should be held liable and penalised for failure to observe the requirements of the traffic management plans during the on-going works. We realised that sometimes there is a lot of traffic jam yet there are no proper traffic management plans and this recommendation is aimed at addressing that;7. Mr Speaker, due to the new programme-based budgeting, KCCA and the lead program agency, which is the Ministry of Works and Transport, should always be holding program working groups with the supervision of the Ministry of Finance, Planning, and Economic Development to harmonise the sharing of the resources. And this one has been given out for the reason that we realise KCCA was grappling with the meagre share out of the programme; 8. KCCA should constitute a roads’ committee like it is in the local governments, for close supervision; 8302Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT 9. The Uganda Road Fund should increase on the percentage to KCCA from its Shs 467 billion, since the local governments and urban authorities are set to benefit from the one billion shillings allocated to them; and10. Lastly, Mr Speaker, KCCA needs, indeed as the minister said, a marshal plan to revamp the roads and the drainage infrastructure network since most of the roads are in a sorry state. Mr Speaker, I beg to move. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, this matter really touches all of us. It is a really big point of concern. That is why we had to take it up to this level, but it is a matter beyond KCCA. It is also a matter that covers Kampala Metropolitan, especially Wakiso and Mukono areas. And most of us, by the way, do not stay in Kampala City. Most of us stay outside the city and the image we really give is not a good one. However, I am happy this has been taken up and for those who are interpreting it negatively, in the end, honourable minister, this will benefit you because it has brought out issues, which we are just taking for granted. So, we should take this opportunity and ensure that indeed, we move seriously on the issue. I had picked Hon. Nathan Byanyima. So, let us hear from him before we hear from Hon. Itungo, and then Hon. Judith Alyek and Hon. Joyce Acan. Two minutes each, colleagues, so that we have more time.MR BYANYIMA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I happen to have headed a team to Kampala City yesterday. We were almost being lynched. Mr Speaker and Members, it is so embarrassing. Where we are, we are sitting on a time bomb because of the lack of road maintenance. The moment you do not maintain the road, hardly two years, you are going in for full construction, which costs a lot of money yet we do not have it - (Interruption)MR SSEMUJJU: Hon. Nathan Byanyima is one of those who have prepared this report but now he is debating his own report, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am the one who allowed him and it is because I read the report and noticed that it is not giving us the true picture. When I interacted with leaders, you know, what they told me is basically different from what is in the report. That is why I assigned him to give us exactly what they saw on the ground, which may be, the committee leaders failed or feared to put in the report. So, Hon. Byanyima, go proceed.MR BYANYIMA:  Thank you. Because I led the team; people insulted us because they thought we had gone there to just laugh at them. They called us thieves who earn a lot of money and do not care about the roads. The roads are in dire state. We went to the whole of Kampala, I can tell you, we need to go back on the drawing board. Currently, it does not require Kampala City Council Authority alone, but it requires the Ministry of Works and Transport, Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the sectoral committee of the Presidency to sit down and see how to improve our city. It is embarrassing to find a big pothole, a lake on Seventh Street; there are no roads in Kampala because of one simple thing; we refused to give the Road Fund money for road maintenance. When you give money to Uganda Road Fund, the biggest share, 60 per cent goes to UNRA, 25 per cent goes to Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA), and the rest goes to districts. If we do not make Kampala our mirror, where else do you want to go?Mr Speaker, some of us move out of Kampala - but if it was not for Hon. Nsereko to come in and cool the situation, even the minibuses would have been burnt. It is as bad as that in Kampala - get out of Kampala and see for yourselves. We are moving in good cars, but one of these days, take a walk to the old taxi park and see; it is no longer the Kampala we [Mr Karubanga]8303THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 25 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.used to see. I think potholes have come from the villages to Kampala.Mr Speaker, since we have not finished the budgeting process; let us go back to the drawing board to ensure that a certain big portion is directed to Kampala City so that we can maintain these roads to a motorable situation, including Mukono and Wakiso. I rest my case and I thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I had already picked you honourable colleagues.4.33MR NATHAN TWESIGYE (Independent, Kashari South County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. As we put our heads together to look for a solution, I just want to inquire from the minister whether Kampala Capital City Authority has a master plan. In addition, whether these fire brigade decisions you are taking of pothole fillings are in part of that master plan. In Kiswahili, they call it “Kujenga na ku bomoa.” We are now patching here, but the plan says something different. So, I would like to request the minister that if Kampala Capital City Authority has a master plan, give you a copy to Parliament so that the public can know that either we are working according to the plan, or what we are doing is against the plan, that is my request. Thank you, Mr Speaker.4.35MS JOYCE ACAN (NRM, PWD Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have stayed in Kampala for a long time. The problem of the roads in Kampala emanates from the blacklisted contractors. I do not know the miracles they do to get those contracts. They have been blacklisted, but still get contracts to construct the roads. I heard the minister telling us about budgeting for rehabilitating the roads; instead of patching the potholes to waste of resources, it is better to construct a few kilometres. Another thing is the failure to desilt the blocked drainages, which makes water leave its pathway into the roads, thus damaging them. I beg to submit.4.36MS JUDITH ALYEK (NRM, Woman Representative, Kole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Kampala Capital City Authority should be exemplary to the upcoming cities. I am raising the issue of waste management in Kampala City and other cities. Much as we are talking about the major road network that needs improvement which the minister has made a report on  I would like to re-echo the issue of waste management that has appeared in that report. I wonder how sewage has been connected to the roads that we want to improve, because these are mutually inclusive. Sewage management is very poor. I see most people in Kampala are still using septic tanks, pit latrines; are these kinds of facilities supposed to be used within Kampala City and other cities? Sincerely, this shows very poor planning. That is why the previous speaker was talking about a master plan. Do you have this in place? Is it appearing so much on the report that you have presented, honourable minister? Because I see you improving on the road network but our sewerage system is very poor. How do we discharge waste from the houses into the sewerage system? How is-(Member timed out)4.37MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Indepen-dent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank you, on behalf of the people of Kampala, for having found it wise to put this matter on the Order Paper and even for the people that come to work in Kampala. The new terminology being referred to our capital city is that if you want to tour and find potholes in the world, go to Kampala; you have 8304Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT seen it all over social media now in the world- it is very embarrassing. I am glad that this august House has sat here in the presence of Hon. Musasizi. We were here during the other budget recession and I want him to bear this House witness, I stood up and showed you the figures of the money you had allocated to this Capital City. I told everyone that one, most of us work or live in this capital. The seat of the Legislature is here, and that means all of us must come here to occupy our offices even if we reside outside. The President operates in Nakasero Plot 1 and all his guests are nearly hosted there or at State House in Entebbe. However, look at the picture this capital city and the state in which it is; no lights, poor drainage and poor roads. I remember putting you to task when you were bringing the supplementary on State House. I told you less than 100 people occupy the State House, but it is enjoying nearly a trillion shillings.The capital city, the roads and the infrastructure is being used by more than 7 million people on a daily basis, but what you had as a release in the first quarter, as capital development was less than Shs 12 billion. How do you explain that to the people of this country, that you are here asking for a supplementary - (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will give you special consideration as MP for the area. MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. And when we talk about equity, where is the equity? How do we explain to the taxpayers who only relate with us the leaders because these people never meet the President?The most immediate person who has the mandate to legislate over the budgetary principles of money allocation as to whether they pay taxes or as to whether money is expended on them is their Member of Parliament and whenever you meet people, you feel shy and embarrassed.Whenever you drive through the city because we stay in these constituencies - people pass you and ask, “Honourable, what exactly are we witnessing?”  The good thing is that we warned you, but you did not heed to our calls. Today, in the budget allocations we are planning, there is zero for drainage. This is a big shame.Why are these roads being washed away? It is because of the heavy runoff water. As long as you do not allocate money for drainage, even if you make for us many roads, they will be washed away because Uganda is at the Equator and so it receives tremendous amounts of rain in millimetres every year. This is why the roads are being washed away.We have heavy traffic and rains, and we are in the hills and valleys. Mr Speaker, it is simple logic. If you do not cover the drainage, given the huge amounts of traffic, the roads will be washed away.Finally, the honourable minister talked about the old roads; it is a fact but Kampala is the only capital city that does not have a functional railway and without plans for even a light rail. Therefore, the mass transit of people -(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conclude.MR NSEREKO: We all said most of the people move from Wakiso; so, how do they come to the city? Mr Speaker, there is a lot of pressure on the roads from goods and the people. Look at the tonnage of trailers that enter the city; over 25 tonnes enter and offload within the city. Meaning the pressure on these old roads is too much. This is why a Member was talking about huge potholes that are like craters or graves in an industrial area because the tonnage of trucks that offload from within the industrial area cannot be sustained anymore.[Mr Nsereko]8305THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 25 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.Members, I appeal to you to increase funding to this capital city so that it reflects who we are, what we are, where we want to go because a capital city is the mirror; it is the sitting room of this country. What it looks like is exactly its leadership on top. Otherwise, we all agreed that the capital city is in the hands of Government, who appoints the directors, implements policy, plans –(Member timed out.)4.40MR LINOS NGOMPEK (NRM, Kibanda North County, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to commend KCCA for commencing works on Old Port Bell Road and Springs Road in Nakawa Division where I reside. However, in the ministers’ statement, he did not indicate when they will desilt Nakivubo channel right from Bwaise through industrial area up to prisons.Mr Speaker, if you drive or move along Bwaise, you will find the drainage channel completely full with a lot of rubbish, bottles and all kind of things. I do not know why the minister did not include that in his statement. It would have been much better, if he informed Ugandans that they are going to work on the drainage channels because it is very important.Finally, for us to have a better road network in the city, I think the Lord Mayor should have a good relationship with the Government. He has sat and told the world that he will never engage the President over issues. Yet, if you want to run a better city, you must engage the Head of State and technical people –(Interjections)  - such that you get enough funds to run the Government and the city. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, everyone will be allowed to express their opinion here. 4.41MR SANON BWIIRE (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have looked at the statistics of Kampala metropolitan vis-à-vis how they pay taxes. When you compare it to other areas, it is the most paying city in the whole of Uganda. I would like to ask the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to account for this because people who are paying more revenue are the most punished as far as service delivery is concerned.Mr Speaker, there is a lot of insecurity to Members of Parliament who live in this city. When you get stuck on any road, you cannot reveal your identity that you are a Member of Parliament because people want to stone us. I would like to appeal to Parliament and the finance ministry to review most of the things and focus on Kampala City and neighbouring towns as we pass the budget. Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for the description of these potholes. I appeal to the finance minister to value that description such that we get the best from the description. Thank you.4.45MR ABUBAKER KAWALYA (NUP, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is quite embarrassing and unfortunate that the Minister for Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs has presented a report that indicates that they even went to the ground and measured potholes in this 21st Century. Recently, as the Shadow Minister for Kampala Capital City Authority, we approved an alternative budget and our advice was as follows: that if we want to see better roads in Kampala, good drainage systems in the city and better lighting, then we should increase the budget for Kampala to at least Shs 2 trillion. When I was still serving at city hall, we passed a resolution where we advised the Government to appropriate at least 3 per cent of the national budget. As we speak, Parliament is about to pass a budget of Shs 51 trillion, where Kampala is allocated only Shs 420 billion, wage inclusive. When you look at the road network - I sit on the Committee on Presidential Affairs but the 8306Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT Government, through the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is planning to give Kampala only Shs 10 billion. When you look at the slot provided for drainage, there is zero so where are we going? The finance minister is here and good thing, he stays and operates in Kampala because even the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is seated on Apollo Kaggwa Road, adjacent to KCCA. Kampala is the capital of this country –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, first seek permission.MR KAWALYA: I am sorry, Mr Speaker. The people in Kampala pay property tax and the property rating act is very clear. The amount of money collected as property tax is supposed to work on the following issues:i) Construction of the roads;ii) The drainage system;iii) The lighting of the city.When we look at the GDP of this country, Kampala contributes over 65 per cent, but when you look at the road network, a lot needs to be discussed. Therefore, my humbly appeal to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is to do a lot. There is no way you are going to say this Government has served the people of Uganda, when the capital of the country still looks the way it is at the moment. I beg to submit.4.51MS BETTY NALUYIMA (NUP, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I welcome the idea of the fact that several times, Kampala issues spill to the neighbourhood and it is none other than Wakiso, the first culprit.When you talk about contributions to the GDP of this country, definitely, after Kampala, it is Wakiso. In one way or the other, each one of us needs a district like Wakiso to access Kampala. The traffic jam affects us, in one way or the other, the way it affects the people in Kampala. So, I urge honourable colleagues – you have heard that there is some bit of Kampala Metropolitan extension. I am glad that over 90 per cent of the Members of Parliament reside in Wakiso, implying that the time spent in traffic jam every day somehow affects each person here. I request the minister, when he returns here, to give more clarification. What has happened to the Lubigi drainage – that road that was supposed to be there - last time when I was monitoring – What is happening to the contractors at Nakawuka Road? What is happening to Busabala Road? What is happening to Kiteezi Road?  We can continuously talk about them, but we need to see money allocated to them. Remember that whenever there is a lot of traffic jam, it affects all of us. At the end of it all, the city and its neighbourhood will be more affected. Finally, Mr Speaker, whenever it rains – for some of us who have been here for years – we know that some sewage line is going to fail and embarrass the city. I request that this time –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. On that issue of sewage, between you and I, there was an important foreign guest we were having a golf game with at Kampala Golf Club. The stench that came out of - I think there is a channel coming from Mulago. There were things which came from that channel that I cannot say here. Someone said: “No, no. Please, let us go.” The game was stopped. This is someone whom I know that if he went somewhere and spoke about it publicly, the image of the country would be ruined. So, when you look at the discharges from Mulago, people’s homes and all that, they pass through the city and everywhere. Beyond that, [Mr Kawalya]8307THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 25 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.we are going to get sick. Even we think we are safe in our houses, but we are going to get sick on those roads because of whatever is coming. It is really bad. So, I want us to move quickly because we have other very critical statements today. I want us to move quickly and propose a way forward. At the time of budgeting, we must work with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and take serious action on the issues of Kampala.4.52MR MARTIN MUZAALE (NRM, Buzaaya County, Kamuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, recently, the President directed that KCCA should receive Shs 6 billion. You have not made any statement in relation to that – whether the Shs 6 billion can be of help, according to the problem that you have.The challenge with the KCCA is that the cost of a kilometre of road is very expensive. Honourable minister, you need to work on that. Recently, we saw where a kilometre was rated at Shs 11 billion. That is way too much. Mr Speaker, the other concern is about the delays in implementation or execution of those projects. You find that there are projects that were awarded in 2020 and to date, those projects are still running. It becomes very difficult, even for us who are doing oversight, to know whether they are still using the money that was budgeted in 2020 or they are using the one allocated in 2023. The other challenge is with the finance ministry. Budget suppression and cuts is becoming a very serious problem. Today, we come here and do our appropriation. We say “the ministry will have Shs 60 billion”, but the ministry for finance releases about Shs 10 billion or Shs 20 billion, according to their priority. It confuses the entities because they are not sure of -(Member timed out.)4.54MR LUKE KYOBE (NRM, Luuka North County, Luuka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Without KCCA having a good maintenance culture for what they have done, we shall continue having potholes for a long time. I have observed that the new roads they have worked on are now full of silt. They flood every time it rains. That means they will continue failing because that is the beginning of the failure of the roads. Secondly, the honourable minister talked about potholes in Kampala. He gave us the measurements in square metres – which is very embarrassing – instead of giving us the square metres of the roads which are well done. I believe that with this kind of gesture - these are roads which were done 35 years ago and require reconstruction. The taxpayers’ money, which will be used to repair these potholes, will go to waste. Instead of continuing to repair the same roads, we should be reconstructing them. I beg to submit. Thank you.4.57MR FRED KAYONDO (DP, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The quality of a road is directly proportional to its drainage system. If they bring a budget without the drainage system budgeted for, then, there is no road.What goes around comes around. By the third quarter, KCCA had received 30 per cent of its capital development budget. This is the money that is used to procure asphalt used for patching. It is the money that is used to repair the drainage systems. So, we do not expect miracles to be performed. So, instead of pointing at KCCA, we should directly point fingers at the ministers because Parliament sits here, approves the budget, but it is not put into practice. At the end of the day, we sing songs and create names such as “Pothole City”. 8308Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT Mr Speaker, we are talking about a city whose road network was designed 35 years ago. The thickness of the road depends on the traffic flow. Over the 35 years, the traffic volume has tripled or is now four times. That means that even if you reinstate or patch a portion, another portion will develop problems because the thickness cannot hold the traffic that exists now.Therefore, unless we overhaul the road network in the city, we shall continue to patch –(Member timed out.)4.59DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. While my honourable colleague was speaking, I saw the people responsible for IT labelling him “NUP”, yet he is DP. (Laughter) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I know you are good at claiming your Members and reminding everyone.DR BAYIGGA: They need to correct that mistake, Mr Speaker.I want to applaud the minister. The minister made a report and was quite exact in the measurements. I had expected that the committee of Parliament would have counter-checked those measurements so that we know how much the cost of this job is going to be. However, the minister would have been candid enough to say that as an emergency action, this Parliament should move to identify funding to ensure that all these roads are fixed within the shortest time possible. And I believe it is possible, especially now that the President got involved and proposed Shs 6 billion as an advance to see what it can do.However, the minister should have advised the President, based on expert information from the technical people, that this is not enough. And I believe money can be identified so that we work together to fix this problem now. The problem of patching around is not going to work, especially now that we are going to have a conference soon. So, we don’t want to get embarrassed. Why the minister had to bring all those details of how many –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us hear from LOP.DR BAYIGA: Mr Speaker, allow me finish this. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, honourable.DR BAYIGA: What is good for the goose is good for the gander.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, I gave the Shadow Minister for Kampala more time because he is a shadow minister. So, that was their statement. Hon. Nsereko is an area MP. Usually, I use different considerations when I am allocating time. So, us the residents, let us -5.01 THE LEADER OF OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Of course, the presentation by the Minister for Kampala is well received. In some of the descriptions of situations, he was rather hilarious and it could actually fit for a script or National Theatre describing the configuration of Kampala roads; it is unique. I read quite a lot, and for a report to have the size of potholes and how they are measured, is a new one and I appreciate the minister for that direction.Mr Speaker, it is the money, and for me, I don’t even want to waste Parliament’s time; we have a report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. And I am very sure the Committee on Budget is working on a series of propositions. We know for a fact that the budget has nugatory expenditure lines. This House should instruct the Committee on Budget to go and pick that money and give Kampala money. This is the face of our civilization.In fact, most of the Members of Parliament travel. One of the questions I asked myself is: [Mr Kayondo]8309THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 25 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.when our leaders travel, what do they see? Are they just - when you really travel to any capital city, what occupies you? You know! What do you use your time for? So, you come back to Kampala and then to what?So, you sit in the Cabinet every Monday and then say what? So, you make a Budget for the country every year for 37 years and do what? And give us this kind of city? Please forgive us!Mr Speaker –(Interjections)– well, I owe it to the Member for a minute on my time.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, we are done with this. I refer the Minister’s statement to the Committee on Budget for action, as recommended by LOP and all of us. You see, I have many statements. MR MPUUGA: Mr Speaker, let me conclude in a second. Because as a LOP, I thought I owed colleagues space. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I don’t have time, LOP. MR MPUUGA: Mr Speaker, I am concluding that these committees are ours. We have described this shameful situation; it needs no more time. Please, you will leave soon as the Government. Please don’t leave us with a dirty city. At least leave with a better city as you pack up. (Laughter) Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, I refer these statements to the Committee on Budget for consideration. They will be coming back here. Next statement.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE PORTFOLIO OF MINERALS FOR THE COUNTRYTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order in the House, colleagues. Honourable minister for energy -5.04THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a statement to this August house by the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development on taxes on gold. Mr Speaker -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, sorry, I would like the Clerk, for the Hansard and record purposes, this should be well captured. On the Hansard let it be captured as “The portfolio of minerals in the country.” So, we need to capture it in the right way, which is the Statement to Parliament by the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development on taxes on Gold. That is what we want. The other one will come later. Thank you.MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Under Rule 42 of Rules of Procedure of Parliament of the Republic of Uganda at the 28th Sitting of the Third Meeting of the Second Session of the 11th Parliament of Uganda, which was held on Wednesday, 19 April 2023, Members raised concerns about uncollected Gold tax arrears, amounting to Shs 600 billion, following the report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, on the Ministerial Policy Statement for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.Mr Speaker, the presiding officer, who was yourself, guided that the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development presents a statement to the House clarifying the following:(1) The circumstances under which the Statutory Instrument to write off Gold tax arrears was made. On this, I beg to clarify that the Statutory Instrument made by the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development was to collect arrears of outstanding export levy on exported Gold and not to write off Gold tax arrears. And references made to the Mining and Minerals Export Levy on Refined Gold Regulations, 2023, Statutory Instrument No.22 of 2023, which I signed.8310Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT (2) In 2021, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development submitted to the 10th Parliament, the Mining (Amendment) Bill, 2021, which proposed an export levy of $200 per kilogram on processed Gold and 1 per cent of the value of unprocessed minerals. However, the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development of the 10th Parliament increased the rate to 5 per cent of the value of processed Gold and 10 per cent of the value of unprocessed minerals. The justification was that processed Gold is a valuable export that should be mainstreamed as a major source of Government revenue. The Bill was accordingly passed into law with the increased rates, and that was the Mining (Amendment) Act, No.08 of 2021. The implementation of the Mining (Amendment) Act, 2021 faced resistance from the industry, specifically Gold refiners and exporters, who contended that the rates were untenable. Uganda Revenue Authority and Uganda Free Zones Authority also expressed concerns that the rates were too high and that it would be counterproductive by shifting the processing and refining of Gold to neighbouring countries that do not impose a levy.Mr Speaker, the Commissioner-General of Uganda Revenue Authority was advised by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to enter into an arrangement with the exporters, to export gold pending payment of the levy. Accordingly, URA entered into indemnity and guarantee agreements with gold exporters, where the exporters committed to pay an export levy and deposited post-dated cheques for the same. On its part, URA provisionally cleared the exporters’ consignments. The purpose of this arrangement was to facilitate trade by temporarily relieving the exporters from export levy for a specific period of time, until a tenable rate was imposed by law.At the time, the Mining and Minerals Bill, 2021 was in the advanced stages of being enacted. The honourable Attorney-General advised that it is good practice for levies to be prescribed by statutory instruments instead of an Act of Parliament. Due to the nature of the mining industry, international commodity prices are dynamic, in addition to inflation, which may require regular review of levies for the country to remain competitive within the region and internationally. The Mining and Minerals Act(No. 25) of 2022 was passed by this Parliament and commenced on 28 October 2022. At this juncture, I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker and the august House for having enabled us to process this Bill within one sitting. As of 24 December 2022, the total outstanding export levy charged at a rate of 5 per cent was Shs 538,062,249,529. Uganda Revenue Authority sought to collect the outstanding export levy from gold exporters pursuant to the indemnity agreements.The other point that I had to clarify is which companies are complying with the payment of gold tax and which ones are not. Based on the information provided by Uganda Revenue Authority, two companies are willing to pay the tax. The other companies have raised concerns and this is being evaluated-I think they are about eight companies and two out of that are the ones that are complying.The third point was whether the statutory instrument was brought to Parliament for ratification. Mr Speaker, Section 287 of The Mining and Minerals Act, 2022 provides that the minister may make regulations to give effect to the provisions of the Act, including under subsection (2)(s) with respect to fees, levies and charges payable to the export of minerals. [Ms Nankabirwa]8311THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 25 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.The law does not require the minister to present these regulations to Parliament for ratification. For clarity and distinction, section 288 provides that the minister may amend Schedule Three on thresholds for mining licenses. A statutory instrument to amend this schedule is what is required to be laid before Parliament for approval. The Presiding Officer also guided that the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development presents a detailed statement on the mapping of minerals in Uganda. This particular statement, sir, will be provided at a later date. I have already instructed the Directorate of Geological Survey and Mapping to organise this information so that I can bring it to Parliament. I beg to submit. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister but I do not know why you skipped page three. You came from two to four. Page 3 had very critical information, which if you do not mind, you can also read.MS NANKABIRWA: I beg your pardon, Mr Speaker.  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Editor of the Hansard will ensure they capture it since it is read verbatim.(The report is hereby attached.)MS NANKABIRWA: In paragraph 1.8 on page 3, I am quoting the directive. In March and April 2022, Cabinet considered the matter of export of minerals. It was agreed that the country should encourage the growth of the gold industry in Uganda so that the country can earn more foreign exchange from the minerals and harness indirect benefits associated with gold refining activities. Accordingly, His Excellency the President directed the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, not to levy a tax on the processing and export of gold to enable the country to maximise benefits from gold processing activities. This is the current position of the Government.Cognisant of the current direction of the Government, it was recognised that there were already outstanding unpaid arrears from 1 July 2021 owed by gold refiners and exporters, which they had already committed to paying under the indemnity agreements. Therefore, a statutory instrument was necessary to collect the arrears accumulated during the period. Led by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the relevant stakeholders were consulted including my ministry and the Attorney-General’s Chambers, Uganda Revenue Authority and gold refiners and exporters, whose input informed the rate of export levy.In exercise of the powers conferred upon the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development by section 287(2)(s) of The Mining and Minerals Act, 2022, the minister duly made the mining and minerals export levy on Refined Gold Regulations, 2023. The purpose of the Statutory Instrument No.22 of 2023 was to collect the outstanding arrears. It has a specific duration from 1 July 2021 to 30 June 2023, as shall lapse thereafter. This statutory instrument is retrospectively being applied. The above are the circumstances under which the statutory instrument was made to collect the levy on processed gold. URA duly issued demand payment notices to collect the levy. However, some gold refiners made a complaint against the same and filed a suit in court, where an interim order has been issued. In order to provide clarity and further engagement with the entire industry to enable seamless implementation, the minister, who is myself, wrote to Uganda Revenue Authority to request that implementation of this statutory instrument be halted until further guidance was provided. The rest, I submitted.8312Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Our editors of the Hansard should realign this statement so that it can flow. Honourable minister, I have one question then I will call Hon. Kivumbi because he raised this issue. Do you mean the Cabinet can sit and agree not to implement this law and it stops there or I thought, if you disagree, then bring an amendment to Parliament. Otherwise, what precedent are we setting? I am actually asking myself: what am I doing here? Why do we waste our time making laws? If Cabinet can sit to pass a resolution that they do not implement - they just sleep over it, issue their own statutory instrument and then it stops there. If you are dissatisfied, why not bring an amendment on the Floor of Parliament like you did last time?I would like to know that before I move to paragraph 1.8. If that goes on our record here, then what message are we sending? 5.11THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MS RUTH NANKABIRWA): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I explained, at that time when Cabinet made the decision, we were preparing to bring a comprehensive Bill, which we did, and it was supported and passed by this House. I was actually guided by the Attorney-General.  Therefore, we thought it was not proper to bring an amendment at that time because we were bringing an amendment to an Act we were going to repeal. This is why we did not come.  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your statement would have been captured better if you said “as we bring”, but not to say “Cabinet sat and agreed that you should not implement”. Let me first allow Hon. Kivumbi who raised the matter initially. Hon. Bumali is not here because him and Hon. Kivumbi were the first people who raised the matter. 5.21MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI (NUP, BUTAMBALA COUNTY, BUTAMBALA): Mr Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity. What is at stake is even bigger than the Mabaati of Karamoja. At stake is Shs 616 billion worth of taxes, effectively the minister waived by this statutory instrument.Let me take the minister to paragraph 1.1. The minister said the statutory instrument was intended to collect arrears outstanding on gold export and not to write off the tax. That is her statement in paragraph 1.1.Now, let me take you to paragraph 1.7. You said, “As at 24 December 2022, the total outstanding export levy charged at a rate of 5 per cent was Shs 538,062,249,529. That was the outstanding arrears. On 24 April 2003, you issued an instrument that effectively rooted that arrear. Yet, in paragraph 1.1, you are saying you intended to collect tax but then issue an instrument that effectively writes off the tax. This statement is grossly misleading right from paragraph 1.1. Again, you come and say you are under the directive of the President. Directives of the President are always in a written form. I would have expected you to attach a copy of that directive. Mr Speaker, every time when we lose money, ministers are fond of saying they are under the directive of the President. (Applause) Now, we want this honourable minister to lay on the Table the directive of the President that effectively instructed her to write off that money.Honourable members, let us look at this critically. The minister has come to this Parliament and alluded to the fact that this instrument will elapse on 30th June. Effectively, the only intention was write off Shs 616 billion, thereafter it lapses.Mr Speaker, this minister needs to be investigated. (Applause) In my humble view, this is a connivance to deny Uganda revenue. 8313THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 25 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.We are talking about Shs 616 billion. We need to investigate. Even the taxpayers had committed to pay and they wrote postdated cheques.  We also need the indomitable agreement that was signed between URA, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development. We need that agreement. This statement here cannot be exclusively dealt with by this Parliament without a thorough investigation of this minister. Whether this minister connived or not with these gold exporters - I would not say a kickback but in another world, I would insinuate so. You are not innocent, honourable minister on this. You can put me to order, but you are not innocent. (Interruption)MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, the honourable member holding the Floor is proposing to do an investigation against me. Yet, he is already concluding that I am not innocent. Is he, therefore, in order to make conclusions before the investigations? Mr Speaker, it is okay to carry out the investigations but as to whether he is right to judge me before even you institute an investigation indicates he already has a determined judgment. So, is he in order?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Ruth, it is Hon. Kivumbi who has considered you guilty otherwise, it has to be a resolution of the House; not a resolution of an individual. So by that fact, I will not involve him in the investigation because he is already biased. He will be a witness. (Laughter)MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I would not have, in any way requested an investigation, if I do not believe there is a prima facie case. Already, there is a prima facie case and I have given facts to attest to my suspicion. This is why I urge this Parliament to institute a committee to investigate this minister on how this country lost Shs 616 billion courtesy of her instrument. (Applause) The law is clear; it says “may”. It never instructed you under “shall”. The law says “you may issue an instrument”. The law did not tell you, “You shall issue an instrument”. On your own volition, you chose to issue this instrument personally. I beg to rest my case. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Odur. Two minutes each colleagues. 5.27MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In case I utilise my two minutes, I request you to give me one more minute. I would like to address the preliminaries of the statutory instrument. The minister cites Section 287 of the Mining and Minerals Act and subsection 2(s) rightfully which gives her powers to make statutory instrument. In that section, the power given to the minister is to make regulations or levies on fees and charges. Tax arrears are not provided under that. If she made an instrument on tax arrears, then that instrument is defective. Honourable minister, you exercised powers you did not have. We cannot accept it as Parliament. The second point I would like to make is that when you make an instrument with retrospective application of the law - the powers we gave you is in the law which was enacted on 28 October 2022. So, you can only exercise that power from 28 October 2022 going forward. Once you extend backwards to the 1 July 2021, then it means you are actually exercising powers you do not have because at that time, there was an active law called the Minerals Act, 2021; so, there was a law to address that matter. You cannot come back and say you are now amending that law by providing for a statutory instrument. The third point I want to address, Mr Speaker, is the requirement for the statutory instrument to come to this House. The minister is under a mistaken belief that the powers she exercises is not subject to the supervision of this House. When this House gives you authority to make a statutory instrument, you come back and lay it 8314Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT either for information, approval or ratification. It is only Parliament that has powers to make laws in this country –(Member timed out.) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conclude, Hon. Jonathan.MR ODUR: I would now like to conclude, Mr Speaker, that this instrument itself must come to this House and we examine it. By practice, within three months of any instrument that is made, this Parliament can make a decision to nullify it – and I will move that we nullify that instrument and get the Shs 600 billion, pay the intern doctors, support the health centres and give money for all the roads that we need. (Applause) I thank you, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal?5.31MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The mover of this statement was requesting the minister to lay on Table the presidential directive. My view was that even if she did, I think the Attorney-General had cleared that in this House – that presidential directives are subject to the law. So, in case the President gives a directive, which would offend any law, it is the responsibility of the minister, together with the Attorney-General, to advise the President accordingly. Mr Speaker, my view on this matter is that this is money already earned in advance because the exporters had already paid in advance by giving post-dated cheques. So, it was just a question of waiting for the post-dated cheques to mature and Ugandans would have their revenue. So, I believe that this is an action taken in error. We have the authority to cancel it and the people of Uganda get the money to do other things. I thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, I will really need more clarification on paragraph 1.8 – on not charging any levy and you conclude that 1.8 by saying: “This is the current position of the Government.” How can the current position of the Government contradict the law, which was signed by the Government? Even the amended law – because a statutory instrument cannot amend an Act of Parliament. I am genuinely worried. There is a law, but we go on record that the current position of the Government is not to implement the law – and I do not see any efforts of bringing it here. Sometimes, really, I feel for you, honourable minister, when you are quoting Cabinet decisions and all that. I have been following this issue. I know how heavy it is. However, I think for things which are clear – when it is a law, we cannot find any other shelter. Just let me allow a few honourable colleagues. Let me start with the Member for Rukiga. Now, honourable colleagues, I have a problem. My practice – if you have seen how I run the House – is that when a Member has already spoken, I usually find it difficult to give them another opportunity when I have others who have not yet spoken. So, when you see you are not “catching my eye” – and you had already spoken – that is the only reason. I am trying to balance and pick honourable colleagues who have not yet spoken. Thank you.5.32MR ROLAND NDYOMUGYENYI (Independent, Rukiga County, Rukiga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This country is faced with so many challenges because of the negligence and the I-do-not-care attitude that some of our people work with. We cannot be talking about losing Shs 616 billion and someone casually talks about it as if it is Shs 1 or She 2. We are talking about billions of shillings. We are talking about potholes in Kampala. We are talking about hunger and famine in Karamoja. We are talking about poor roads in our villages and Shs 616 billion is being given out for free to exporters.Mr Speaker, I find it weird. I find it challenging. If we continue like this, our future generation will judge us harshly. [Mr Odur]8315THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 25 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.I expected the minister, in her report, to give us the names of those exporters whom she is trying to give free money so that we know them. She has said some of them were willing to pay, others were paying and others refused – that they had concerns. I do not know when paying taxes became optional – that I can decide to pay or not to pay – when there are tax laws in place. Mr Speaker, that is negligence and causing financial loss – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ameede?5.35MS AGNES AMEEDE (Independent, Woman Representative, Butebo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Aware that Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) is having a shortfall and also aware that companies have been prospecting gold for a long time – as a staff of Government, I last stumbled on a file in 1995. This company had been prospecting gold for about 10 years – this is 2023. I do not see any justification for the honourable minister’s statement. I, therefore, implore this House to reject that statement and have the minister and the Government ratify whatever it has to ratify so that these gold companies pay taxes.Mr Speaker, local companies are struggling and they are the ones paying taxes. Most of the foreign companies do not even give fair employment terms to Ugandans, yet they are exempted from paying taxes. That is the addition I wanted to make to this conversation. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Okupa?5.36MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Independent, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Listening to Hon. Kivumbi and Hon. Jonathan Odur, if we are to go by what they have said, I think we would even stop the debate and ask the honourable minister to get back and do the work neater than what has been presented here because these are issues of law and we cannot even debate them. If that is what the Government thinks, then, they should do the right thing. Like the Speaker has said, they bring the law and amend it. To me, this is also tax exemption. You remember the issue I raised here last time. Under Section 77 of the Public Finance Management Act, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is mandated by law to bring the list of the companies that they have exempted. The minister has not brought the report. Even the other one, Mr Speaker, which I asked for. I went to the library; I have searched everywhere, but I have not seen those reports. The provision of the Public Finance Management Act is very clear. If this exception had taken place, we would have even been able to raise it at that level. I would like to take this opportunity to demand that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development brings the list the companies that are exempted as of 31 March 2023. Thank you, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, you can answer this one quickly. Why don’t we – it is a legal requirement. We need the list of the companies you have exempted from tax.MR MUSASIZI:  Mr Speaker, this information is available and we have always provided it to Parliament through the finance committee.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you lay it on the Table on Thursday?MR MUSASIZI: Much obliged.MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, let us not take these things casually. Section 77 of the Income Tax Act report on tax exemption;(i) A person or an authority granted power to exempt the payment or to vary any tax under an Act of Parliament shall in each 8316Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT financial year, on or before the 30th day of September, the 31st day of December, the 31st day of March and the 30th June make a report on the matter to Parliament.(ii) A report made under this subsection 1 shall include (a) A person exempted from payment of tax; (b) The reasons for the exemption; (c) The amount of tax foregone by the Government; and (d) The benefits to the Government from the exemption.This is the law that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development brought to the House. So, it is not an optional thing, and it is not about reporting to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development but to Parliament.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Yes, honourable minister.MR MUSASIZI: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank Hon. Okupa, for clearly bringing out what the law provides. And now this invites me to ask our Secretariat here at Parliament to extract all of the reports I have laid here in compliance with the law.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, lay that report on Thursday; I know you have many copies. So, you lose nothing laying it here. Yes, Hon. Mwijukye, represent the miners quickly.5.43MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, BUHWEJU COUNTY, BUHWEJU): Mr Speaker, I am not a minor but I represent the miners in the Gold mining area.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, the artisanal miners.MR MWIJUKYE: Sometime back, the President of Uganda wrote a book about the paradox of development. In that book, the President talked about Africa’s problems and he said that it is a paradox to find a highly mineral-endowed area but very poor. When one reads that book, they see what is happening now, and which we are talking about. While there is a lot of Gold in Buhweju, poverty is overtly seen. There are no roads but people come and mine Gold and go away without paying taxes. We are told that Gold is the property of the Government and that we cannot touch it. If they are not paying taxes, how can we benefit from the Gold mining in Buhweju?The minister talked about the companies - those that are willing to pay and those that are paying; we want to know these companies. Last time I told you that in Buhweju, we are suffering under a company owned by the daughter of the Minister of State for Energy and Mineral Development, called Modesta Lokeris. She has a lot of power and authority. She has destroyed all the roads, and now she is not even paying taxes. No, we cannot allow this to happen; we sit here while people are suffering with somebody saying, “Just let them be.”THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Odero, you have not spoken.5.45MR GODFREY WERE (Independent, Samia Bugwe County South, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When you only talked about my colleague, Hon. Francis Mwijukye, as the one representing the gold miners, I wondered why you were leaving out Busia yet the Gold we have in Busia is equivalent to the oil from Hoima. (Laughter)Having said that, Mr Speaker, I wonder why the minister is saying that Gold miners are being exempted from paying taxes. Go to Busia at the moment, we have too much Gold but when you look at the state of Busia town, there is nothing like corporate social responsibility. [Mr Okupa]8317THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 25 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.Therefore, when the people of Uganda, especially of Busia hear that there is an exemption on taxes for those Gold miners, how are we benefiting from this resource, as the people of Uganda?Mr, Speaker, I want to implore the minister, especially the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development, to ratify that statement to say that such miners should be exempted. This is not uncalled for and the people of Uganda are watching because they want to know how they are benefiting from their mineral resources. Thank you.5.47MR ENOS ASIIMWE (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Mr Speaker, when you read paragraphs 1.1, 1.7 and 1.8, without reading Paragraph 1.1.2, you cannot have your debate concluded. Paragraph 1.1.2 says that URA duly issued a demand notice but that some Gold miners complained against the same and they went to court. The court has not concluded on the matter.Then the minister wrote again saying “URA should stay the collection” implying that the money has not been lost; they are only waiting for the court to decide. That brings me –(Interjections)- no wait - that brings me to rule 73 again. So, Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right to conclude that we halve lost this money, yet the matter has not been concluded? Rule 73(d) indicates that we cannot make conclusions until that has been done. Mr Speaker, let me again seek clarification from the honourable minister. In reference to Paragraph 1.8, is the decision by Government based on the fact that the matter is still in court? And is there a court order not to collect the money until the case has been disposed of? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, with the submission of Hon. Enos Asiimwe, let the minister first clarify on that for him and the members because it might mislead us and we get lost in there. Honourable minister, have you written off? Hon. Ssemujju, the point of procedure does not apply when there is no Member on the Floor. Those are the rules; you are the ones who made these rules. Rule 78(4) of our Rules of Procedure is very clear on this; there must be a Member on the Floor and that Member must be violating a certain rule; that is when you raise a point of procedure. Honourable minister, the Member is saying you have not written off the tax; you have only stayed it. Can you clarify that?MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I have not written off this levy. We have been faced with a problem right from the 10th Parliament. And in my statement, I have hinted on this in paragraph 1.2, where the Minister of Finance came to this Parliament and submitted an amendment to paragraph 1.2, which states that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development submitted to 10th Parliament, the mining Amendment Bill, 2021, which proposed an export levy of $200 on processed Gold but the committee of Parliament at that time did not agree with the minister and so they put the 5 per cent instead of the 200– THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proposed -MS NANKABIRWA: The committee of Parliament proposed and what came out thereafter, the implementation of this provision was unattainable which means URA and the gold exporters were in meetings. So, this time around, I was approached by the URA with the concern of not collecting tax. The Commissioner General of URA requested me to make a statutory instrument (SI) that would allow them collect the $200 per kilogram of gold and that is the SI, which I signed and sanctioned by the Solicitor General. There is no legal document that I can sign without getting advice from the Attorney-General. So, I signed it so that we can at least collect the $200. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of procedure?8318Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, one of the companies involved in refining gold- The African Gold Refinery was sanctioned by the US State Department, and chances are high they may have run away with taxes that with the help of Hon. Nankabirwa was not being collected. The other key dealers in this gold business are relatives of the President and I know for a fact how they load gold at the old airport at Entebbe, sell to China and Dubai and return with dollars in aircraft at night. So, the procedural issues I am raising is whether -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, you see, it is very important- I know we have immunity and we can say anything here. However, we also have standards; there are allegations that you can only make with very clear substantiated information and evidence. Hon. Ssemujju, the information you have given; can you give us evidence so that we have it here on record? It helps us here.MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, I thought the reason we give Parliament information is for it to investigate and that is why we have been involved in investigations. If you allow me, and a committee is set up, I want to go and give evidence -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, maybe, if you had said that it is alleged that relatives of the President or honourable members, I want Parliament to investigate whether relatives of the President are involved in this. But, when you speak conclusively on your own -MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, I take your guidance, I do not want to paralyse this debate, it is alleged but I will be happy to be invited by a committee and then I will inform the committee about these brothers who are involved in gold.Mr Speaker, the procedural issue I am raising is whether Hon. Nankabirwa should not inform Parliament -(Interjection)-  you see, the Hon. Ogwang has problems; the other day you were putting me on order over the Anti-Homosexuality Bill when I said the President is going to fight it. What happened after?- No, I do not want clarification.Mr Speaker, the procedural issue am raising, is whether Hon. Nankabirwa should not give Parliament full information that actually some of the companies that are exempted, have even left the country.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The honourable minister will clarify on that- you will be the one to give information. Hon. Ssemujju wants you to clarify whether they have left. But, you see, honourable minister, what I pick from your statement and the concern of the House is simple and it is related to what Hon. Enos has said. Parliament passes the law providing for 5 per cent, the refineries complain and when they complain, you go as the Executive which is in charge of implementation, you sit and first agree internally, you say no, since these refiners are not willing to pay, let us first hold it as we look for a way forward. Now, you agree as Cabinet, bring a law and we amend. However, in the process, you issue a statutory instrument that now reduces the rate from 5 per cent to 200 retrospectively. This is what the colleagues are concerned about; you amended the rate of tax retrospectively. Therefore, if we can first sort out the issue of saying we lost this much- the MPs are saying, before the law was amended, this was the bill, but your statutory instrument revised that bill.MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: That is why Hon. Amos should have been a little more honest. Hon. Keefa, him and I, sit on the Committee of Finance and he is aware that after the statutory instrument, the arrears were reduced to Shs 43 billion, - and that is what the committee tabled here. 8319THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 25 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.After the instrument of the minister, the total arrears now stood at Shs 43 billion and of which only Shs 3 billion had been collected. Therefore, the instrument of the minister effectively wrote off the arrears.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, that is the concern. I will guide after but Hon. SSemujju’s issue - Hon. Enos, that is the concern we are have.MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I have a list of the exporters which, I got from URA. And, I must sincerely say that I cannot tell the whereabouts of some of these exporters -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If you can read for usMS NANKABIRWA: From URA on the list of exporters:1. Aurnish Trading Limited.2. Bullion Refinery Limited.3. Metal Testing and Smelting Company Limited.4. Simba Gold Refinery Limited.5. Thaba Investment Limited.6. Faru Trading Uganda Limited.7. Africa Gold Refinery.And from the 7 from URA, only Simba Gold Refinery has paid the tax amounting to Shs 428,703,624 million the rest have not paid - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As of when?MS NANKABIRWA: Payment since 1 March to 17 April 2023, a total of 4,709.47 kilogrammes of gold was exported and tax of Shs 3,500,467,334 had been collected and the table indicates how -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, if you do not mind, you can lay it on the Table so that it can be a record of Parliament. Kindly lay it on the Table.MS NANKABIRWA: I beg to lay.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Read the statement so that we capture it. Honourable colleagues, let us get the statement first; she is laying it on the Table.MS NANKABIRWA: Should I read the heading?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please.MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a brief on gold export levy to the honourable Minister of Energy and Mineral Development from Uganda Revenue Authority. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, if you have the statutory instrument, lay it so that it can be on record. If you do not, we can do -MS NANKABIRWA: The statutory instrument was supposed to be attached. I do not know whether the soft copy I forwarded omitted that.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not have it. Clerk, crosscheck for it. If we do not have it, it can be laid tomorrow. MS NANKABIRWA: I was also asked for proof about the decision by the Government that Cabinet made regarding what the President directed. I beg to request you, Mr Speaker to lay the Cabinet minutes on the Table because you know our rules regarding Cabinet information. I do have proof, but I would like to seek authorisation so that I can lay on the Table the minutes of Cabinet regarding the waiver of the levy as I -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think what is causing a problem honourable minister is, here, you said, “Accordingly, His Excellency the President directed the minister -” So, was it part of the Cabinet minutes?MS NANKABIRWA: Yes. Mr Speaker, the President chairs Cabinet and whatever he directs is captured in the Cabinet minutes, which I possess. I just want to seek authorisation 8320Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT from the Leader of Government Business to allow me to lay this proof. I have it but I am constrained.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, I have this side and I need them to also contribute. Hon. Tom Bright, Hon. Okwi and Hon. Okeyoh. 6.01MR TOM AMOOTI (NRM, Kyaka Central County, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When you talk about the issue of tax exemption, I shade tears as a person who pays taxes. Our people are suffering on the ground. Uganda Revenue Authority is harassing our traders on the ground even right now, left, right and centre. Yet, the big fish are not paying taxes. Our own people here whom we call local investors are not benefitting from our gold. Many people have been chased from the gold areas like Kassanda while the rest have been killed and harassed by the soldiers and some people we do not know. At the same time, the people who are mining are not paying taxes. What is all this? I really feel pain because if we could consider everybody to pay taxes, the issue of roads, poor water, poor sanitation and all issues the country is undergoing will be solved. I call upon the honourable minister to check her office. Make sure that at least these so-called gold exporters pay our taxes so that we can benefit as a country. I submit. Thank you.6.04MR SAMUEL OKWI (NRM, Moroto County, Alebtong): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I join colleagues in discussing the issue before us. It is true most companies in Uganda do not celebrate their first birthday. You cannot open a business and take two days before URA reaches your doorstep. Most of our Ugandan companies are closing. The interest rates are high in the banks, the taxes are high and we cannot afford them. Mr Speaker, when we fail to do what is number one, we lose what is number one. The Government is trying left, right and centre and we are trying to be everywhere but ending up nowhere. We tried the Parish Development Model, this and that - we should plug these holes which are leaking so that we save resources to run this country properly, in the interest of the future generation who will judge us by what we have done today. I beg to submit.6.07MR PETER OKEYOH (NRM, Bukooli Islands, Namayingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I represent two subcounties that have got gold deposits, that is, Bukana and Sigulu. They are not artisanal miners; they are serious miners with heavy machinery. I consulted the District Commercial Officer and asked him how much gold they get. He told me between four and five kilogrammes in a month and this is a lot of money. Mr Speaker, when I inquired, he told me that most of the people involved are not Ugandan companies; they are foreigners. You might find that even the gold we say is from here is branded when it is sold outside the country. Just like some of the products like our tea, coffee and even fish; you find that countries that do not produce these eventually brand our gold, fish fillet, and tea and then export it as their own. So, when the minister states that there was Shs 600 billion that was supposed to be halted, it is painful. This country and history will judge us harshly because we need services. This is the time we needed to bridge every gap and ensure that all the money we earn is properly put to use and then we even ward off foreign influence with the money and conditions that are attached. I beg to submit that Parliament and the minister reconsiders this so that we save this country. I beg to submit. [Ms Nankabirwa]8321THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 25 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.6.09DR MICHAEL BUKENYA (NRM, Bukuya County, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Like my brother from Sigulu Islands, I represent six subcounties where there is mining of both artisanal and medium-scale miners. Mr Speaker, I would like to invite you to take a trip to Bukuya. You will note that the journey on the road from Myanzi to Kiboga, which is supposed to take about 45 minutes takes two hours. I am telling you this story to understand where I am coming from. When you reach the epicentre of mining, there is a town called Lugongwe. Paradoxically, the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development is supposed to take electricity there but people are generating their own power using diesel generators. It is very expensive, by the way, because if you have a fridge in that area, you pay Shs 10,000 per day for the generator to run it. The miners use cyanide; the processors use mercury and very soon, we shall be dealing with the complications of contamination of the water sources in Bukuya – very soon we will be facing complications of water contamination. The minister, Hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, is my mentor and I would like to urge her to convince Cabinet and the President to cancel these tax exemptions because when you come and see what we are going through; what is coming from Bukuya and what we have there, you may end up crying.I also urge the minister to deploy more officers in the field because I know groups of foreigners who mine and I do not think they declare any of the gold they export. I am ready to be an informer. I think we can even earn more than Shs 600 billion if the ministry is well equipped and staffed to come and we do the work together.As a community, we are also not happy because the gold is being mined in all the six subcounties of Bukuya by both middle- and small-scale miners. We know that the gold is there and people are taking and exporting it. Therefore, I urge the minister to convince the Cabinet and the President to cancel the exemption, even before Parliament comes in to engage. Otherwise, we need a lot of corporate social responsibility to help Ugandans to benefit from their minerals and we get to gold roads, for instance.I know that for the electricity lines, she can just write a letter, but we need gold roads like the Myanzi-Kiboga Road – and she is from Kiboga. So, we need the gold roads just like the oil people have the oil roads. If the Government is exempting them, let it borrow and invest in the area such that we also feel comfortable. Otherwise, we shall start fighting with those people who are taking the gold. Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, go back and update your statement. Honourable minister for finance, would you like to say something?6.11THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. This is a matter which cross-cuts between energy and finance. Therefore, it is important that I also make a comment.Mr Speaker, arising from the debate, there is an impression that we are exempting these companies and the gold business. The answer is “no”. We are simply moving from the position which we took as Parliament – and at that time, I was the chairperson of the committee. The position which we took became difficult to implement because it was extreme and unfair. I want to admit that in the debate in the committee then, we did not base on evidence to arrive at the 5 per cent, moving from the $200 per kilogramme. Mr Speaker, even the Shs 600 billion tax lost or foregone – that we are talking about - is arising from this measure, which became difficult for the Government to implement.8322Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT Mr Speaker, my last point is that we need to work together to ensure that the due taxes are collected. The impression that we terminate all the exemptions where they exist - not for gold because on gold, there are no exemptions - is also not fair because we use taxation to achieve various objectives. Mr Speaker, the honourable member from Kyegegwa –(Interjection)–  clarification?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, I do not have time honourable. Stop donating my time. MR MUSASIZI: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. I would like to respond to what Hon. Bright Amooti said, that businesses downtown are closing when we are giving favours to the big ones – and you can see the impression in the House. Mr Speaker, this impression is not correct. In the interest of time, next week, when I come to defend the tax Bills, I will give a comprehensive statement to the House about what is bringing this about. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. You see, honourable colleagues, processes are important and that is why the law gives processes. If we are going to have laws and not follow them to change whatever we want to change, that is where the problem is. You could have cured this when you brought the amendment.When you brought the amendment, you could have addressed this issue at that time – to say we even have this Bill: what do we do with it? We would see whether this could apply retrospectively or not. That is it. So, the problem is the process. Otherwise, if you find it difficult –we cannot force you, to say you must succeed in doing this when you have found it difficult. The processes – motion?6.15THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move under Rule 59(k) of the Rules of Procedure to invite your indulgence and that of the House, having listened to the minister’s statement and the attendant responses, that the House considers a motion without notice to constitute a select committee, under rule 190, to;1. Consider the circumstances under which the minister, by statutory instrument, waved Government taxes from what is supposed to be Shs 616 billion to 43 billion.2. Consider the circumstances under which the statutory instrument was issued.3. Consider the agreements between URA and the gold exporters that have not been tabled on the Floor of Parliament.4. Consider matters attendant to this industry. Mr Speaker, aware that the country is grappling with revenue challenges and we are in a budget period, I beg, your indulgence, under this rule, that this motion is taken. Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, you know, we are flexible on how we do business here. Honourable LoP, number one, personally, I am not a strong believer in these select committees when we have our own committees. It is not that I am watering down the motion. I am trying to be flexible and give guidance – especially now that they have finished the ministerial policy statements and have enough time to process these issues. Secondly, I was thinking we could give the minister one week because there are issues - you see when you go after just one individual, yet that individual has shown you where their hands are tied - I think we would, first, open it further, get more information in one week’s time, she brings an updated statement and if we are not satisfied, we subject it to this investigation. I do not know your view about my proposal.[Mr Musasizi]8323THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 25 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Of course, I am one of the proponents of the in-house committees doing their work because Members are empowered and capacity is built. My consideration of the committee is that one, Hon. Ruth is my old friend, but I think her statement is constrained. For example, she is making an allusion, in her statement, to seven companies of which two were willing to pay. In the report tabled, there are 10. That is already an inconsistency that may not be cured by another statement; it does speak to gaps. I am sure that statement was written for her by technical people that can easily mislead and put her in trouble. I want to protect my sister from that. Therefore, an investigation, which she is not part of, would really remedy that gap. It is not about targeting an individual but there are issues in this industry that need to be resolved.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And that is why we would need to give her a second chance to update this statement. MR MPUUGA: No, they will mislead her again. That is why she needs to be protected from people who made that statement, which is misleading the House and the country.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded?HON. MEMBERS: Yes.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, I will put a question and you will voice. So, the motion is seconded by Hon. Jonathan Odur, Hon. Allan Mayanja, Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, Hon. Mwijukye and Hon. Ameede. Honourable members, this is a motion, which we do not need - because we have been talking about it, and we know the issues. So, I put the question that a select committee be formed to investigate circumstances under which – I am trying to get the real statement so that I capture it well - taxes on Gold were waived – let us put our hands up. I will make it very easy; let me do this.(Members voted by show of hands.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have 36 for, and 28, against. Therefore, the motion has carried the day. A select committee will be formed to carry out this investigation. The minister does not need to bring another statement. We shall contact the whips to second members to this committee so that we can be able to look into this matter expeditiously. Thank you – still on the same?MR MPUUGA: This is to request you - now that the motion has been taken - we have a budget process. Would you consider that they report back to the House in two weeks before we pass the budget so that we have this captured as part of our budget process? Just in case you believe it is possible, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I really understand but we are going through a very critical period. So, this will depend on the proposed names. If they are not members who are in committees that are doing very critical work, as far as processing the budget is concerned, especially members of the budget committee - I will guide on that, on Thursday. MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE INQUIRY INTO THE OPERATIONS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF SPORTSTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, we received the responses of the minister and the report of the Committee on Education and Sports. I want us to have a debate of 30 minutes and conclude this matter. Starting now. Those who have forgotten what we discussed, please I can put the question for the adoption of the report and we will be done. 6.23MR ANDREW OJOK  (NRM, Omoro County, Omoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the chairperson and the minister 8324Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT for the responses. When you look at the budget, you notice that 80 per cent of it is allocated to the federations. So, I would like to appreciate the Council for that aspect. The other issue that I want to talk about here concerns the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Regulation 14 talks about the releases, which should be done every three months within the first 10 days of that month. Mr Speaker, the sports sector employs very many youths within Uganda and has the potential to actually get us out of that youth unemployment problem. However, sports as you know, is very dependent on the financing and timely releases of funds, as reported by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. When you look at Rugby, for example, right now they are representing Uganda at a very high level in South Africa but any delay would impact how they perform. It was also reported that the women’s netball team also suffered when they failed to get money in time. So, I want to request this House to at least compel the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to release money in time to support the sports activities. On term of reference No.2, the committee proposes that the federations look for ways of getting funds from corporate agencies. We know that there are hindrances to the corporate companies supporting our sports institutions. For example, if you are importing foot balls or rugby balls into the country, you are taxed very heavily. Can we have interventions in that regard and look at how we can make it possible to bring equipment into the country? On the jerseys - we know there could be options. For example, we have NYTIL in Uganda but they do not have the capacity to manufacture those jerseys. Can we look into that direction to see how we can support our local teams?Mr Speaker, we mentioned that the clubs can support themselves but the interest of the Government is also to support the age grade and development. We have children who are trying to learn sports but they may not be catered for in terms of funding. Can we have the corporate agencies also supported to cater for the age grade and the women’s leagues, in terms of creating interest and awareness in the – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, it is two minutes each. 6.25MS MOURINE OSORU (NRM, Woman Representative, Arua City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We all know that the National Council of Sports promotes and controls all sports on behalf of the Government of Uganda. I have a few concerns: First, whenever it comes to travelling abroad for the qualified teams, we realise that the National Council of Sports takes more staff than the participants, and most of those participants always struggle when it comes to accommodation. They even cry for sports gear. Why don’t we use the money that they use to take their staff, to procure sports gear?Secondly, His Excellency made promises. I remember during the Olympics, Tokyo Awards, he said all gold medal winners would be getting Shs 5 million monthly, silver medal winners, Shs 3 million and bronze, Shs 1 million. However, to date, nothing has taken place. We wonder what could be happening yet those people have families.Thirdly, the She-Cranes have been crying ever since they had the Commonwealth competitions. They won and were promised money. It was only Shs 5,000 that each was given. We wonder up to now where that money could be or if it has been diverted. Lastly, the National Council for Sports has become very segregative of the Paralympians. Last year, we had about 15 people who qualified to go to the competitions. Unfortunately, they came looking for money from us for their [Ms Nankabirwa] SELECT COMMITTEE REPORT8325THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 25 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.tickets and accommodation, but we did not give them. When they reached there, without –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Tonny.6.28MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I read the report of the committee and the recommendations and that of the minister in charge of Sports. Mr Speaker, first of all, I have noted that from the committee’s report, they seem to agree with the minister on most of the things. Except that the committee appeared to have not got most of the information that the minister eventually came to clarify on. But all in all, Mr Speaker, the committee recommended that there were issues that they were not able to conclude and wanted the Auditor-General to carry out a forensic audit. I am also aware that this Parliament made a recommendation and directed the Prime Minister to constitute a forensic audit into the National Council of Sports, which I have learnt has been done and the report is coming to this House soon. Now, I wanted guidance on how we are going to deal with this because Parliament requested a forensic audit, which the Auditor-General is just- THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You can propose an amendment to that.MR TONNY AYOO: I would think then that we get a complete report from the Auditor-General which we requested for as Parliament so that we are able to discuss it conclusively. For now, issues that require administrative action by the minister, then Parliament can ask the minister to act on them. However, when the report comes out, we shall have a conclusive position on issues like sharing funds among the federations and associations.Mr Speaker, we are aware that the Ministry does not release all the funds and they come late. This is part of the problems that are causing confusion among the federations. If this –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable Minister for Sports, the information Hon. Tonny Ayoo gave us on the forensic audit done by the Prime Minister - we need to confirm it; is it true? Is the report more or less ready - because Parliament had tasked you?  Honourable minister for sports, can you clarify that?6.30THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCA -TION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true that the Prime Minister directed the Office of the Auditor-General to carry out a forensic au-dit; the report is yet to be concluded. When it is ready, I beg that maybe I bring the report and lay it on the Table for purposes of looking at the findings of that audit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Chairperson of the select committee, what is your view on the suggestion by Hon. Ayoo Tonny that we wait, for them to bring this report so that we handle it conclusively?MS KANUSHU: Mr Speaker, I concur with the suggestion of Hon. Tonny Ayoo. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Because the other suggestion would be that we adopt this one, then once the forensic report comes, we refer it to the committee because it cannot be processed in plenary and it would go to the accountability committee, which would also take more time. I think there are recommendations that are not subject to the forensic audit; because the forensic audit is on expenditures and how money was utiliszed. But, we have very strong recommendations in the report. 8326Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT We would amend and remove that component of the forensic audit, where you were recommending that we do a forensic audit, since we have confirmed that there is one already being concluded; it would be redundant now. We can also leave this recommendation in the report. When that report comes, it would be implemented.MS KANUSHU: Mr Speaker, there were two recommendations with regard to the forensic audit: one of the recommendations was on the National Council of Sports and the other was on the federations because the committee established that there were also issues of mismanagement of funds within the different federations. So, I need to be guided on the one we are talking about. Are we talking about the forensic audit of the National Council or the forensic audit of the federations, because there are two recommendations?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which forensic audit are you doing Hon. Peter?  MR OGWANG: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The forensic audit which is being undertaken at the National Council of Sports (NCS) is on the money we appropriate to NCS which goes to all federations. Therefore, for that purpose, the forensic audit is for all monies sent by Parliament to the National Council of Sports. Therefore, as far as the recommendation is concerned, in my considered opinion, the right word would be to say that we allow the forensic audit of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to bring the report, which is holistic other than us going into a piecemeal approach; one on NCS, one on federations and yet all monies go through National Council Sports to federations. I thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yeah, I totally agree with that. Because you see, the forensic audit is covering all money we appropriate wherever it went; whether in federations or at NCS, it covers all of them. The moment, we are not satisfied, honourable colleagues, we can order more for more audits. Yes, Hon. Nsamba. 6.34MR PATRICK OSHABE (NUP, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Mr Speaker, this report we are dealing with, was sanctioned by this House and the forensic audit was sanctioned by the Prime Minister. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No by this House; we directed the Prime Minister. MR OSHABE: By the House- THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, it is also by the House.MR OSHABE: Mr Speaker, I do not know why we should not deal with this report and finish it, because members did their work. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Sure. MR OSHABE: Let us conclude on this matter and we wait for the other one.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So let us conclude this. MR OSHABE: Yes -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We can even leave out that part of the forensic audit. Then once the Prime Minister’s report comes, it will actualise this provision of the forensic audit. So let us move. Hon. Aza.6.35MR TOM AZA (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report.  On the operations of National Council of Spots. Mr Speaker, the issue of National Council of Sports is simply a lack of knowledge of good [The Deputy Speaker] SELECT COMMITTEE REPORT8327THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 25 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.corporate governance that is accountability; issues related to cooperation, integrity, transparency, dialogue and teamwork. There is a lot of backbiting, telling lies, gossiping, rumour mongering and so on –(Interjection)-  yes, there is no much work there. I for one would feel that really, there must be cooperation and teamwork; this is what should be encouraged there. For instance, Mr Speaker, more than 15 years ago, Dorcus Inzikuru won a gold medal in steeplechase in Santiago Chile, and was promised that Barifa Stadium will be changed to Dorcus Inzikuru Stadium. Up to now, the National Council of Sports has failed to follow up on this issue. The stadium is really dilapidated up to now. Not only that, Mr Speaker, there was a promise that there was going to be the construction of stadiums in all the regional centres like say Mbarara- Kakyeka Stadium, up to now it has not been constructed, Pece Stadium in Gulu has not been constructed, Moyo Celecelea Stadium has not been constructed, in Lira we have Aki Bua and so on and so forth. Please honourable minister, let us follow up on all these promises by the Government so that we have these stadiums in place. And there must be harmony and coexistence at the National Council of Sports. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Akena. 6.37MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Division East, Lira City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am going to address only one aspect which came out clearly from the committee report and this touches on the criteria for the funding. I am speaking on behalf of the Federation of Motorsports Club of Uganda, where I am a member and a participant. Last year, we hosted the Africa Championship in Uganda and I want to thank the minister for being available at the launch. At the same time, I want to fault Government. Mr Speaker, when the actual event was kicking off, our minister for sports was deployed to Lira on other duties.I raise this with pure honesty because in Botswana, President Khama was there to flag it off. In Zambia, we had a senior minister. In Zimbabwe, we also had a minister. In Uganda, when we were are hosting, our minister was present for the press but was not available when the actual event took place. What criteria do we use? On the issue of the success; we have had success in different departments. Uganda emerged third overall in the Africa Championship. Within that context, we have an African champion on the 85 CC, which is a young man by the name of Gift Ssebuguzi. We won medals or podiums in various areas but the criteria on how we handle these matters are things which really need to be looked at. As far as the sport is concerned, motor rally brings up huge businesses. Internationally, we have the Africa Rally Championship, which is the Pearl of Africa Rally in Uganda. But if we go back, we used to have the East African Safari Rally which was an international event that promoted the whole of the East African region. So, I am requesting the Government to look at it holistically and look at areas – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Member for Busia. Honourable colleagues, we are going to Parish Development Model. We have to clean up this Order Paper before we break off this session. 6.39MS HELLEN AUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As a sports lady who has brought gold medals to this Parliament, I have to speak about this. First of all, we have 52 federations in this country but among the 52, only few federations are active yet they submit their budgets. Honourable minister, where does the budget for the inactive federations go? 8328Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT My prayer is that these inactive federations should be activated. My other question is about budgeting. Since many federations are inactive, where does that money go after being budgeted for? Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, I have picked your sentiments on this matter. We are going to have a forensic audit. We shall debate more because we still have opportunities to debate this. The shadow minister was part of the select committee, so he is very well captured. Honourable minister, I did not want you to open up so much but I have one issue. I have heard allegations of sexual harassment within these federations by coaches and staff especially our female athletes. What action are you taking on those issues? MR OGWANG: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, allow me to begin by commending all honourable members for taking a keen interest in supporting sports in Uganda. I want to begin with an issue, you have just mentioned Mr Speaker. As far as I am concerned, I have got that from one federation; a complaint which I want to confirm. As a ministry, we have asked the Uganda Netball Federation, specifically the Vice President, who is holding the office of the President for the next three months to work with Makerere University, Department of Gender Studies to specifically undertake an investigation into the matter by interviewing our daughters to see how many of those might have been sexually harassed. Why are we bringing this? We have picked Makerere specifically because we want them to give us an independent report which in our considered opinion would be able to take action upon.Secondly, I would like to thank my dear president, Hon. Jimmy Akena. Mr Speaker, I want to begin by commending your leadership, in particular; both you and the Rt Hon. Anita Among, have taken a keen interest in supporting sports in Uganda and I think it is the first of its kind that we are getting the much deserved attention. (Applause)I also want to commend colleagues who have specifically participated and are involved in active sports development in the country, beginning with Hon. Jimmy Akena. Hon. Jimmy Akena is a member of Uganda Motorsports and to be honest, he did invite me to flag off the competition of the Motocross Country Championship, which was here in Kampala. I regret having not participated in that event. Hon. Jimmy, accept my apologies, as the minister responsible for sports. Next time, I will do better. On the question of what criteria is used to specifically divide this money, I want to first say this. I have a board which I call the council and this council sits when funds are appropriated to look at what goes to which federation. Honourable colleagues, I have picked a lot of interest as far as the criteria for money is concerned. I want to say I will be able to guide as the Minister of Sports going forward on that specific subject matter with the board since they are the ones who have the powers in line with the Act to run the day-to-day affairs with the National Council of Sports regarding the operation of sports in the country.On inactive sports federations, I do not have any inactive sports federations. I have 51 active sports federations. Why? Because they have activities, which we might say are not active, but they have and they are doing it, challenges notwithstanding. When they have activities where they need support from Government, the funds might not be available at that specific time. This is why you see there are a lot of complaints that we are not supporting them. I would like to thank the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. For the first time, the National Council of Sports has got 100 per cent funding. Let us appreciate them -(Applause)– because all the monies [Ms Auma] SELECT COMMITTEE REPORT8329THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 25 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.which have not been sent in the last three quarters have been sent in the fourth quarter. So, I expect federations to receive all their funding as per the budget they sent to the National Council of Sports. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conclude, honourable minister.MR OGWANG: I want to conclude by saying two things. One, on what my sister, Hon Osoru said about the athletes, specifically the pledges, I would like to state that the stipend given to the athletes includes the following games:1. All-Africa games2. Olympic games3. Commonwealth games.These stipends are given to those who win gold, silver and bronze. I would like to confirm to my sister that if any one of them is not getting their stipend from the three, then you need to see me so I can follow it up. To my knowledge, this money is being paid monthly to those athletes because I get the records from the Statehouse Comptroller. Last, but not least, on the issue of the Paralympics, I would like to say that some of the challenges which come in here, came in at a time when we did not have the support - Hon. Mpindi is here. Recently, I constituted a steering committee that will organise the All Africa Games. We also have the Paralympic games and Hon. Mpindi is the president of that federation in Uganda. For that matter, I nominated him as the Chairperson of the Paralympic Games, which is going to take place. I would like to confirm that as Government, we are committed to supporting sports holistically without segregating. On the issue of Barifa Stadium - Hon. Ssolo, I was in Arua under the directive of the President. I met the stakeholders but we must accept to address the question of land. What is happening in West Nile, particularly Barifa land is that there is a contest between the National Forestry Authority. The President sent me to Arua. I met the sports administrators. Barifa Stadium, as of now, is on the National Forestry Authority’s land. We are looking at getting funds to construct the stadia which were pledged to the people of Uganda by His Excellency the President. For that matter, I challenge you, Hon. Aza that as leaders from West Nile, sit down as stakeholders, and agree on the area the Government should plan to construct the Barifa or Dorcas Inzikuru Stadium. To my knowledge, that plan is in Arua City. Mr Speaker, I have been asked about Namboole – let me put this on record.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, they do not ask you by rumour. (Laughter) You only answer questions that are on the record.MR OGWANG: I thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that the report of the select committee on the inquiry into the operations of the National Council of Sports be adopted. (Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, committee chairperson and your team. Your report has been adopted. Honourable minister, I will give you three months to bring an action-taken report on the recommendations. MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE SUBREGIONAL OVERSIGHT REPORTS ON THE PARISH DEVELOPMENT MODELTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, I want us to conclude on all these reports because they have budgetary implications. All the reports were received and the minister was supposed to give responses 8330Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT and then we have a debate – although we have already picked most of the issues. Honourable minister?6.49THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Raphael Magyezi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Arising from the reports of the oversight visits on PDM and the debate, I found it imperative to produce detailed reports on how much money has been given to each parish, under PDM. Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a report on the parish revolving fund (PRF) disbursement to the parish SACCOs for Financial Year 2021/2022, as of June last year.Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the report on the parish revolving fund disbursement to SACCOs for the Financial Year 2022/2023, as at the end of February this year.Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the report on the parish revolving fund disbursement to SACCOs, by district, for this financial year, as at the end of March this year.Mr Speaker,  the responses I am going to present to the Members have been uploaded on the iPads, but I request the IT team, through you, Mr Speaker, that the report be put on the screen so that we can follow it together. Mr Speaker, this statement is presented to Parliament in response to issues raised by Members of Parliament during the debate on the motion for the adoption of the sub-regional oversight reports on PDM, as directed by the Speaker on 4 April 2023. For consistency, Mr Speaker, I have decided to use the format of the terms of reference which were given for the oversight activity. These were;1. To determine the exact amount of approved funds that have been disbursed to the various parishes.2. To examine the eligibility of the various categories of beneficiaries of the PDM funds. 3. To assess the effectiveness of utilisation of the PDM funds disbursed to the beneficiaries. 4.  To establish the extent of adherence to the guidelines and procedures by the various actors in the implementation of PDM. 5.  To examine any other matters incidental and make recommendations for corrective actions. I have responses to 25 very important questions, which I believe the honourable members keep meeting in the public. I, therefore, beg that we go through these responses.TOR 1: To find out the amount of approved funds disbursed to the parishes: Question 1: “How much money was disbursed to the various parishes for PDM last financial year and this year?”In Financial Year 2021/2022, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development released Shs 86 billion as parish revolving fund to the PDM SACCOs.This year, in quarter one and quarter three, out of the 10,594 SACCOs, which we have, the finance ministry disbursed Shs 25 million each to 9,937 SACCOs, which were ready, across the country. The total amount disbursed was Shs 25 million to each of these which comes to Shs 248.475 billion. This is an implementation rate of 93.7 per cent in terms of SACCOs so far funded within one financial year of implementation, which, to me, is commendable. There has been some delay, mainly in Kampala and Kasese District, because of some errors in the training and registration of the SACCOs and the leadership of some of those SACCOs. These errors have been corrected and as I [The Deputy Speaker] MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION8331THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 25 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.speak now, the funds are being processed for those areas. This month, as per the end of last week, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has sent an additional Shs 25 million to 5,874 PDM SACCOs, which had already disbursed their first tranche of Shs 25 million to their beneficiaries. This means that those particular SACCOs have already received Shs 50 million this financial year. The total amount disbursed this month is Shs 146.850 billion. The process of disbursement continues on a daily basis and we will keep on reporting this to Parliament. Mr Speaker, I have given you a table showing the total amount of parish revolving fund so far released to the SACCOs.The one for Financial Year 2021/22 was Shs 86 billion, which was 47.7 per cent of the budgeted Shs 180 billion. The money for the first three quarters – the Shs 25 million per parish – was Shs 248.475 billion and the money which we have released in this month is Shs 146.850 billion. These give us a total of Shs 395.325 billion for this financial year, plus the Shs 86 billion for the last financial year. Question 2: “Why did some parishes get less than Shs 17 million last financial year and what is going to happen to the balance that was not paid?” This is an important question, Mr Speaker. In Financial Year 2021/2022, the Government had promised to fund each parish at Shs 17 million. The amount required to cover all the 10,594 parishes was Shs 180 billion. However, the finance ministry released Shs 86 billion only for this purpose. Therefore, not all the parishes received Shs 17 million. If you get Shs 86 billion divided by 10,594 it is impossible to get Shs 17 million per parish. So, what happened is that in some districts they decided to pay Shs 17 million in full to only a few parishes while in other districts they distributed the money equally among their parishes. And this explains the disparity in amounts received by parishes last financial year. The Government is committed to clearing the arrears of the last financial year. The finance ministry is carrying out reconciliation with the districts so that each parish gets Shs 17 million for the last financial year.Question 3: “Why were some parishes missing out on the PDM yet these parishes were approved, some of them got their councillors elected and others even completed the procedures for PDM funds?”I was requested by some of the members to explain the difference between parishes created by the Electoral Commission and those by the Ministry of Local Government. Mr Speaker, some parishes, which are on the system indeed missed out on the Parish Revolving Fund so far released this financial year mainly because of the various errors in their names, accounts, and their signatories. Others were not yet registered by the Ministry of Trade, Industry, and Cooperatives. These errors have now been corrected and some are still being corrected and the affected parishes will get their funds.Regarding the Electoral Commission’s activity in accordance with sections 108 and 109 of the Local Government Act, the EC may demarcate certain electoral areas into more than one constituency in order to take into account means of communication, geographical features, and the deaths of the population. This does not mean that when there are two councillors representing a parish, the Electoral Commission has created more administrative units. Only those parishes approved by the Ministry of Local Government and are given an instrument of creation by the minister, remain on the list of parishes and are the ones to receive the PDM funds.Question 4: “Why give the same amount to all parishes yet they are of different sizes and different populations, and parishes have 8332Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT different numbers of villages; some with many and others few? The poverty levels in these parishes are different; some are very urban with a lot of people and different urban features and other factors.”Mr Speaker, it is true parishes are different in nature and there are no two similar parishes in Uganda anywhere, in terms of population, age, villages, geography, poverty levels, urbanisation, and so on. For PDM, the most critical factor that will carry the bigger statistical weight is the rate of subsistence of households in the parish. Data being collected under the parish-based management information system by the Ministry of Information Communication Technology and National Guidance, and the Uganda Bureau of Statistics is actually aimed at helping us obtain the necessary information, which will generate a robust formula in the near future, taking into account all those factors. So, in the meantime, that is why the Government is using the pro-rata basis of allocating the PRF to each parish across the board.Question 5: “Is the money actually on the SACCO accounts? If so, then why are some of the beneficiaries being sent away by the banks without any payment?”Mr Speaker, the money is actually available on the SACCO accounts in the different banks and we are ready to indicate which SACCO and which bank have kept their money. Any beneficiary who has completed their application process and has been appraised by the SACCO loans committee, and has been trained and cleared, such a beneficiary should have their money paid, to his or her bank account or mobile money account, without unnecessary delay.Some people have been sent away by the banks, which is true, but this is mainly because these people presented identification and telephone contacts, and biometric information, different from what was captured on the system. So, if someone registered a telephone number of his wife but when he goes to the bank, he presents his own telephone numbers, he will not get the money.In this case, SACCO leaders are called upon to assist their members to correct those errors together with the district officers at the parish.Question 6: “What is Government’s plan to release the remaining Shs 75 million budgeted for each SACCO this year? Remember we promised Shs 100 million we have already given Shs 25 million, what will happen to the money unutilized at the end of the end of the financial year?”Mr Speaker, I have already said that arrangements are in place by the government to release Shs 100 million and even this month the SACCOs that are ready and which have already disbursed the first tranche have already received an extra Shs 25 million. Government is committed to releasing the remaining Shs 75 million to the parishes as per the budget you approved, this financial year; for those SACCOs that are ready.Parish Development Model funds are given as a grant to the parish. The money does not return to the Government; the money stays with the SACCO. However, the money is given to a borrower as a loan. So, the beneficiaries that are getting this money need to be told that this is a loan from their own SACCO, but for us, as Government, it is a grant to the SACCO.Eligibility of various categories of the PDM beneficiaries; terms of reference number two We are required to look at the beneficiaries and their eligibility.Question 7: “Who are the target beneficiaries of PDM, and how does the system determine who is in subsistence?”Mr Speaker, the target beneficiaries of PDM are households in subsistence production and these are about 39 per cent, as per the UBOS household survey. The subsistence economy refers to a cashless mode of production that relies mainly on natural resources to provide basic things of the home through hunting, [Mr Magyezi] MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION8333THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 25 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.gathering, and rudimentary agriculture that has minimum surplus to take to the market to sell or trade.The Parish-based Management Information System is a tool, which has been developed by UBOS and the Ministry of Information Communication Technology and National Guidance, to capture and analyse profile data of each household by population in the household, level of income, economic activities, access to social economic infrastructure, and so on. And this is done alongside participatory appraisal technics such as wealth ranking and these are used at the community level to determine the house substance. There are a few exceptions, as colleagues pointed out, where the data collectors made errors in profiling the households. In such cases, the system will reject that applicant because your biometric data does not conform to the set parameter within the system, but errors will be corrected as the program continues.Question 8: “Are the SACCO leaders eligible to access PDM funds?”Mr Speaker, the SACCO leaders are eligible for PDM funds because they are part of the households in subsistence in their parishes. They are actually elected leaders because they emerge through enterprise groups as households in subsistence. However, prudence demands that leaders first serve the ordinary members before they can serve themselves, especially in this beginning season of the first round of disbursement of PRF to the beneficiaries.Question 9: Why are some residents in some areas excluded on the basis of their political party affiliation?PDM is for all Ugandans; it is not for any particular political, religious or tribal group. Indeed the aim is to promote the financial inclusion of all the citizens of Uganda and to fulfil the SDG objective of leaving no one behind. Any form of sectarianism or exclusive tendencies, by the SACCO leaders, should be reported to the authorities for appropriate handling in accordance with the law. At the moment, - who is the head of the Parish Development Committee (PDC); it is the Chairperson LC II in that parish. Who is the chairperson of the SACCO, it is the SACCO leader who is elected by the people, and you know that in some areas these may not necessarily be NRM members. So, the emphasis is to leave no one behind. As long as the household in that parish falls under subsistence, they are entitled to receiving the money. Question 10: “What are the strategies to deal with some people who keep benefitting from every Government wealth programme and yet some of them are perpetual defaulters?”Honourable members, the communities know the character of their members and that is the key philosophy of the PDM. Therefore, defaulters, swindlers and habitual liars under the other programmes should be identified by the SACCO leaders, should be blacklisted and denied access to the PDM funds. Question 11: “Why is PDM funding individuals, instead of funding groups which would protect the funds from misuse?” Implementation of PDM follows a conceptual design, as approved by Cabinet and Parliament. As stated earlier, under the PDM, the beneficiary is the household, not the individual. There are other schemes of Government and private sector institutions in which an individual may be funded.Question 12: “How does PDM help people in hard-to-reach areas with no banks, with difficult terrain, people on the islands, marginalised communities and minorities?” Mr Speaker, in all areas of Uganda, there are parishes. Irrespective of the location or geographical features, there must be a parish in that area. All parishes in the country access PDM funds, training and extension services.8334Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT Infrastructure and services for the hard-to-reach areas are catered for under the sectoral programmes of the ministries, departments and agencies of Government; but we have requested the banks to provide mobile vans or agents to serve remote areas in the form of outreach. Question 13: “How does PDM address issues of special interest groups?” Special Interest Groups have raised a number of concerns on PDM through their representatives here in Parliament and councils. They include the following:1. Under the special interest groups’ issues, can these special interest groups form their own groups or SACCOS? Mr Speaker, there is nothing to prevent anybody in Uganda or a group of persons from coming together to form their own group or SACCO. However, under PDM, each household will benefit from the PDM as households who are members of the PDM parish SACCO. 2. Can Special Interest Groups be represented on the PDM SACCO Executive? They are represented on the PDC; the Parish Development Committee, but then on the SACCO Executive, the request here was that the special interest groups also be represented. We welcome this idea. We shall study it and include it in the revised guidelines accordingly. 3. How are the special interest groups’ quotas secured? The basis of the quota is funding, not numbers. What do I mean? I mean that if we are giving Shs 100 million per parish, we mean that Shs 30 million out of that Shs 100 million will be given to the youth; Shs 30 million would go to the women, Shs 10 million would go to persons with disabilities, Shs 10 million for the elderly and the rest would fall in between the remaining Shs 20 million. The limits apply even for the special interest groups. That means that each beneficiary may borrow a maximum of Shs 1 million from the PDM SACCO. We have trained the loan committees to screen the applications they get and categorise them according to these quotas. The process is monitored by the Parish Development Committee, on which the special interest groups are all represented. If the quota of a particular special interest group is exhausted or is not exhausted, what happens? If it is not exhausted, it is rolled over to the following quarter and is reserved for that special interest group within the parish PDM SACCO. So, last quarter, we gave Shs 25 million. If a certain group has not accessed their money fully, then it is reserved and they add what they have in this quarter and that money is for the special interest group. 4. What happens later? I would not like to go into this when we are beginning a programme like this one. We believe that in every SACCO and parish, we have the elderly and people with disabilities and even the youth and women are there. So let us believe that they will access their quotas. How are the special interest groups members trained and guided to select the right enterprises? The members of the special interest groups who are to benefit from the PDM funds, like any other person, apply and they are vetted and selected within their enterprise groups. They undergo training and guidance on the basis of business planning and management for their specific enterprise, together with other beneficiaries. Nonetheless, the special interest group, whether it is youth, women, people with disabilities or the elderly, have no problem in arranging special programmes of training and monitoring their members to make sure that they actually utilise this funds properly. Let me go to terms of reference number three, which was to monitor the efficiency and utilisation of PDM funds. [Mr Magyezi] MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION8335THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 25 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.Question 14: “How will the beneficiaries utilise the money if they receive it late for the planting season?” Mr Speaker, the late disbursement of funds to most beneficiaries indeed makes it difficult for farmers especially and particularly those engaged in crop farming to procure inputs this planting season. We apologise for that. It is highly regrettable but it is explainable. This has been due to the laborious, detailed process of beginning such a nationwide programme and correcting errors by some SACCOs along the way. Now that the system is getting more refined and procedures are better understood, my hope is that farmers should be able to procure the inputs in time for the next season. There is no need to rush to disburse money to anybody who is not prepared to use it, as per one’s business plan. The money should be disbursed only to those beneficiaries who are ready to use it. Otherwise, it remains with a SACCO and it is safe and secure to disperse, as and when the beneficiaries have been prepared, trained and are ready for it. Question 15: “Give clear information on who is responsible for the distribution of seeds and other inputs to farmers under PDM. Is this system efficient, given the experience so far?”Under PDM, inputs are procured directly by the farmer using the loan obtained from the SACCO. The role of the district, guided by the production department, is to certify the suppliers of the inputs in their district. To us, this system is efficient because it minimises the bureaucracy of Government institutions. It minimises overpricing of inputs. It reduces the wastage of resources and bribery. It actually puts procurement directly under the control of the ordinary citizen. The oversight bodies of Government, civil society and the leaders at all levels should pick interest in this initiative. We shall analyse its efficiency in the subsequent reports to Parliament. Question 16: “Effective utilisation of funds requires skilling, training, capacity building of the SACCOs, enterprise groups and the beneficiaries, before you give out the money. To what extent is this being done?” The pillar for community sensitisation training and mind-set change is critical to the success of PDM. This is under the leadership of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. The training is done using national and district teams of trainers. Colleagues, the challenge has been that of inadequate funding. Nonetheless, the districts have prioritised this activity and work is ongoing, albeit at a slow pace to build capacity of SACCOs, the PDCs and to sensitise the communities. They use local radios and meetings. Question 17: “Explain delays in allowing the SACCOs to disburse funds to beneficiaries, which has resulted in poor utilisation of funds and loss of confidence in the PDM.” Mr Speaker, I would like to apologise for the delay to give funds to the beneficiaries. I want to assure you that the situation is improving, especially since the last recess. We note an increase in the number of beneficiaries receiving the money.We will certainly continue to report this as we go along but again, this situation is explainable. Delays in disbursement of funds to beneficiaries has been mainly due to the lack of preparedness of the beneficiaries, inadequate training of the SACCOs and the need to screen the leaders of the SACCOs. So, we had to ensure correct signatories who are elected by the people at the parishes instead of those handpicked from offices, correct errors in the names of SACCOs, and have all SACCOs registered and certified by the Minister of Trade in line with the SACCOs byelaws. 8336Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT We have given instructions to all accounting officers and banks to immediately release funds of the beneficiaries who have been approved by their SACCOs and who have been trained and are ready to put funds to the right use. There should be no reason in any district for not distributing this money to the beneficiaries. In some cases, they are telling me they are waiting for the launch, and a statement, I do not know. If a district has carried out training of these beneficiaries, the SACCOs have done their role, things are in place, then there is nothing to delay release of funds to the beneficiaries.Question 18: “What is the strategy to promote transparency and accountability so as to ensure that PDM funds are used for the right purpose? How can this be strengthened? Who is in charge of monitoring PDM funds and how is this information relayed upwards?” Transparency and accountability are key to the success of PDM. The Government accountability agencies have been brought on board and they will monitor and audit the utilisation of PDM funds. The secretariat has developed a tracker system to follow up the flow of funds and they shall be producing weekly reports. The PRF is sent directly from the Treasury to SACCO accounts. This has cut out beneficiaries and delays which were experienced when the money was sent through the districts. Nonetheless, we have ensured that the district accounting officers are informed of the funds which have been sent to their parishes.The most important structure and means of promoting integrity under PDM is actually the peer to peer pressure by the community members through their SACCOs and enterprise groups. PDM is overseen by the Parish Workmate Committee (PDC) of seven members at each parish. Through the parish chief, the PDC reports upwards the district through the subcounty or town council. Steps will be taken to strengthen this mechanism through training, follow up and prompt action on abuse of PDM funds and other deterrent or preventive measures.TOR 4: To examine adherence to PDM guidelines and proceduresUnder this, I was asked: Question 19: “Why are the guidelines ever changing? There is a need to avoid contradictory information and multiple circulars given by various agencies of Government.”The overall implementation guidelines and policy framework of PDM were laid by myself before Parliament last year. Changes which have been made over time have been made in good faith and are meant to accommodate necessary improvements in the programme. They include the following: i) The PRF funds are now released directly to the SACCO accounts from the Treasury instead of being sent through the districts;ii) The SACCO executive; the chairperson, the treasurer and secretary are the signatories to the SACCO bank account instead of the parish chief;iii) The maximum amount loanable is Shs 1 million, per beneficiary. One may borrow less than Shs 1 million - that is actually between Shs 200,000 to Shs 1 million, depending on the nature of the enterprise or business in which one is to invest the funds. Previously, it was a flat rate of Shs 1 million for all;iv) The Parish Development Committee (PDC) to expressly include the chairperson of the council for the elderly in the parish. Previously, it was simply saying an opinion leader in the parish;v) The quota for the elderly has been increased from 5 per cent to 10 per cent. They raised complaints through their representatives, and we thought this was justified;[Mr Magyezi] MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION8337THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 25 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.vi) All local supervised banks were permitted to participate in the programme instead of limiting it only to Government owned banks.It should also be understood that the different pillars have developed their pillar manuals and operational guidelines. This is seen as issuing multiple guidelines by different Government agencies because we have different pillars, and each pillar issues its manual and operational guidelines; it is the programme design. In order to ensure consistency and harmonisation, the secretariat has been tasked to study all guidelines and circulars before they are given out to the public. We have agreed on a centralised communication system under the National Coordinator of PDM.Question 20: “Can the secretariat translate these guidelines into local languages for people who are not conversant with the English language?” Mr Speaker, translating the guidelines into all local languages in Uganda is not feasible. However, the secretariat has been instructed to study the proposal of translating the guidelines into the main languages, if possible and affordable. In the meantime, it is the responsibility of the parish chiefs and extension workers to assist interpreting the guidelines to the SACCOs, the applicants and the general public.Question 21: Will the secretariat develop separate guidelines for the special interest groups? It is not practical for the secretariat to develop separate guidelines for each special interest group per enterprise. But steps shall be taken to incorporate the concerns of the special interest groups in the revised guidelines. The pillars shall also be required to review the manuals and guidelines to tailor them to the needs of the special interest groups. The secretariat is in touch with the Equal Opportunities Commission to ensure that PDM guidelines provide affirmative action for special interest groups as required by the law. Question 22: “The ordinary people who are targeted beneficiaries of PDM have found your guidelines and procedures cumbersome and bureaucratic. Can the secretariat develop simplified forms and procedures?” It is true that the ordinary people have complained about the lengthy procedures and complicated application forms. We have tasked the secretariat to study this matter in view of easing the procedures and making the application forms more user friendly, and this is being done immediately. Question 23: “Give clear guidelines on the amount payable by an applicant to access the loans and the repayment conditions. How does PDM cater for borrowers who subscribe to Islamic banking?” The applicant under PDM is required to pay not more than Shs 5,000 to the SACCO for processing the documents, stationery, photocopying, and transport and so on. It is not more than Shs 5000. The borrower signs an agreement with a SACCO and is required to pay interest of 6 per cent per annum payable within a maximum of 36 months. The repayment schedule for each borrower depends on the type of enterprise in which one is to invest the money.We presented the issue of Islamic banking to the National Policy Committee and they have mandated the Minister of Local Government and the Attorney-General to go ahead and advise the modalities to incorporate conditions of Islamic banking into the PDM procedures.Question 24: “Why subject every applicant to open an account in the bank, when some banks are too far, and some borrowers need less than Shs 1 million?” The guidelines provide for three ways in which to access the money that is, opening a bank account, using mobile money or getting your money by cash.8338Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT It is not mandatory for every PDM beneficiary to open a bank account. Nonetheless, this option is recommended, especially for those in towns and those who can easily access the banks. It is a vital step to get our citizens into the culture of banking. It is disadvantageous in terms of cost and convenience for those who live far from the towns plus bank charges and remember one has to live a minimum amount on the account. This may reduce the amounts available for investment.The option of using cash is preferred for those who live in remote areas, far from the banks and where the mobile telephone network is poor or unavailable. In this case, we have requested the banks to provide mobile vans to serve their clients in the remote areas on specified days. However, the banks have complained, this is expensive and it requires adequate security both for the banks and the people. Imagine you put it on the radio that on Wednesday, the van will be here, come for Shs 1 million. We need to make sure that we provide adequate security both for the banks and the people. The use of mobile money service is the most preferred modality on the assumption that the PDM beneficiaries have mobile telephone sets with the numbers registered in their names and corresponding to their national identification card numbers. Unfortunately, this is not always the case and hence delays some beneficiaries in accessing their money. Mr Speaker, the secretariat is engaging the banks so as to agree on the most appropriate method applicable to each case. The objective is to avoid overcrowding at the banks, as we saw recently in Mbale, and to ease access to the funds by the beneficiaries while ensuring the safety of the money.Question 25. “The guidelines give seven pillars, which are mutually reinforcing but we only hear you talking about pillar 3 - the financial inclusion pillar, which is being implemented. Explain the contributions or plans for the rest of the pillars.” Mr Speaker, the seven pillars of PDM are all necessary. For now, the emphasis is on pillar 3 - financial inclusion - because we are aiming at giving money to households to invest in their preferred enterprises. We hope that this will increase the household incomes and hasten their transformation into the monetary economy. However, other activities of the other pillars are also being implemented through the work plans and budgets of their respective MDAs, specifically under Pillar 1. This is the pillar to increase production, productivity, value addition and marketing. It is chaired by the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. This is the reason for the Parish Revolving Fund. Farmers are expected to invest their money wisely with cost-benefit analysis or “ Ekibalo”,  so as to make profit. The Ministry for Agriculture has already given guidance that the Extension Service Grant, which is sent to the districts should be used to support the farmers and enterprise groups under PDM with more extension service. Pillar 2 (Infrastructure and economic service) and Pillar 4 (Social service) are equally important because, for example under Pillar 2, we need community access roads to evacuate produce the markets. These pillars I have met, Mr Speaker I want to assure you that they have already developed their manuals. Of course, we thank Parliament for agreeing with Cabinet that in the next financial year, the districts get at least Shs 1 billion each for community roads to ease the implementation of this pillar. Pillar 5, the one of mind-set change and community sensitisation is ongoing. The one of data collection and parish information systems is also ongoing. The last pillar 7, which is under local government, is the one of governance and administration. This has been active. I noted that in the reports and the debate, we had the following issues raised:1. Lack of adequate critical staff, especially the extension workers. Recruitment of critical staff remains a challenge [Mr Magyezi] MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION8339THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 25 APRIL 2023Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.to the local governments. The plan of the Government is to have at least two extension workers at each subcounty for crops and livestock. This is being handled by the Ministry of Public Service. 2. Lack of offices or the parishes for the SACCOs and the parish chiefs. The request for parish offices is noted but this is a budget issue, Mr Speaker. I am glad that you have said let us handle some of these issues now. If we are to provide headquarters at each parish, we are talking of Shs 212 billion at a cost of Shs 20 million each. In the meantime, the guidance we have is that the parish chiefs should operate from their mother subcounties.3. The issue of inadequate facilitation for parish chiefs and transport - in order to provide enhanced facilitation for these parish chiefs and extension workers; again we need some inquiry into the budget. I was looking at if we are to provide Shs 100,000 shillings per month to each parish chief, we are talking about Shs 12.7 billion.Mr Speaker, under the last terms of reference - to examine other matters incidental thereto and make recommendations for corrective action. We noted that the following observations and recommendations were made in the sub-regional reports and during the debate. There are nine of them:i) That Government should build the capacity of SACCOs and empower them so that they grow and become community banks, able to mobilise savings, secure deposits, manage lending at affordable rates to farmers; handle collective bargaining for inputs, storage markets and oversee the growth of local economic investments.ii) That the secretariat should develop a robust monitoring and evaluation framework for PDM with clearly measurable performance indices, internal checks and review mechanisms.iii) That Government should establish a strong link between PDM and other public sector wealth and job creation programmes for synergy, harmonisation and sustainability.iv) That Government should vigorously promote a culture of grassroots integrity system and transparency. This will ensure buy-in and trust of the population PDM and government programmes.v) Implementation of PDM should strengthen the role of stakeholders in wealth creation programmes, especially the political leaders, technical staff at all levels, the private sector, cultural and religious institutions, the academia and civil society.vi) Ministry for Agriculture was required to enhance the proficiency of NARO and NAGRC in the supply of quality seeds, breeds, drugs and markets.vii) It was observed that there is a tendency to over-emphasise the role of small-scale intensive farming in Agriculture yet, the contribution of large-scale farming remains paramount in the country. Therefore, this should also be enhanced. viii) The guidelines should be reviewed so as to explore the possibility of using established large SACCOs in areas where the banks are inaccessible or the amount being borrowed is too little for one to line up at far of banks for too long.ix) That the Ministry for Finance should provide adequate operational funds in the budget to fully functionalise the PDM rather than focusing on the Parish Revolving Fund only. We did present this through the report, which was presented by our committee chairperson. Mr Speaker, we appreciate the observations and recommendations of the sub-regional groups and the Members, on the matters that are incidental and necessary for further improvement of PDM as elaborated above. 8340Disclaimer:  The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT These observations and recommendations have been especially noted for consideration and action. I will make sure that they are reported on in the annual reports, which we present to Parliament at the end of each financial year. In conclusion, this intervention of Parliament was timely and helpful and we thank you very much. It has helped to bring out the issues of concern to the public and made some recommendations, which are very important for further improvement of this programme.We would like to thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving the Members of Parliament the recess and clear definition of terms of reference, which helped the oversight activity and the debate to focus on critical areas of concern on PDM. Allow me to thank you too, honourable colleagues, for the inquiry oversight, and the time you spent raising the issues in your sub-regional reports and during the debate. There are several honourable Members of Parliament who sent their questions and recommendations directly to the secretariat. These too are appreciated highly.Finally, profound thanks go to His Excellency the President for his address to Parliament at Kololo last month in a clear and precise way on PDM and for explaining the various issues on this programme. Despite the challenges at this initial stage, which are normal for such a big programme, Government wishes to reiterate the assurance given by His Excellency the President, to Parliament and to the nation that in executing this programme of PDM, we will do all it takes to make sure that it succeeds for the good of our people so that the country moves faster to attain the cherished goal of socio-economic transformation for all.Given this presentation, it is my considered opinion that the motion for the adoption of the Sub-Region Oversight Reports on PDM be passed, subject to the minister’s responses and clarifications as given? I beg to submit. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Over 30 honourable colleagues submitted on this and we were just waiting for the response of the minister for me to put the question. We cannot open it again - Listen to me. We did over 35 submissions on this. Whenever a minister makes the final conclusions, we put the question. This is not final. We are not making resolutions on this. This is an issue we are going to continue with.Honourable colleagues, I now put the question that the Sub-Regional Oversight Reports on the Parish Development Model be adopted.(Question put and agreed to.)Reports adopted.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, there is no issue that we have debated more than the Parish Development Model. We are going to follow up on these – we shall be going forward. Honourable colleagues, Hon. James Mamawi – Hon. Mamawi, where are you seated? Hon. James Mamawi said that last week, he was seated with one of the honourable colleagues, a lady, and they were sharing his iPad. He left the iPad with the honourable lady, but he cannot remember that Member. (Laughter) I am just informing you colleagues; if you have his iPad, please, deliver it to Hon. Mamawi or take it to the Sergeant-at-Arms, who will pass it over to Hon. Mamawi.The House is House adjourned to tomorrow at 10.00 a.m.(The House rose at 7.37 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 26 April 2023, at 10.00 a.m.) [Mr Magyezi] MOTION FOR A RESOLUTIONDLTnrri. tr, arl!(dS.rFl.ttlae*.LIBRARYL{,--a ^^uj ll'"N\;^Nfi..-.-'-ra.J2t@Ln,EI't't.?7€)tlTOFoiPitJganda Flewenue AuchonicyBRIEF ON (X)LD EXPORT LEVT TO THE HON. IIINISTER OF EITEROY At{DMITERAL DEVELOPMENT1. TAXARREARSFor the respectrve period, 07 (seven) Gold Exporting Companies all together hadexported gold to the tune of 59,943.94 Kgc with an amount of UGX43,421,166,653.94 in tax arrears (at a rare of USD 2OOg/Kg). Only oneCompany, Simba Gold Refinery has so far made a payment of UGX 429,?0,O,624towards settlement of their outstanding arrears. The total outstanding texliabilrty is UGX 42..9921463,0/29.91 1 =The summary of the outstanding arrears and status of payment rs as follows:Tablc 1: SIruMARY OF GOLD EXFORT ARREARS pAyltEI{T STATITS AS OF29th MARCH 2023ooUJ=AaIrE:XFORTERxcaEXFORTEDTA' ARREARSAfOT'ITTTAXAUOUNTPIIID SO TARIAURNISH TRADING LTD7 ,312.78 5,32r,OO3,29a.42002BULLION REFINERY LIMITED 20,707.5O rs,or5,427,2A9.97oo3METALTESTING & SMELTING COLTD16,408.08 r 1,855,862,639.76oo4SIMBA GOLD REFINERY LIMITED3,685.96 2,633,131,908.30 428,703,6245THABA IM/ESTMENTS LIMITED9,338 006,834,984,034.OO006FARU TRADING UGANDA LTD70 31 52,460,839.9000?AFRTCA GOLD REFINERY (AGR) 2,42r.32 r,704,296,643.60006ll(yf^L69,94:1.94 4ll,42lrt66,63ll.g442t.?O31621At the rate of syo as stipulated in the repealed Mining (Amendment) Act, 2O2lthe outstanding taxes would have been as fo[[ows:Trblc 2: Sunne4r of Veluc of Erpottcd Cold ty Conpeay and Tar Attcrrr et Solofor tha pcrlod 1.r rruly 2(Jr2l to 3.. Urtch 20232. PAYUENTS sIT{CE lEf MARCH 2023For the period l"t March 2023 to t7r,\ Apr 2023, a total of 4,?09.4? KGr of gold wasexported and tax of UGX 3,500,46?,334/= collected as shown below:SINCOUPAI(?KG8 OFGOLDE;TAORTEDVALI'E OFEXFORTED (X)LD lltUGXTAX AUOUNTAT 5%OFVALUE llt UOX1FARU TRADINGUGANDA LTD70.3115, 103,840,666.68 75S,192,033.332SIMBA GOLDREFINERYLIMITED3,685.96812,464,120,13?.67 35,734,396,775.623BULLIONREFINERYLIMITED20,70?.504,373,326,3t7,626.AL 2 r 5,562,02 l, 18 l .524METAL TESTTNG& SMELTING CO.LTD16,408.083,222,a9t,tt7,t?6.93 164, 13 1,001,834.575AFRTCA GOLDREF^INERY (AGR}2,421.32s77 ,870,t[t,a22.oo 24,767,960,L24.536THABAIIN/ESTMENTSLIMITED9,338.O01,950,689, 148,861.76 99,L9a,241,620.907AURNISHTRADING LTD?,312.78r,539,286,360,050.32 76,434,634,707.45TOTAI,59,943.94 12,491,631,O16,342.20 616.5,87r/A8,2?7.93EXPORTER ITAXE xxl(xiRAtsEXPORTEDTAX AiIOUIIT PAIDruoxlAURNISH TRADING LTD568.41422,490,3t3BULLION REFINERY LIMITED2,L41.401,591,660,730METALTESTING ANDSMELTING 842.53626,234,286SIMBA GOLD REFINERYLIMITED 186.66r3a,?4r,2L7THABA INr'ESTMENTS LIMITED970.4872t,340,7AAGmadTotd4,709.4?3,5OO'.157,3343. CWIL AUITBulllon Rcfinety Ltd, Auraish Ttadlng Llmitcd, and Metal Smelting &Tcrtlag sued URA and the Attorney General vide HCCS NO. OO92 of 2023seeking orders that Regulation 3 of the Minhg and. Mmeral (Export t*ug onRefned Gold) ReguWions, 2023 be declared unconstitutional for contraveningArticle 152 (1) of the Constitttion of thc Republic of Ugonda" Section 122( j) of theEast African Commurulg Customs Maragemznt Act, 2OO4 and Arhcle 23 of theProtoal for Esablshment of the Eost AfrAan Custorns lJnion, 2OO4 .The three Companies also filed an Applicatron for an Interim Order vrdeMiscellraneous Application No. 0132 of 2023 and Temporaqr Injunction videApplication No. Ol33 of 2023. On 4th April, 2023, Court granted an interim order,restraining URA from implementing the Regulations until 28th April, 2023."DEVELOPIIO UGA}TDA TOOETHER'