

Tuesday, 21 April 2020

Parliament met at 2.46 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I would like to remind members who have not yet registered for the virtual Parliament to have themselves registered. Last week we gave you the address in the East Wing where you are supposed to register.

Secondly, I would like to instruct the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Priviledges to commence the process to amend our Rules of Procedure so that we can eventually proceed to a virtual Parliament. A number of parliaments in the world are challenged because of COVID-19 and are now constrained on how to operate. 

The following parliaments are where you could borrow to see what we can put in our rules; the Parliaments of Albania, Brazil, Colombia – of course  there we might have a language problem but you can also check with the Parliament of the Maldives, the United Kingdom and Kenya, which is also proposing to start work through a virtual Parliament.

Since we do not know how this COVID problem will last, please rules committee, start on that process so that we can examine how we can improve our interactions without being together in the same room but carrying out our other responsibilities.

I will be amending the Order Paper to permit the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to lay corrigenda but in doing so, I would like to protest for the third time during this Budget session, at the way the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is conducting itself. Every week they come with something new. Last week we wanted to handle the Budget Committee report but they brought in new issues; so, the Budget Committee had to go back. 

Today, the committee was ready to report but they surfaced with corrigenda so all these are hampering the work of Parliament and I would like the country to know that it is not Parliament, which is inefficient but it is actually the Executive.

Honourable members, there are so many issues of national concern but these days our sittings last for only about two to three hours. So, I will only look at two or three of them. The others can go to the task force because many of them have to do with the management of COVID-19. I will allow hon. Robinah Ssentongo. 

I had asked the Clerk to put a chair there for the next speaker. Sometimes when we have many numbers, it takes time to walk back and forth; so, put a chair there for whoever is going to speak after to wait in.

2.51
MS ROBINAH SSENTONGO (DP, Woman Representative, Kyotera): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, I happen to be on the Parliamentary Task Force against COVID-19 and I represent the people of Kyotera District. As we go around the country, we try to monitor and see how prepared the various stakeholders in this fight are able to control the spread of COVID-19.

Wherever we go nationally, we look at the towns, the people and we talk to the district taskforces, which are led by the RDCs to see how they are managing. Today, while with the committee trying to write a report of what we have seen around the country so far, I got information from Kyotera District; a sad happening from a person that is supposed to be part of the fight against COVID-19.

In the past few hours, the State Minister for Microfinance, hon. Haruna Kyeyune Kasolo, County MP for Kyotera, bought food; maize flour branded with his name, bananas and the like. He disguised that he had given the food to the task force of Kyotera led by the RDC, Maj. Matovu. Just two to three hours ago, he got that food and took it to his home. Thousands of people - I have the video captured - gathered around his home to receive the food.

We are here to fight COVID-19 and Kyotera District is near Mutukula where there is a porous border. People are coming in stealthily to Kyotera. I commend him and everybody for giving food but the act of breaking the directive of our dear President - He said that if you give out food to thousands of people, whoever you are, that will be attempted murder. 

Madam Speaker, we all can give food. As we speak, every MP is being called by constituents who want food but we tell them that we cannot give out food because the directive says that we should give it to the district or the National Task Force. 

As he gives out food, he tells the people, “We were given Shs 20 million but hon. Robinah Ssentongo is mean; she cannot give you any. I am giving you because I can give.”

My prayer is, if what he is doing is breaking the directive of His Excellency, like they have done to hon. Zaake, he should be arrested and brought to book for breaking the law and charged with attempted murder. If he has not broken the law, then they should allow all of us here to go and give out food to our voters the way he is doing. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know where the Prime Minister is; this matter is for the taskforce because the directives of the President were given to the whole country, including all of us. I do not know whether – Hon. Bahati?

2.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we have just received this information about our colleague, hon. Kasolo. We are going to take this matter to the Prime Minister, who is the chairperson of the taskforce for COVID-19 and then report back to the House tomorrow.

MR AGABA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As the minister stands in for the Prime Minister, I think what our colleague has raised is a real, important and urgent matter. We are under intensive barrage and calls from our people all throughout the country. They want food. 

The initial conception of the Government that those affected by the President’s directives were largely in urban areas is not true. Our people throughout Uganda have been directly or indirectly affected and intensively, they need food. 

The other time, we asked Government for the programme on how they are going to roll out the distribution of food to every constituency. Until tomorrow, it has not yet come. If we are not able to give the people the food ourselves and Government is not able to give the food to the people - our people are calling us - under such circumstances, how are we going to deal with it? How do we help our people and how do we help ourselves?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you recall, that was the  reason I had asked the Government to stop the distribution until we have a national plan. However, of course, they went ahead and now you can see the whole country is in need of food. I think the Prime Minister should come and tell us whether they intend to serve the rest of Uganda or we should fend for ourselves. I think we need answers about that one.

Honourable members, as I said, there are very many questions but we do not have enough time. So, the following should write questions for oral answer. Hon. Tumuramye, hon. Rwabushaija, hon. Rwakojo, hon. Lubogo, hon. Mulindwa. Write questions for oral answer to the taskforce.

Hon. Macho’s is on the issue of the markets in Busia. Hon. Ndamira should send it to the taskforce. Hon. Komakech should send it to the taskforce. Hon. Abala, also send yours to the taskforce. Let me now invite hon. Molly Lanyero. Hon. Kalemba’s question should also go to the taskforce.

3.00
MS MOLLY LANYERO (NRM, Woman Representative, Lamwo District): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. On 13 April - that is last Monday – a group of cattle rustlers from South Sudan attacked my members from the garden and hacked one member and left him for dead. As I speak, he is in Agoro Health Centre III.

I have brought this issue up several times on the Floor of Parliament about the issue of the border. The challenge that we have is that Lamwo has the longest borderline with South Sudan. I would like to thank the security forces because they have added us 150 LDUs. However, as I speak, because of the COVID-19 directives from the President that have kept people at home, most of these security people are busy keeping order in the sub-counties. We have a challenge at the border points.

People have resorted to going to the gardens where they can do some work, just like the President directed. However, at the border point, we have Madi-Opei. We have Agoro Sub-County. We have Lokung Sub-County. We have Palabek Kal and Ogili. They have failed to even go to their gardens because they are being threatened by the cattle rustlers from South Sudan. 

It is not only that; the South Sudanese are using this opportunity to also come and claim that their borderlines pass right into Uganda. That encroaches on a number of homesteads in Lamwo.

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that Government beefs up security at the border. Secondly – (Interjection) – It is okay; let me first finish, honourable member. Let them beef up security at the border of Lamwo and also increase for us the number of personnel because we need them to keep the people safe in their gardens.

Madam Speaker, because of this COVID-19 issue, we do not have areas for quarantine for the truck drivers who come to the border. When they come to the border and are tested, where will we put them? So, although you have requested us to put this to the district, it is a challenge that we are facing. I would like to call upon the ministry to help us as a district because we have a very wide borderline. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I meant the National Taskforce here because they sit everyday; so, they can address some of those issues. However, the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs should address the issue of security at the border of Uganda and South Sudan and take interest in the issue of the cattle rustlers who have come into Uganda and are disturbing our people. He can give us an update on Tuesday next week.

3.04
MS CAROLYN BIRUNGI (NRM, Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to bring to the attention of this House a matter of national importance affecting the people of Kyamuswa County, which I represent. As you are all aware, the world at large and Uganda not spared is currently grappling with the corona virus pandemic that has affected the performance of global economies.

I have closely followed His Excellency the President’s addresses to the nation on measures to control the spread of the coronavirus. To be specific, His Excellency the President has appealed for support to boost the health systems infrastructure to respond to the corona virus pandemic. Plans are underway to provide each district with ambulance services.

However, I wish to note that His Excellency the President’s appeal for ambulance services did not consider the uniqueness of island districts, which should as well benefit from these services. Madam Speaker, I wish to state that Kyamuswa County does not have any public transport means meant to meet the needs of the local residents, in their quest for public services. 

It is against this background that I appeal to the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business to provide boat ambulances to serve the 64 islands of Kyamuswa and the island districts at large. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member. This is a matter of grave concern. Last financial year, I gave directives to the Committee on Health and the Committee on Education and Sports to make special recommendations for the island districts. Certainly, however, the issue of the boat ambulance is very important. 

Unfortunately, the planners are mainlanders. If there were more islanders in the planning, I think they would remember that there are islands, which need to be supported. However, let us ask the Prime Minister to give us advice on what to do with the islands in view of the absence of any ambulance during this COVID-19 Pandemic. 

3.07
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent national importance. Yesterday at Elegu border in Amuru District, we were faced with a very big challenge of a truck driver whose sample was taken from Malaba about four days ago. He reached Elegu, stayed there for three days and he was only discovered yesterday at around 11 O’clock.

This truck driver was faced with a challenge of conflicting border policies. In Uganda, we are allowing two people in a truck but when they reach the border, the South Sudan Government says they only want one driver. When they cross, the rest of the crew stay back at the border. This has brought a very big problem because very many truck drivers are idling at Elegu and mixing with the people.

As I speak, there was one driver again who was discovered in a house of a woman in Elegu. Those are the challenges that we are facing. We are very worried because the COVID-19 National Taskforce has not sent on ground the point of entry supervisors. They are nowhere to be seen at the border. 

Secondly, there are some medical teams who are supposed to go and beef up the team on the ground. Currently, it is Amuru District Local Government that is struggling with the same staff they have on the ground – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: State the prayers.

MS LUCY AKELLO. The district is struggling with both the district work and the international one. My prayer, Madam Speaker, is that the national taskforce should rethink the position of testing the truck drivers and allowing them to move freely. 

Secondly, the President also talked about the technical team studying this position. Can we fast-track this and have it clarified to our people. 

Madam Speaker, I have in my hand the supplies that the district requested. Out of this long list, only five items were delivered to Amuru and these supplies cannot last two days. So, as of tomorrow, if we do not get more supplies, there will be no testing at the border. 

Mu second prayer is that the focal point supervisors must take up their roles and go and start doing their work. They also need to allocate one vehicle, preferably an ambulance, that will be in charge of taking the samples from the border to Entebbe. It is because currently, it is the district that has been charged with this responsibility and it is too much for them. All the districts have received the same amount of money without taking care of the border districts. 

Madam Speaker, if you will allow – 

THE SPEAKER: No.

MS LUCY AKELLO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. These are the prayers I have and they are really urgent. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am sorry that we have to abridge the time. This is a very serious issue at the border. The Minister of Health is required to come on Thursday and explain to us the special arrangement she has made to manage the situation at the border especially the quarantine for the truck drivers and the supervision by the health workers. 

Clerk, we can now go to the other item. 

AN ADDENDUM TO CORRIGENDA TO THE BUDGET FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2020/2021

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I hope you will convince the House why you have come late and why you are disrupting our programmes. 

3.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we would like to apologise that we are laying this addendum to the corrigenda for the budget of the coming financial year. We did receive these final figures from the agencies very late. These are mainly non-tax revenues –

THE SPEAKER: It seems you are not using the microphone.

MR BAHATI: Am I audible now, Madam Speaker? We would like to apologise that we are bringing this corrigenda at the very last minute. The reason is, we received these figures from agencies very late. Actually, we received them on Friday and yet we should capture them so that the budget is complete. 

They are mainly non-tax revenues and they speak to the revenue side of the budget. Therefore, that is the only explanation I can give. Most importantly, I would like to apologise to this House for bringing this information very late. It was beyond our control as the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: I would like to know – because we were due to receive a report from the Committee on Budget today – how much longer it is going to take us from our programmes. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, if we allow the Committee on Budget to look at this, it will not take a very long time. It can take even 10 to 15 minutes. It is just to adjust the resource envelope and the report will be done. 

THE SPEAKER: Let me hear from the chairperson of the committee.

3.14
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. We are scheduled to present the report of the Committee on Budget under Item 4. The implication of the minister laying this corrigenda is that we have to revise our report. 

So, I would like to beg for leave of about one hour with members of my committee to go and consider the corrigenda so that as I come back to present the report, we have considered the corrigenda because it has become the property of Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. You go and have your meeting and come back to give us an update. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE EXECISE DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had received the report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. You are free to debate now. Honourable members the report was presented last week.

3.16
MR DENIS SABIITI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Rubanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this chance to debate the Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2020. I support the report that was written by the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for the following reasons: 
One, in this Bill, Government seems to contradict some of its own policies it has already initiated. When you go to Clause 2(2)(c) of this report - which is about the barley which is grown and melted in Uganda - Government intends to increase the Excise Duty from Shs 950 per litre to Shs 1,115 per litre, which is an increment of 21 per cent.

Madam Speaker, barley in western Uganda is grown by the districts of Rubanda, Kabale and Kanungu and in eastern Uganda, it is grown in Kapchorwa. The growing of this barley is heavily subsidised by the same companies which buy it. The seed is given freely, fertilisers are subsidised, chemicals are obtained from one company, which is Bayan - and they are subsidised because of the quality that needs to be achieved.

Now, the moment this increase is done, I am afraid that some of these subsidies will be the first to be touched and the poor farmers who depend on barley - particularly, like in my constituency and in one sub-county, I have 1,500 farmers and they have got two seasons. Definitely, when this increase is done and the seed is not given free as it is, I am afraid we shall be crippling them and they will be unable to cater for the essentials they have been catering for.

Madam Speaker, the timing is probably very bad; really very bad for this kind of scenario because we are in a very big problem and if we add another problem, particularly to farmers who are engaged in this business, then I do not know whether we shall be supporting “Buy Uganda and Build Uganda” (BUBU) because we already have that policy of BUBU.

Now, if we cannot encourage our own barley, which is grown by our small scale farmers to be bought and instead we increase tax so that some of these companies can buy imported barley, I do not know whether we shall be building ourselves or we shall be promoting imports rather than promoting exports in Uganda. Therefore, I beg that the position of the committee, which rejected this, is maintained so that my farmers have livelihoods and are not at all destroyed. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me invite hon. Mbabaali who is participating by video. Who is coordinating the video? Hon. Mbabaali would like to participate by video. Okay as we wait, can we get hon. Ssemujju?

3.22
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to broadly look at the proposals because if you look at the committee report, the proposals are to increase more. I would like to beg the minister - hon. Bahati - that this is not the time increase taxes on almost everything. 

I was speaking to manufacturers this morning because they are many in my constituency - in Bweyogerere and in Namanve - and their fear is that the moment you begin increasing taxes, you will automatically be forcing them to lay off people because even for them to survive in the business after the lockdown and after the consequences of COVID-19, it is not going to be easy.

Therefore, my proposal to the honourable minister is to stay any increase he is proposing. If you look at, for example fuel, the world-over now, prices are going down. In America, for first time they were even negative - something that has not happened before. We cannot be a country that is increasing taxes from Shs 1,200 to 1,350 per litre when everybody watching television can see that prices of fuel are falling. All the big producers under OPEC and other countries are looking for a solution.

I would like to ask hon. Bahati that unless you want to bring the economy to a halt; you need to rethink these proposals and concede to the proposals by the committee. Otherwise, you are sending a very bad signal because world over now, Governments are proposing stimulus to keep people in business. For you, you are instead imposing a bigger burden - that we do not care; you can collapse and send away workers because that is what all these proposals mean to the manufacturers, producers of soft drinks and all of us who are using fuel.

Therefore, my proposal - and I would like hon. Bahati to listen to me; please, do not increase taxes because this is not the time to do it. We must be looking for solutions on how we are going to keep the jobs that are at least available. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Can we now have hon. Mbabaali? He is not ready?  Okay, Can I have hon. Musana, who is also on video? Oh, he is here. Come to the podium. Quickly use three minutes. 

3.26
MR ERIC MUSANA (NRM, Buyaga East County, Kagadi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Earlier on, I tried to connect to the video conferencing when we were testing with the ICT. That is why you see most Members trying to connect to video conferencing. 

Madam Speaker, my interest is on this Excise Duty  on the raw materials that are used in the production of the local beer. My biggest interest is that if it is being increased by 60 per cent on beers from the local materials that we are using – I think it will make the life of the common person much more difficult. 

We know the resources we are getting are basically from the raw materials and excuse duty is increased, it will impact on the income of the local person. Given the situation we have in Uganda today - looking at the COVID-19 - if we increase the taxes, we will not have done it in good faith. 

Madam Speaker, we propose that the tax be stayed and we ensure to improve the quality of the common person in Uganda so that life continues. 

In the report, I have also looked at the Excise Duty  on fuel. It is seems it will affect the purchase price of a number of products; the production costs on our major factories and the common persons in Uganda. I propose that the tax be stayed and we maintain the status quo. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

3.30
MR CUTHBERT ABIGABA (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for the report. I would like to say that to a bigger extent, I agree with their recommendations. 

There is only one item that has caught my attention and it is one of the proposals on non-alcoholic beverages, where they say, “...excluding fruit and vegetables.” In my opinion, they are referring to bottled water. Bottled water is no longer a luxury but an essential product because we need healthy Ugandans. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I support the committee for having rejected this, in particular, because we need our people healthy through drinking clean, safe water.    

We should actually push for establishment of many water processing plants upcountry because if we do this –(Interruption) 

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, it is unfortunate that this is my first time to get back after you sent me out of the House.

THE SPEAKER: Welcome back. 

MR AKOL: I am happy to be the first to be quarantined in Uganda. I was happy about it. 

Madam Speaker, considering the time we have for this debate,  the situation in Uganda and in the world, the position of the people in this room and also the report of the committee, is it not procedurally right for us to just say that, as members of Parliament,  we maintain the taxes as they were before? 

THE SPEAKER: What is really the point of procedure? No, honourable, you are smuggling. 

MR ABIGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was initially worried that probably I was not proceeding well but I am always procedurally compliant.

Madam Speaker, I am in support of encouraging many more water processing plants across the country such that we provide our people with safe, clean drinking water and at the same time provide employment for our people. I strongly support the stand not to increase Excise Duty  on bottled water. On that one, I am really 100 per cent in tandem with the committee. 

Madam Speaker, on gas oil, we need to raise some money. I have been following the global trend and the prices of oil have actually gone down. We could probably allow Government to introduce a small tax on fuel. At the end of the day, the price should not actually go beyond what we already have because the global prices have already gone down. 

Therefore, we should introduce a small tax to enable Government raise some money because we eventually need money. On that, I would like to disagree with the committee and I recommend that we go ahead and add something to fuel so that we are able to raise some money. After all, most fuel users can afford it. I would like to submit, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Can you please get hon. Mbaabali because he was here a few minutes ago. Has he gone away? Okay, let us have hon. Kasule submit in three minutes. I can see hon. Kasule Sebunya - (Interjection) - I think he is in his house, honourable members.

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I know these are very difficult times where we may not have to follow all the rules. However, we run into trouble because if we do not at least put some limit, someone will be sleeping in his bed with his blanket and he is calling Parliament. The colleague, who is online, looks like someone who is in a market.

Therefore, the procedural issue I am raising, Madam Speaker, is whether even under these circumstances, you will not guide on the way we appear because the whole country is watching Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you will appreciate, this is something new. I think we had not addressed the question of how we appear even on television but we shall work on it. Can I get hon. Lucy Akello?

3.37
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me add my voice to thank the committee for a good report. I would like to start with the issue of both Government and the committee agreeing on removing tax on sacks and bags for direct manufacture of sanitary pads.

Madam Speaker, you are aware of how our girls have been suffering and continue to suffer because the cost of sanitary pads is on the high side and for some of us who have been trying to supply a few sanitary pads in the constituency, it has been quite costly. Therefore, I would like to applaud the committee and I think you both agreed on this, which is quite commendable.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, on the issue of excise tax on wine and locally made drinks, I visited my foster son in Isingiro and I was very impressed by one woman who is making local wine out of matooke. For me, she exhibited a very good example of using a raw material and coming up with a very good product. I imagine if there is an increase in tax for such a product, it would definitely be prohibitive to the young woman who is coming up and trading. 

In addition, considering the fact that these are hard times and COVID-19 has really hit us hard, I would imagine that such a woman would actually go down completely. 

I, therefore, agree with the committee on this and say that we need to support and help our young entrepreneurs who are using local resources to go ahead. Thank you, Madam Speaker and I support the committee report 100 per cent.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mbabaali is properly dressed. There is no volume; where is our technical person? Hon. Muyanja, can you speak, please? Sorry for hon. Muyanja, this is the third time we are getting mixed up.

3.42
MR ANDREW KALUYA (Independent, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank the committee for the wonderful report. However, I would like to add my voice to hon. Ssemuujju’s submission where we need to look at the areas that are actually being increased in terms of taxes. 

I think in this situation we are operating, where we have challenges with COVID-19, we also need a plan to address some of the immediate challenges that we have right now. When we talk of increment of Excise Duty on some of the products, I think we need to classify them. We can look at the essential and non essential commodities that we need to protect. The essential ones need to be protected because when you look at the soft beverages like bottled water as well as soap, we need to protect such commodities.

Whereas we need to look at where we get the revenue, we have those non-essential commodities, which at the moment, I will term as luxurious. That is where we need to put most of the weight and protect these others. If we do not protect these products, we are going to have a problem of sufficient supply.

Conidering what hon. Ssemujju said, when we come up with budgets that are always increasing taxes, then there is problem. We are bound to face a problem of unemployment as most companies will run out of business. Right now, most of the companies are operating at 50 per cent production and that means that they have to lay off their workers.

Therefore, we need to show that we still need these companies and we also have to show that we can attract more companies to come. Otherwise, if we keep pushing the tariffs high, these companies will close and go away, which will affect our budget. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I can now invite hon. Ongom. Honourable members, I think we need to apologise. There is a small problem with our IT; it is not working well. I was expecting that our colleagues would speak today but I think it will be improved and we can work together tomorrow. 

3.45
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support the position of the committee, on this Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2020. I would like to speak on the issue of increasing taxes on wines that are locally produced, from Shs 2,000 to Shs 2,300.

We are aware that wine is majorly produced out of fruits. If we are to add taxes to this, it would mean that our people would have to export the fruits in their form. This country has to encourage manufacturers in value addition. We have realised that in most cases, as a country, we export and process products and then we import the processed ones. This is very expensive and it encourages balance of payment, which is not okay for this country. Let us see a way of encouraging our manufacturers in this line so that our people benefit.

Secondly, on the issue of increasing petrol from Shs 1,200 to Shs 1,350, yes, we may want to generate revenue but this will be an expense to the local people. Even as we talk, the cost of transporting our products and even human beings is very expensive. Therefore, when we add value added tax to it from Shs 1,200 to Shs 1,350, it would mean that the cost of the products will be very expensive because we have to transport them from one place to the other. We don’t have a train to help us cheaply and we don’t have another mode of transport other than road. So, let us see this, as a Parliament.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, on lubricants, you will realise that in this country, most of the vehicles are used. Currently, the air pollution is too much and levying more taxes on the lubricants would mean that very few people are going to service their vehicles and this will again impact on the environment. What do we do? Can we make something that is affordable for the population and encourage them to service machines and vehicles so that our air and environment –(Member timed out.)

3.49
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You are finding a challenge in the connection. I think the challenge is that most Members, possibly, don’t have Wi-Fi where they are calling from. If they are just using mobile data, they are bound to have a challenge in communicating to you. Therefore, Members can only be encouraged to use Wi-Fi where they are calling from and it can connect so easily. 

I stand here to support the committee’s report on the following grounds. On the matter of fuel, there is a tendency in this country that when taxes are introduced, the fuel dealers automatically increase the price of petrol, diesel and kerosene per litre. Two years ago, I remember I brought a matter when the price per barrel reduced from US $110 to US $35. Our fuel dealers here did not reduce the price and yet there was a reduction of more than 300 per cent. We raised this matter here and we asked the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development to explain why our fuel dealers did not reduce prices but they could not explain. 

Later on they said, no, there was a problem with the exchange rate. The rate of the Uganda shilling to a dollar did not increase even by 10 per cent but they used that as an excuse. Therefore, there is a problem. Now that again, the fuel prices worldwide or in the international market have dropped to $48 per barrel; leave alone for America, which is now negative. 

Madam Speaker, this will not transform into a reduction in the price of petrol per litre. You will see our people increasing prices and therefore, that has a multiplier effect on the transport costs and that leads to an increase in the cost of the products, goods and services. How can you propose to increase the price on kerosene unless you want to discourage the local person in Kasilo in Apapai village from using paraffin? Most of our people rely on this, now, if you increase during this COVID-19 problem, how do you expect them to continue buying? 

Madam Speaker, the best my Government can do now is to maintain the status quo. Of course, we would have asked for a reduction in the tax rates but we can stay at the current rate because even Kenya has reduced the VAT rate from 18 per cent to 14 per cent but we have maintained it at 18 per cent. I would like to encourage and call upon the Government that please, for now, you have seen; let us use other options - the stimulus provided by the World Bank, IMF and all the others being provided to push on the economy. 

Lastly, on the issue of Excise Duty on alcoholic drinks, let me speak for the people of Teso and Kapchorwa who grow sorghum, the one called epuripuri; that it is Uganda Breweries Limited that provides market for that sorghum. If it is increased, of course, the price of beer will go up and these brewing companies will definitely reduce the market to the local person who is growing this sorghum or barley and it will definitely affect the poor people because it is grown on small scale. It is not the commercial farmers who grow sorghum and barley; it is mainly the local farmers. 

I think the best for now is to maintain the status quo if we are to help our people but also to help the economy. You have seen how companies are already laying off workers but you want to again impose another tax on it. Therefore, you will make the worse the bad situation that we already have.

Madam Speaker, I would like to call upon the Government, again, that let us maintain the status quo. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, I think we will reduce the time to two minutes. 

3.54
MS AISHA SEKINDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Without wasting time, I support the status quo. However, I would like to talk about the issue of sanitary pads - and it has been talked about by hon. Ruth. 

So, I don’t want to add more but my prayer is that we maintain the status quo. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Sekindi.

3.55
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I know we are considering the Excise Duty (Amendment) Billbut I would like to seek clarification. Now that we already considered the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, on 21 November 2018, I raised an issue to do with the allowance given to LCI chairpersons - the Shs 120,000 per year, which is taxed 30 per cent income tax. They are supposed to take home Shs 84,000 by law. 

The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Bahati explained that that is as per the law. He noted that he was not aware of any accounting officer who was not submitting this specific revenue. We resolved that it was incumbent upon us to amend the Income Tax Act so that these people are also exempted because it looks funny. It has already been passed; so, I do not know how we handle that. I think it is still our duty to do just by them. 

The other issue is that under the Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill and even the Act, agricultural machinery is exempted from paying Excise Duty yet when it comes to fishing activities -(Interjection) - fishing is an agricultural activity, I would presume. Fishing gear like outboard engines are not exempted from the Excise Duty yet it is agricultural machinery. 

When it comes to paying taxes like the withholding tax of 1 per cent, fisheries is regarded as an agricultural activity and people are paying yet when it comes to exemptions, it ceases to be.

My appeal to the minister and the committee is that when it comes to the exemption schedule, even fishing gear like engines should also be exempted because they are agricultural machinery.

I do not know why the ministry of finance assumes that the easiest item on which to increase tax is always fuel. If it were not for the hard times that the country is going through, I would actually propose that we even reduce the current Excise Duty on fuel. However, aware of the difficult situation that the country and the world is facing, I propose and I urge the minister that it should actually remain the same. The status quo should remain. 

Specifically, the minister and the NRM Government programme has always been pro-poor. It would be a deviation – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, last year, we discussed the issue of allowances for the local councils – the Shs 10,000. You said that we shall address it this year. It was incumbent upon you to bring it in your Income Tax Bill. You undertook that last year. 

MR MIGADDE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister said that  it was incumbent upon me but I wrote to the minister on 20 December 2019 on the same. The minister wrote to the commissioner general on the same, seeking clarification on the taxing of the Shs 120,000. 

In his letter, he said that the purpose of the letter was to request the commissioner to review the matter in line with the law and advise accordingly. The law says you pay. I think the honourable minister did not do justice to this. I beg to lay this letter signed by hon. Bahati on the Table. Thank you very much.

4.01
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the committee recommendations. However, we are considering this budget at a time when the country and the world at large is having the challenge of COVID-19. 

One of the issues that has crossed my mind is that if we had time, we should have reviewed the whole budget putting into consideration the after effects of COVID-19. However, because of the laws and the time, we may not be able to do that. We are bound by the law. 

I would like to address the issue of fuel. Madam speaker, increasing the tax on fuel has a direct bearing, particularly on the famers who transport their produce right from the villages to the urban centers for marketing. This will directly translate to how much the farmers will have to pay, and has a direct bearing on the cost of food that Ugandans consume. 

I would like to implore the minister that for now, since the world prices of fuel are going down, can we hold it there so that it reflects like a package?

Unfortunately, you have not even provided us with any stimulus package and this could be one way you could do that. Let us maintain the status quo for now, as we wait to see the after effects of COVID-19. A lot of people are going to lose jobs. If you maintain the fuel at Shs 1,250, I think that will be good enough to help us recover from the shocks. 

The other issue is on the local materials used to process wines. We have a promotion  - since we want our own industries to produce these products here, so that we do not import wines from South Africa, for example. By imposing these taxes, honourable minister, we are discouraging local production. 

You need to look at this critically so that we are able to create jobs for our people and to also create an enabling environment for these factories to process more wines. That will encourage the economy to produce more and be able to tax later. 

However, right now, we are discouraging them by imposing these taxes on them. Therefore, I would like to implore you to go slow. Let us build our capacity with our own industries by limiting these prohibitive taxes. 

The last thing that I would to comment on is the issue of the fishing community. They have never benefited from this Government; I am sorry to say this. Even during the Operation Wealth Creation programmes, they are not put in the picture. 
Therefore, I would like to support the proposal from hon. Migadde that even the motorboat engines should be exempted from these taxes because they are part of the agricultural sector. 

This is the way to go. The only solution and avenue that is going to save the country is the agricultural sector. The more money we pump into the agricultural sector, the faster the economy will recover. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. 

4.05 
MR VICENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since I am taking the Floor for the first time in this environment, permit me to thank you for arranging this kind of sitting because at least we are now more secure than when we were inside. 

I would like to comment on the issue of any attempt to increase taxes on soft drinks; we are encouraging production in the country and value addition. Government is making an attempt, especially on food processing; you know we have the Soroti Fruit Factory and we would like this to be rolled over to other areas of the country but any attempt to put a levy on these soft drinks, will be defeating the very policy that we are pursuing, especially now that we want to see, “Buy Uganda, Build Uganda” working. I discourage this and we will be better off to maintain the status quo.

I urge that we lower the taxes on importation of this machinery for processing so that we ignite production all-over the country because now in any supermarket you go to, you will be buying locally-made juice. There is Kazire – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Conclude.

MR WOBOYA: Madam Speaker, we should not increase levy and especially to create employment; this sector of soft drinks employs many of Ugandans - so if we do this, we will be discouraging production and we shall obviously have unemployment rates going high. Thank you.

4.07
MS JACQUELINE AOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to applaud the Head of State for all the initiatives he has put in place and wish to congratulate and appreciate hon. Bahati for whatever we have been doing. 

Today, our voices are being heard by our people, from Nebbi District; we do not mind about the food that is being distributed because we do not know when it will reach us but we beg Government to give us some seeds. 

It is out of what the people are going to earn that will contribute to the taxes we are talking about and to cut the long story short, please give us what we need in Nebbi District, the whole of West Nile, northern Uganda and everyone else in Uganda.

If we are to build Uganda, we need to be Ugandan. Thank you, so much. I am not a mocker but I always tell the truth and normally people do not want to listen to the truth.

4.09
MS MOLLY LANYERO (NRM, Woman Representative, Lamwo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report and I add my support to the recommendations. I have one issue concerning the increase of excise duty on the raw materials for wine production.

When you look at the farmers of sorghum and barley - in my district we have about three cash corps: simsim, sorghum and barley. We have about 1,000 farmers in the barley production and if this is affected, it is going to affect the farmers and yet already we are encouraging our people to go back to farming since most of the work companies are laying off workers.
 
I got very many calls, especially from the 1,000 barley farmers from Agoro Hill and Otika Sub-county; these are the two sub-counties that will be affected. And when you look at the sorghum production, it will affect a majority of the northern Uganda farmers.

My request is that we stay this because if we do so then we will force the wine producers to get raw material from outside Uganda and our farmers –(Member timed out.)

4.11
MR ABOTT OUMA (NRM,	Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also support the committee’s recommendations. I am here to say that we, as Ugandans, know very well that Uganda gets a lot of money from water and taxation should not always be discriminative or prohibitive. 

When we are talking about agricultural inputs in the schedule that is concerned about the exemptions, the agricultural inputs that are needed by fishermen, the boat engines, fishing gear and many others, the tax on them makes them very prohibitive.

My humble appeal is that when we are going to put these exemptions on the schedules, I pray that - think this time I should fast because some of the issues from the islands are not normally tackled properly. The smallest engine now is Shs 9 million or 10 million and this is very important.

Lastly, you were telling us that we should go and see the national taskforce; seeing those people is a problem. You can call them wanting to talk to them but you may not find them. Where they sit is a problem. You can look for them from day one to the last day. So, we should ask them to tell us where they sit and how we should see them. That is my appeal. Thank you very much. 
 
THE SPEAKER: Before I invite hon. Muhumuza, honourable members, we appointed four members of this House to the national taskforce - hon. Mwijukye, hon. Arinaitwe, hon. Anyakun and hon. Atiku. You could actually take your complaints to them. You do not have to go there yourself.  

4.14 
MR RICHARD GAFABUSA (NRM, Bwamba County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for presenting a good report. I am here to support their report. This time, when we are affected by COVID-19 and the economy is limping and on the verge of collapsing, we should not be thinking of increasing the excise duty tax on a number of things. Otherwise, we will be encouraging unemployment because many companies are actually suffering and laying off workers.  

However, as a country and as Government, we must accept that we are between a rock and a hard place because the country must continue running. We need resources to run this economy. That is why I would like to deviate a little bit from the recommendation of the committee, specifically on the proposed Shs 150 increase of excise duty tax on fuel. (Applause)
 
Considering the fact that globally, we are seeing a huge drop in the crude oil and fuel price - in this country, I think I will call it business indiscipline because even when fuel prices reduce globally, the pump prices in this country do not. That means the business people are reaping too much, in terms of profits, because while they get this fuel very cheaply, they sell it to us very expensively.  

Therefore, I think putting this Shs 150 extra on a litre of fuel will help, first of all, the Government to realise some revenue to help it run the economy. However, it will not affect the business people because already they are getting this fuel very cheaply from the global market. I thank you, Madam Speaker.  

4.18
MR DAVID MUTEBI (NRM, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and the committee for the report that was well-researched on. Last week, one of our colleagues stated clearly that it was almost a ritual going through this budget process, which I do not want to believe. The fact is that Government appreciates the circumstances under which the economy is operating currently.   

I have looked at the proposals on the Excise Duty tax amendments, much more so in the brewing sector. I would like to appeal to you to appreciate some of these industries as we are setting these taxes.  

Before the local brew from local materials – I mean the beers – came into this market, Government was losing almost all the potential tax to the consumers who were supposed to graduate from other forms of unprocessed drinks. It was brought purposely to take care of that segment of the market.  However, over the years, taxes from such brew have been increasing yet they are processed using local raw materials. 

At the moment, when you get into these brewing companies, you realise that since last year, they have been producing below their capacity because of the high taxes, on the basis of which some consumers are getting back to unprocessed brew.  

Last year, we had a substantial increase of taxes on beers. I think this time around, we should maintain the status quo. If we have to raise taxes, we should consider those ones consumed by the affluent - the imported stuff. 
  
The same thing applies to the wines. The wine industry in Uganda is still in its infant stage; much as it is helping the local farmers to get their products into the market to process wines. Increasing taxes on wines will kill the industry before it even matures. Therefore, I think we need to look at the situation and reconsider to maintain the status quo.  

On paraffin, this is what the poorest of the poor use. Given the situation that this country is going through currently whereupon we now see rural people crying for food, imposing more pressure on their small resources would not be the appropriate action to take.  We need to study and appreciate the fuel sector because just like my colleague has said, whenever there is a very small increase on global fuel prices, there always is a disproportionate increase in the pump prices, yet –(Member timed out.)  

4.22 
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee but also propose taxes on inputs and raw materials for the manufacture of tyres, footwear, mattresses and toothpaste for a person who, according to the committee, meets the capital threshold of $300 for urban areas and $150 in rural areas. 
 
Madam Speaker, I wish to make further amendments that for purposes of stimulating growth and investment, we can put it at $250 for the urban areas and US$ 100,000 for the rural areas. You will realise that most of the people, especially those in rural areas, have the skills but the threshold of US$ 150,000 is not attainable in some parts of this country.

In some regions, for example, US$ 150,000 is very tenable and in other areas, it is not. That is why I suggest that we strike that balance at US$ 250,000 for urban areas and US$ 100,000 for rural areas. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I also wish to suggest that for cigarettes, it is important that we strike a balance between health and revenue. You know very well that even on –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. You are timed out –

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, on the cigarettes, the manufacturers are very cognisant of the fact that it is very dangerous for health.

Madam Speaker –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have had an opportunity to hear a number of views on the Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2020. I now put the question that the Bill be read for the second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you will speak at the Committee Stage. Who is sponsoring the Bill? Okay. After the honourable minister, we will go straight to Committee Stage. 

4.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We have read the committee’s report and we have also listened to our colleagues in the House. 

Last week, when we passed the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Act, 2020 and the Income Tax (Amendment) Act, 2020, as the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we became very worried because in total, we are losing about Shs 260 billion in tax revenue. 

Today, going by the comments of our colleagues, and if we proceed with the committee report and uphold it, we are likely to lose over Shs 300 billion. It will bring it to a total of Shs 600 billion. 

We know these are very hard times, Madam Speaker, not only for Uganda but for the entire world. Most of the economies are going into recession and that has a huge impact on our economy, especially as a developing economy. 

I would like to make reference to only one point and that is where I would like to appeal to the colleagues to at least support our position. That has to do with the increase in the price of fuel, especially diesel and petrol. If you have followed the oil markets from 2018 up to 2020, the price of crude oil, just over six months ago, was about US$ 60 or US$ 58 per barrel. As of today the West Texas Index, which is the price by which crude oil is traded in New York, is US$ 15. 

The price of oil that is traded in the London Stock Exchange is US$ 11, which is way below the production cost of oil. In most industrialised countries, the pump price has dropped by about 40 per cent. I was talking to my daughter yesterday and she said the price of pump petrol is about 60 cents from about US$ 1. 

The problem we have in this country is that whenever there is a decrease in the price of crude oil internationally, that decrease is not matched by our local companies in this country. As a result, we find ourselves in a situation where the crude oil prices are way below the production line and we do not see any reflection in the reduction of the pump price. 

It is our hope that as we go through coronavirus, our importers and distributors of crude oil in this country save the citizens of this country by bringing down the price of diesel and petrol. I know we are operating a free market economy but I think sometimes there has to be that realisation that when the prices of crude oil come down internationally, our local producers should also respond accordingly. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to beg my colleagues that we at least save this one item. We will observe it in the course of this year. I do not expect the economy to turn around within six months to one year. It will probably take much longer because of the subdued demand of oil internationally. I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, Bills Committee Stage. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE EXCISE DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

4.28
Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 2 by deleting the following: 

    1. Paragraph (a) on cigarettes;
    2. Paragraph (b) on beer;
    3. Paragraph (c) on ready to drink spirits;
    4. Paragraph (d) on wines made from locally produced raw materials;
    5. Under paragraph (f), delete item 5(a) on non-alcoholic beverages not including fruit or vegetable juices;
    6. Paragraph (g) on fuel;
    7. Paragraph (i) on lubricants;
    8. Paragraph (j) on registration of motorcycles;
    9. Paragraph (k) on other fermented beverages.

Justification, Madam Chairperson; these are increases in the current rate of excise duty, which rates are not conducive amidst the current economic times.

2. 	We propose to delete paragraph (i), justification is correction in a drafting error. Paragraph (4) of item 21(b) was substituted in Financial Year 2019/2020. This is covered under paragraph (m).

3.	 Insert a new paragraph as follows; by substituting for item 21(a) the following: “(a) A minimum investment capital of $10 million in the case of a foreigner or $300,000 in the case of a citizen whose investment is placed in urban area or $150,000 for a citizen whose investment is placed upcountry.”

Justification is: 

    1. To ensure that this benefits a larger proportion of the local economy. This can also be instrumental in enhancing and strengthening forward and backward linkages between the free zones and/or industrial parks and Ugandan farmers who comprise 80 percent of the local economy.

    2. Is to encourage development and investment in the rural areas as opposed to concentration of investments in towns.

Substitute for paragraph (m) the following: (m) in items 21(b) by inserting immediately after the words, “commercial farming” the words, “tyres, footwear, mattresses or toothpaste.” Justification is to extend incentives already under law to the above category as part of the drive to industrialise the economy and replace imports and also to correct the wrong reference to 21(b)(xi) which was substituted in Financial Year 2018/2019.

We propose to delete paragraph (n) and justification is to maintain the percentage at 70 for consistence under Income Tax, Value Added Tax, and Stamp Duty.

We propose to insert a new paragraph as follows: by substituting for item 21(d) the following. “(d) At least 70 per cent of its employees being citizens earning an aggregate wage of at least 70 percent of the total wage bill.”

Justification is that: 

    1. The number of 100 citizens should be expressed as a percentage of the entire workforce as in the case with exemptions under the value added tax.

    2. The exemption should only apply to those investors who are ready to reserve 70 percent of the total wage bill for citizens. This will ensure that more citizens are employed in the skilled positions.

    3. Is for consistence across all tax laws. This is the same position proposed under the income tax, value added tax and stamp duty. 

I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you have heard the proposal made by the chairman. However, I would like to ask members - you know these bills are about raising revenue for the Government to run. Now, in the Stamp Duty Act, VAT and Income tax, we rejected everything. Therefore, I do not know where we expect the Government to generate revenue from. As you make your decision, this is something I wanted to draw your attention to.

MR TUMURAMYE: Madam Chairperson, I do concur with the honourable minister’s position. Much as the country is facing the COVID-19 pandemic, it must run. And in an effort to raise revenue for the country I do support that we maintain these taxes so that the country can generate more revenue to be able to provide essential services for this country. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR SSOZI MULINDWA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for the report. However, I would also like to echo the guidance you have given us. Every tax that has been proposed in the Bill has been rejected by the committee. 

There was no evidence made to show that there was a negotiation to say that this 20 percent is too high, let us reduce it to 15 per cent of some other percentage. And again, as I pointed out earlier, this report does not give the impact on revenue that would give us a basis on which we would be able to decide and side with the committee.

Madam Speaker, therefore, I am hard-pressed to differ from the position of the committee on all these taxes. We do have obligations as a country; budgetary implications are even going to be bigger after the COVID-19. Even the traditional seen taxes; the spirits and cigarettes, the committee has not appreciated or made us to appreciate that the only justification for us to allow wines, beers and cigarettes is purely to raise money as a Government.

I, therefore, would like to appeal to the House that let us not be like those other people who eat their cake and also have it if they are there. We have to appropriate money in accordance to what the Budget Committee is going to tell us; on this other side, we must raise that money. I beg to request my case with that prayer. Thank you. 

MR MIGADDE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. You asked what we need to do, because Government needs to raise taxes. If we are to keenly look at the mortality rate of businesses in this country, we will realise that many of them are failing to pay taxes and are collapsing. Therefore, as we think about raising taxes, we must also know why some businesses are collapsing in this country. One of the reasons some are failing is because of over taxation. Tax is a cost to business, so the more taxes you pay, in one way or the other, the more you may actually fail to meet other obligations. 

Madam Chairperson –(Member timed out.) 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you have a proposal for a win-win situation?

MR MIGADDE: Madam Chairperson, at times, it may not be a win-win situation. If something is wrong, the issue should not be a win-win situation; the status quo can remain and that can be the win-win situation for the country.  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I would also like to thank hon. Migadde for giving way. 

To begin with, these taxes are already in existence. What it means now is that there is an increment in the rates from a certain value or percentage to another one. 

Secondly, this tax increases the cost of production. It has nothing to do with the profits of a company but it has to do with the cost of production. Now, given the situation we are in, if the cost of production goes high, it means the cost to a final consumer will go high. If it goes high, it means the consumption rate – if their income has not increased – will go down. In the current state, if you do increase any of this, the production will go high and the number of employees will go down because the consumption is going to go down. 

Madam Chairperson, if I am employed, I pay Pay as You Earn (PAYE) tax and if I am not employed, I will pay nothing. If I do not have money to consume, then this excise duty we are talking about will not apply. Therefore, the information I am giving is that this is going to increase the cost of production and we are going to have repercussions, given the fact of COVID-19. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Chairperson, if you look at Section 13(8) of the Public Finance Management Act, you will realise that it places an obligation on Government when they are preparing the annual budget. It says, “The annual budget shall be based on sound analysis and forecasts of macroeconomic developments and fiscal prospects.” 

The recommendations by the committee, as hon. Nandala-Mafabi has said, are not to the effect that this Parliament wants to abolish taxes. We are only saying that you must look beyond taxing because that has an effect on production. What all the other governments are doing is borrowing and trying to identify other sources of funding. 

Taxation is the laziest way of raising money, and I do not think hon. Isaac Musumba wants this Government to look lazy. As all other governments are looking for other sources to borrow, you are lazily telling Parliament that you will just increase taxes. 

Therefore, the win-win situation is that I do not support the idea that we reduce the taxes. I am only supporting that we maintain them the way they are. When we recover next year - (Interruption)  

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to give information to my colleague on what hon. Musumba has said. The tax we are talking about stands on one canon or two canons of the principles of taxation; one is raising revenue and the other is protection of local industries. 

Let us look at the option of raising revenue - Today, look at social media; the World Health Organisation is urging all governments, including Uganda, in this COVID-19 situation to lock down up to December. If you raise that tariff rate, where are you going to collect the revenue? Where is your projection? Excise duty on fuel – the lorries and cars are parked and the consumption is low. Therefore, does it make sense? It does not. That is why we are saying that the status quo remains. If it is for protection of industries, you depend on returns - 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, take back the Floor. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Thank you, my colleague, for the information. Let me conclude. 

Yesterday, I came to town and I was listening to a debate on one of the local FM stations. They just posed a simple question: if you are working for any company, can you call and tell us if you have received your March salary? Almost everybody who called said they had not received theirs. So, they were asked if they think they will receive their April salary and they said if they did not receive the March salary, how do they expect the April salary. 

I would like to urge the honourable ministers that there are other items that we can even remove and revise the budget. That is why we are dealing with taxes first. If we were dealing with the budget first, you would say we have already considered the budget. However, we are dealing with taxes first, so please go home and revise the budget to fit within the available tax framework. You do not come here and blackmail the population that if they do not increase taxes, there will be nothing. Please, just go and revise the budget. I thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The country is in a catch-22 situation. We are not operating in a normal situation but at the same time Government needs to raise revenue to ensure that business continues. 

We need to support the health sector; I think this is not in question. It would be okay to say that we go back and cut some of these expenditures but there are some critical areas that we need to focus on. Take the situation of the health sector, it would be very suicidal for us, as a country, to say let us go back -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, we are looking at the Excise Duty Bill, please.

MR OTHIENO: Yes, Madam Chairperson. My take is that we do not need to overburden the country with heavy taxes but at the same time we must be aware that it is our responsibility to provide Government with resources to finance the budget.

My considered opinion, Madam Chairperson, is that if we cannot increase taxes on fuel, we could sacrifice and go in for some items. Personally, I know it will hurt some farmers in Kabale and highland areas, but we can impose these taxes, for instance, on beer. Let us be honest, consumption of beer is a habit. Nobody is going to stop consuming beer simply because we have increased tax on it, unlike fuel that has a multiplier effect. Let us look at beer. If we say we cannot tax fuel, which has a multiplier effect on all other sectors, let us look at beer. The people who consume alcohol do it as a habit.

Actually, for your own information, the more you increase taxes on beer, the more revenue you will raise and nobody is going to stop drinking. These are the areas ordinarily you would go for. 

Therefore, I would urge colleagues to support Government and sustain the tax on beer and maybe have minimum consideration for others. We should levy excise duty on beer so that Government can raise revenue to provide services to the country. Otherwise, it is going to be very difficult for the Government to run. It is a catch-22 situation and we must be ready to pay the price and I think this is where we go. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think let us vote. Honourable minister, do you have an amendment?

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank the Members who have contributed on this important Bill and subject of taxation in these times. However, as many Members have said, we are in a catch-22 situation and indeed, we are in the year 2020. We have got to raise revenue to finance the budget. As we tax, we are also being rational. We are not just going to increase tax –(Interjection)- I am coming to the amendment and I think that is not the spirit, hon. Ssemujju.

Madam Chairperson, the amendment I am moving, which is on clause 2, is in relation to the fact that you stated, that we did not get anything out of the income tax. What this means is that for the revenue which we have not realised through the tax measures we have proposed, we are going to borrow this money. If you go to the domestic market to borrow Shs 600 billion, for example, you are paying Shs 100 billion in interest. Therefore, we must really balance this.

Madam Chairperson, I agree with all the clauses the chairperson and the Members have proposed but I wanted to propose that in clause 2, we delete everything save for paragraph (g)(8) on fuel and then that can balance our small - Let us have some little thing that we take out of this. 

Hon. Nandala-Mafabi can testify; I know he deals in fuel. There is a reason why we put something on fuel. It has been proven year in, year out that every time there is a reduction on the other fuel cost, they never reduce the price. Even when it increases, it has never gone beyond one per cent. Therefore, saying that it will affect all other sectors is not necessarily true as we are saying. 

Madam Chairperson, in this House, we have always gone with a win-win arrangement; we have always found a common ground. We can find a common ground on this particular item and we pass this Bill and move forward. 

I beg to submit, Madam Chairperson, that we save (g) on fuel and then we leave out the rest. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us hear from the chairman.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, having listened to your guidance, and also the minister having conceded on all other proposals, as a win-win we concede on 8(a) and (b). I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we are in this together. So, I put the question that clause 2 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

The Title 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the title do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE CHAIRPERSON: Clerk, what happened to the new paragraphs?

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, I read all the insertions at once.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourable minister, please move the motion.

5.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING)(Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2020” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE 
WHOLE HOUSE

5.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE EXCISE DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

5.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2020” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2020 be read for the third time and do pass. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE EXCISE DUTY (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2020”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and the Bill passes. (Applause) 

Chairman, how much time do you require for that presentation? Can you use 30 minutes to present? We can only receive, not debate. Okay, honourable members, in view of the curfew, I think we need to adjourn now. Tomorrow, we can settle entirely on the issue of the Budget Committee. The House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow. Thank you very much. 

(The House rose at 5.06 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 22 April 2020 at 2.00 p.m.) 
