
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Tuesday, 5 April 2022

Parliament met at 10.02 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this special sitting today. It is not an easy sitting. It is full of emotions, but we have to bear with it. Today, the whole nation is joining us in this special session as we pay tribute to a gallant son of Uganda, a leader, mentor, friend and brother to most of us. 

To everyone out there, we sincerely cannot thank you enough for your contribution and support towards the Rt Hon. Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah, who has gone to be with the Lord. 

Honourable members, I would like to recognise the presence of the members of the family of the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah as follows:

Dr Opiyo Oloya – Uncle; 
Francis Emuna 	–  Brother; 
Diana Achieng	- Daughter; 
Andrew Ojok	- Son; 
Harold Adiyo	- Son; 
Ezra Audu		- Son; 
Karen Atim	- Daughter; and 
Christian Okori 	- Son.

Thank you for coming to pay tribute to your late dad who has been our friend, brother and mentor.

I also wish to recognise, in the gallery, the presence – we will mention the names later because I have not yet got them. However, I would like to thank you so much for coming and we remain forever indebted to you. 

The sitting is entirely dedicated to paying tribute to the eminent son of Omoro, and indeed a great son of this nation, the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, the former Speaker of the 11th Parliament. 

Without pre-empting the motion to be moved by Her Excellency the Vice-President, I take the opportunity to thank the Lord for blessing this Parliament with a very brilliant leader called Jacob Oulanyah. (Applause) He was a leader and mentor, who believed we should move this country further. 

He was a great leader, a lawyer, legislator, researcher, a debater and an advocate for peace and unity in Uganda, and the world over. No one will forget the role the late played in the peace talks between the Government of Uganda and the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) towards the pacification of Northern Uganda. Indeed, his negotiation skills are something that this country will greatly miss. It brought some peace to Northern Uganda. 

The late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was a devoted advocate of Ubuntu – a loose reference to humanity. He believed that everybody should be treated fairly and equitably. That is the man going to lie in front of us here today. The Bible says, “…we shall know them by their works…” and our hands are indeed – Jacob has done everything! Because of the works and deeds he has left behind, today for the first time, the House is full to capacity. I would like to thank you once more for coming. 

Honourable colleagues, as Parliament of Uganda, one of the ways we shall honour the legacy of the late Speaker is by accomplishing his vision of achieving evidence-based debate in the House, and having a people-centred Parliament. That is how we shall make Jacob lie in peace wherever he will be. 

I would like to most sincerely thank the President of this country for doing everything humanly possible to save the life of Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, including taking him to one of the world’s best hospitals in Seattle, USA. (Applause) This shows how much value and contribution he made to this nation. This reminds me of the time when we were in Seattle - the First Lady called and asked Dr Aceng how the Speaker was. Dr Aceng said, “The doctors said we are only waiting for time.” The First Lady said, “That is a lie. The God we serve is a living God.” This means he had touched that family in different ways. Nobody believed Jacob was going this soon, but God’s plans are never our plans. 

Honourable members, we have gone through thick and thin in this Parliament. I would like to thank this Parliament of Uganda for all that they did. We had to forego some things in Parliament because we had to treat and transport Jacob to wherever he went. Clerk, we would like to thank you so much for standing with our Speaker. (Applause) It is just because we could not say everything, but today, we have to say it - we had to forego a number of things in the name of treating our boss. 

Honourable members, before I conclude, I kindly request the persons whom our fallen leader could have hurt knowingly or unknowingly, to forgive him, just as he forgave them. There is a clip that was moving around in which he is reported to have said that he had forgiven everybody who had hurt him. As his former deputy, I am asking Members, if anybody was hurt by Rt Hon. Jacob, kindly forgive him so that he can rest in peace.

This nation, and indeed the Parliament of Uganda, will dearly miss Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah. I will say more during the national function tomorrow at Kololo, and at the burial in Omoro.

I was privileged to work with the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah as his deputy. I want to assure you that you can never have a better leader and boss than Jacob.

The people of Acholi, Lango and Uganda will miss him dearly. Let us stand and observe a moment of silence in honour of Jacob.

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me now allow the casket to be brought into the Chamber.

(Entrance of the late Rt Hon. Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah.)

The National Anthem

The East African  Community Anthem

Laying of wreaths

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this being a special sitting with special circumstances, the Chief Justice, being part of the family of the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, has been allowed in. He is seated here.

You are most welcome, Chief Justice. I am acting under Rule 8 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

(Laying of wreaths continued_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in our midst we have the Chief Justice, His Lordship Alfonse Owiny-Dollo. You are most welcome; and in the VIP Gallery, we have the following:

H.E. Mohammed Suleiman Ahmed - Dean of the Diplomatic Corps;

Hon. John Nasasira – former minister;

Hon. Kibuule Ronald – former minister;

Hon. Amanya Mushega – former Member of Parliament and minister;

Hon. Makmot Otto Edward – former Member of Parliament;

Hon. Simeo Nsubuga - former Member of Parliament;

Hon. Miria Matembe - former Member of Parliament;

Hon. Okello-Okello - former Member of Parliament;

Rt Hon. Margaret Zziwa - former Member and Speaker of the East African Legislative Assembly (EALA);

Rt Hon. Dan Kidega - former Speaker of EALA; 

Hon. Ben Wacha - former Member of Parliament;

Hon. Dan Wandera Ogalo - former Member of Parliament;

Hon. Richard Todwong – Secretary General, National Resistance Movement (NRM);

Hon. Nobert Mao – Democratic Party President;

H.E. Ambssador Doreen Amule – Uganda’s Ambassador-designate, Paris.

Hon. Michael Werikhe – former minister;

Hon. Babirye Kadogo – former Member of Parliament;

Hon. Kumama Nsamba – former Member of Parliament; and

Hon. Lydia Wanyoto – former Member of EALA.

They are all here to witness the proceedings of the day as we pay tribute to our fallen hero. (Applause)

We also have a delegation from the Parliament of the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) and it includes the following:

Hon. Tabu Makusi Angele - Head of delegation;

Hon. Muber Thoniot Serge - Member of Parliament;

Hon. Masela Kiluty Zurry - Member of Parliament;

Hon. Berocan Keraore Nono - Member of Parliament;

Hon. Segihobe Bigira Jean-Paul - Member of Parliament;

Hon. Pierrot Uweka Ukaba – Senator;

Hon. Alphonse Ukeci Rundi Muswa – Senator;

Hon. Odette Mbuyi Ngoyi – Senator;

Mr Matumikina Mayedi Gaspard – Advisor; and

Mr Adubang’o Chunya’ay – Advisor.

We also have a delegation from the East African Legislative Assembly (EALA) and it includes:

Hon. Akol Rose Okullu – Member of EALA

Hon. James Kakooza - Member of EALA

Hon. Mary Mugyenyi - Member of EALA

Hon. Mukasa Mbidde - Member of EALA

Hon. Musamali Paul Mwasa - Member of EALA

Hon. Denis Namara - Member of EALA

Hon. George Stephen Odongo - Member of EALA

We also have the following distinguished guests:

Dr Mbonye – Director, Nakasero Hospital;

Hon. Sam Kuteesa – former Member of Parliament;

Hon. Patrick Amuriat, the party President of the Forum for Democratic Change (FDC). Engineer, you are most welcome. 

Thank you all for coming to witness today’s proceedings. (Applause)  

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE RT HON. JACOB L’OKORI OULANYAH, FORMER SPEAKER OF THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency Jessica Alupo, you are welcome.  

11.03
THE VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Rt Hon. Speaker and colleagues, Members of Parliament, this is a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay special tribute to the late Rt Hon. Dr Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah, the former Speaker of the 11th Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. 

It is moved under rule 56 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, and schedule 4, part D, paragraph 13 of the Parliamentary Pensions Act, 2007. 

“WHEREAS Parliament of Uganda received with deep sorrow the sad news of the death of the Speaker of Parliament, the Rt Hon. Dr Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah, which occurred on Sunday, 20 March 2022; 

AWARE THAT the Rt Hon. Dr Jacob Oulanyah had an exemplary and distinguished career, and meticulously served the nation in various capacities, including as – 

(a) 	Speaker of the 11th Parliament from 24 May 2021 up to the time of his death; 

(b) 	Deputy Speaker of the Ninth and Tenth Parliaments from l9 May 2016 to May 2021 and l9 May 2011 to May 2016, respectively;

(c) 	Member of Parliament representing Omoro County, Gulu District, from 2001 to 2006, 2011 to 2015, and 20l6 to the time of his death; 

(d) Chairperson, Northern Region, Central Executive Committee of the National Resistance Movement, from 2020 to the time of his death; 

(e)	Chairperson, Commission of Inquiry into the Sublease of Kisekka Market in 2008; 

(f) 	UN Special Envoy to the Uganda Peace Talks between the Government of Uganda and the LRA, and participated in drafting the Juba Peace Agreements in 2006, earning him an honorary Doctorate of Divinity by Zoe Life Theological College, USA; and

(g) 	Chairperson, Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs from May 200l to 2005; 

APPRECIATING THAT the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was a dedicated Speaker who served our country and Parliament with devotion and enthusiasm, and his leadership greatly contributed to strengthening of adherence to the rule of law, parliamentary practice, political tolerance, the spirit of humanity (ubuntu) and encouraged cohesion amongst different shades of opinion; 

RECOGNISING the contribution made by Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah to the Acholi subregion through his participation in the peace talks between the Government of Uganda and the Lord’s Resistance Army, and championing the promotion of Government programmes for the social and economic transformation of the people of Acholi subregion and Uganda at large; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that: 

Parliament collectively conveys its condolences to His Excellency Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the President of the Republic of Uganda, the bereaved family of the late Jacob Oulanyah, all relatives and friends, the people of the Acholi subregion, the Parliament of Uganda, and all the people of Uganda for the loss of a great and exceptional leader. 

Parliament takes cognisance of the excellent and patriotic service that the Rt Hon. Dr Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah has rendered to the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, the Acholi community and the people of Uganda.” 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Your Excellency the Vice-President. Is the motion seconded? 

(Motion seconded.)

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded by the Prime Minister, Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, the Leader of the Opposition and the whole House. Thank you very much. Would you like to speak to your motion? 

MAJ. (RTD) ALUPO: Madam Speaker, on 20 March 2022, we received the sad news of the death of our Speaker, Rt Hon. Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah, who passed on in Seattle in the United States of America, where he had travelled for specialised treatment. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity to pay tribute to our departed Speaker, Rt Hon. Dr Jacob Oulanyah, who was a gallant son of Uganda. We shall remember him for the distinguished service that he rendered to the institution of Parliament and to the country at large. 

I would like to thank His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the President of the Republic of Uganda, for his unwavering support and efforts to try to save the life of the late Jacob Oulanyah with the interventions, which we all know are self-explanatory. 

I would also like to thank His Excellency the President, for enabling Government to accord him a state funeral that is deserving of a man of the calibre of the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. 

Madam Speaker, the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was born in Gulu District - now Gulu City - on 23 March 1965 to Nathan Okori and Karen Atwon.

He studied at St Joseph’s College Layibi, Dr Milton Obote College Boroboro, and Kololo Secondary School for his O-Level and A-Level education, respectively.

In 1988, he joined Makerere University and graduated in 1991 with a Bachelor of Arts degree. The same year, he joined Makerere University, graduating in 1994 with a Bachelor of Laws degree. While pursuing his law course, he served as Speaker of the Makerere University Students’ Guild.

In 1995, the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah attended the Law Development Centre and obtained a Postgraduate Diploma in Legal Practice. He then joined the Centre as a lecturer, and it was during this time that he began private law practice at Oulanyah, Onoria & Co. Advocates.

Madam Speaker and colleagues, in 2001, the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was voted to the Seventh Parliament as a Member of Parliament representing Omoro County.

He chaired the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, handling the challenging process of political transition then, from the Movement System to the Multiparty System, and the constitutional review. He steered the committee to process two constitutional amendment Bills and nine other Bills to implement the provision of the amended Constitution.

In 2006, the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah quit the Uganda People’s Congress (UPC) party, and joined the National Resistance Movement party.

He continued to actively engage himself in the legislative activities within the region, and trained numerous legislators in Kenya, Eswatini (formerly Swaziland), South Sudan, and Sudan, on parliamentary practice and procedure. He also drafted several rules of procedure for other parliaments in the region.

The Rt Hon. Dr Jacob Oulanyah was also instrumental in the restoration of peace in South Sudan. He drafted the Juba Peace Talks Agreement and was an adviser to the Government of South Sudan, alongside other high-level persons, including Dr Riek Machar, who was the chief mediator in the Juba Peace Talks, and President Joaquim Chissano, the UN Special Envoy to the Lord’s Resistance Army affected areas.

Madam Speaker and colleagues, in March 2011, the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was elected Member of Parliament for Omoro County on the NRM ticket, and in May 2011, he was elected Deputy Speaker of the Ninth Parliament of Uganda. In 2016, the Rt Hon. Dr Jacob Oulanyah was re-elected as Omoro County Member of Parliament and Deputy Speaker of the 10th Parliament. 

On 13 July 2019, the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was awarded an honorary Doctorate of Divinity by Zoe Life Theological College in the United States of America, in honour of his distinguished services in the faith.

On 14 January 2021, the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was re-elected Omoro County Member of Parliament and on 24 May 2021, he was voted Speaker of the 11th Parliament.

Madam Speaker and colleagues, the Rt Hon. Dr Jacob Oulanyah was a key figure in the northern region, offering political leadership and monitoring to the post-conflict and recovery process of Northern Uganda. With his influence, he mobilised support for the ruling National Resistance Movement party in Northern Uganda, which saw the party win overwhelmingly in the region after three decades.

The Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was passionate about propelling his community from subsistence survival to the money economy. To this effect, he had initiated several projects for the people of Omoro, one of which was the Dano Pa Dano Foundation, with a revolving fund of close to Shs 3 billion, which provided start-up capital to natives for various micro businesses. 

Indeed, at his election as Member of Parliament in 2021, his focus was on improving education standards, healthcare, boosting agriculture and achieving socio-economic transformation for our people in Omoro County and the rest of Uganda.

The Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was a father and a mentor to many. At the time of his death, he was sponsoring over 200 students at primary, secondary and university levels. He went beyond supporting them financially, but took keen interest in ensuring that they grow up to be successful and responsible citizens.

It is this group of young people that he had in mind when he said he was careful with how he handles public matters, because he did not want to set a bad example; he wanted to be a man worth emulating.

Madam Speaker and colleagues, the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was also instrumental in the ongoing construction of the cancer institute in Omoro District. I would like to urge the Ministry of Health to ensure the completion of the said cancer institute in honour and memory of Jacob Oulanyah. (Applause)

Madam Speaker and colleagues, the Rt Hon. Dr Jacob Oulanyah was not only passionate about politics, but committed his life to serving God and humanity. 

He was a Rotarian of the Rotary Club of Kampala Central. He donated to all major Rotary activities in Uganda, and contributed generously to the Rotary Foundation of Rotary International, to support humanitarian service.

Madam Speaker, as Parliament, we would like to extend our sincere sympathies and condolences to his Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, the bereaved family, relatives, friends, in-laws, honourable Members of Parliament, the people of Acholi subregion, and to all the people of Uganda. 

May the Lord sustain the bereaved family of the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah and may his soul rest in eternal peace. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Vice-President, for that elaborate motion. Can we have the Prime Minister.

11.22
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank you for according me time to second this motion. I would also like to thank His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, for the support rendered to the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, in saving his life and ensuring that he receives a dignified send-off.

A lot has been said about Oulanyah’s background and education. I will, therefore, focus on his legacy as the Speaker of the 11th Parliament and Member of Parliament who represented the people of Omoro County.

Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah served this nation with excellence and dedication. He fostered collaboration between Parliament and the Executive; he actually prioritised Government business. 

Rt Hon. Dr Jacob Oulanyah was a pro-people person. Indeed, his last task in the House, before being hospitalised, was the passing of the National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Bill, 2021, which legalised the midterm access to members’ savings.

Madam Speaker, Rt Hon. Dr Jacob Oulanyah sought to restore public confidence in the institution of Parliament by urging legislators to focus on debating issues of national importance and perfecting service delivery to the people of Uganda. As the Speaker of the 11th Parliament, Rt Hon. Oulanyah was keen on instructive and constructive debate in the House. It should be recalled that while setting the agenda of the 11th Parliament, Rt Hon. Oulanyah called for evidence-based debate in the House, citing that without research and statistics, Members risked bringing the entire House of intelligent and dignified people into disrepute. 

The eloquence and expertise with which he steered the House earned him respect and loyalty of honourable members, among whom he always promoted the spirit of humanity like others have said - ubuntu. He was a uniting factor among varied voices in the House and he always urged Members of Parliament to accord respect to each other irrespective of party affiliations and status in society. 

Madam Speaker, Rt Hon. Dr Oulanyah respected time. He ensured that the parliamentary proceedings he chaired started right on the dot. He believed that leaders should be the pacesetters in handling parliamentary business. He did not just talk, but he walked his talk. 

He was an expert in law and Parliamentary Practice and Procedure. In 2001, Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah chaired the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. His legal expertise was shown particularly on the constitutional amendment that ensured that the presidential and parliamentary elections are held on the same day, to maximise resources and promote fair competition, and this is on the record. It was also during his tenure as the chairperson of the same committee that the multi-party dispensation was ushered in, which has been key to our growth as a democratic state. 

The late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was an accomplished legislator. As a matter of fact, he presented the only private Members’ Bill in the Seventh Parliament called “the Copyright and Neighbouring Rights Act, 2006”.

Rt Hon. Dr Jacob Oulanyah was a true nationalist, a visionary and progressive leader. He was an inspiration to all of us and his legacy will outlive him. 

Madam Speaker, as the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business in Parliament, I wish to extend my sincere sympathies and condolences to H.E. the President of the Republic of Uganda, the bereaved family, relatives, friends, honourable Members of Parliament, the people of Acholi subregion and the nation. May his soul rest in eternal peace. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Can we have the Leader of the Opposition?

11.29
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join the mover of the motion, who is the Vice-President of the Republic of Uganda; the first seconder, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister; and my colleagues, Members of Parliament, to pay tribute to now the late Rt Hon. Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah, who until his death on 20 March 2022 served as the Speaker for the first nine months of the 11th Parliament.

I stand not just to second the motion, but to join all Members of Parliament to mourn and pay tribute to a great son of Uganda, Rt Hon. Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah. In my own capacity, as the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament, I would like to extend my personal sympathies and those of my team to the family of the late Rt Hon. Speaker, to the people of Omoro, the ruling party to which he belonged to and served so diligently, and of course, to the Parliament of Uganda to which he had personified the service.

Madam Speaker, it has been a long painful 15 days for the family, friends and the country since our leader took his last breath. It is with a heavy heart that we will reflect upon his life and accomplishments. For us in the Opposition, the demise of the Rt Hon. Speaker is a huge loss to the country. The Parliament of Uganda has lost an encyclopaedia of parliamentary procedure when many of our first-time Members of Parliament needed guidance from him to understand and master the ways and methods of Parliament. There is no doubt that he distinguished himself as one with a clear mastery of parliamentary practice.

Over the past 16 days that our nation has been mourning, people have expressed their grief in various ways. However, what stands out very clearly is that there has been an outpouring of admiration for the accomplishments of the Rt Hon. Speaker. His accomplishments over the last years of his service are no mean feat, considering the nature of the political environment in which we operate. 

In times like these, we tend to ask ourselves questions - What is it about this man that elicits this kind of outpouring or admiration for his accomplishments? We now know that Jacob Oulanyah – or OJ as we knew him – worked his way up. He did not climb up. He was never a social climber, but he worked his way to rise to the top. (Applause)

When people see goodness in a person, they respond by reflecting goodness back to that person. Put simply, agree or disagree with him, he was a fine gentleman. He was a good man.

I have learned over time, through my engagement with people I agree and disagree with, that eventually, leadership is about falling in love with people and the people falling in love with you or loving you back. It is about serving the people with selflessness, sacrifice and goodwill.

As the Opposition in Parliament, we had fallen in love with a leader, the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah – the Speaker, but not necessarily the politician and the two are distinct. Probably, the distinction about him was that he was able to draw a boundary between being a leader and being a politician, which is why he had the right balance while leading us here in Parliament. (Applause) It is a unique trait. It is that delicate balance that distinguishes statesmen from masqueraders. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, today we pay tribute to a man whose extraordinary eloquence, clarity in speech and mastery of House rules and procedure made him unique as the presiding officer of parliamentary sessions. 

Our fallen Speaker created and maintained his own unique “OJ brand”. It is the reason why most of us, men, are decked with bowties. His style reflected his humility and meekness. He was apologetic for many a time, and humble enough when caught off-guard.

Most importantly, our fallen senior colleague and leader distinguished himself as a master of balancing the interests of everyone. I recollect that at the launch of the Opposition’s Legislative Agenda, I invited him to be our guest. He was excited to officiate at the Opposition’s initiative – the first of the kind – and committed to working with the Opposition on everything that would seek to serve our citizens. 

He advised that he preferred that the leadership of both sides of the House use the Westminster model of meeting regularly to iron out differences on issues of divergence, and only come on the Floor to sort out matters where the two sides could not agree. 

Madam Speaker, in his memory, we owe a bipartisan approach to matters that really help citizens to better their lives because that is our space. (Applause) As the presiding officer of this House, this great son of Uganda exhibited a level of fairness to all sides of this House, despite the partisan pressure that is extolled on the office of the Speaker. 

In the spirit of fairness, he has left behind a matter he passionately intended to provide leadership over, that is, rule 25(2)(1) that regards the processing of a statement by a shadow minister. He was very passionate, as I recollect. 

There are individuals in this House who actually believe that the Opposition is here illegally –(Applause)- and that the Opposition is such a bother and an intrusion. They believe that people are supposed to come here, in Parliament, and run through issues, regardless.

We had had a conversation about the import of rule 25(2)(1) with the late and I would like to implore and beseech the indulgence of the Rt Hon. Speaker to pursue this matter with the rules committee because we are a people’s Parliament. As such, it is not true that at all times we must agree and must not question, and that questioning the work of Government is done with the intention of failing Government. No, we are Ugandans and we know that the Government in power will go and we shall take over. We want to find a better Uganda before we take over. (Applause) 

Before I take leave of this eulogy, may I take this opportunity to remind this august House of these three issues as a matter of reflection as we bid farewell to our brother, leader, comrade, friend and parent like most of us: 

One, as leaders, as we offer leadership in this country at various levels, we should, as much as possible, refrain from generalising and categorising citizens when we disagree. We have had leaders in this country trying to drive a wedge between citizens on ethnic, religious and other grounds. 

The memory of OJ will not be served well with this partisan posturing. We owe his memory to the nature of politics that is embracing of our differences. Our differences are not a minus on this country. Our diversity - being a nation that is a melting pot of ethnicities - is not a minus. We should, instead, use it to serve the common good. 

I would like to invite politicians at all levels to avoid milking ethnicity for political advantage as they pursue their own goals. Jacob was a unifier. We would disagree, but he would give you space and listen to you and respect you. (Applause) We owe his memory that. 

Two, let what made our Speaker exemplary be an inspiration to all of us. The most important lesson he taught us is commitment to duty. He committed himself to delivering on assignments given to him on time and with the quality they deserved. We should, in all our respective capacities, in memory of Jacob Oulanyah, commit to delivering quality output on time. That is the best we can give to Uganda and the memory of our leader. 

The business of ministers running away from duty and giving excuses, making Parliament lose time and waste taxpayers’ money, should end in memory of OJ. (Applause) A session scheduled for 2 o’clock was at 2 o’clock and we would process business. We need to learn from his commitment to duty. Pretending to work shall not solve national problems. If you are a pretender, please, go and pretend from home. Do not occupy a public office. 

Lastly, our Rt Hon. Speaker and friend sadly passed on away from home. His close friends, save for a few who were able to travel, missed an opportunity to have a last word with him, which is very saddening. Not that we wanted Jacob Oulanyah to die from his house, but we need to do better. Right now, as Parliament, we are engaged in the budget process. I am waiting to see the level of commitment that will be given to these experiences in the health sector. (Applause)

This Parliament mortgaged the nation to over a trillion shillings to build a specialised hospital. However, that facility is a no-go area for Members of Parliament. As leaders, we need to be very careful in our actions and when we return, it is going to be very different. Government must explain whether we were fleeced so that we go for those who did it. If it was connivance, we shall go for everyone who connived in that project; we want it delivered. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to note that finally, the President, while at Kololo when we were electing the Speakers, advised us to amend Article 82 that provides for the Office of the Speaker of Parliament. I remind this House and the country that the actual legal provisions on succession that lack in our law books, and that require urgent legislation, are related to the conduct of Government business upon the passing or loss of an election by an incumbent President in Uganda.

A Presidential succession law with details of authority given to office bearers is the urgent legislation which we intend to initiate as the Opposition in the 11th Parliament, to create certainty and close an ambiguity, especially upon the loss of an election. There is no problem relating to the election of the Speaker, regardless of the misgivings of the President. The ambiguity and void is in the succession to the Presidency. So, we intend to resurrect the Bill that was earlier moved by hon. Dr Lulume Bayigga in Parliament, polish it and make provisions for Presidential succession with clarity and without ambiguity.

May the soul of our fallen giant, friend and leader rest in eternal peace. I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. We will want to get a brief medical report from Hon. Dr Aceng, who followed up on the health of the fallen hero. However, before Dr Aceng comes, we have condolence messages. 

We have a condolence message from Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo, MP of Katakwi and Vice-President of Uganda.

We also have a message from the Parliamentary Catholic Chaplaincy and enclosed is Shs 1,000,000 for the Jacob Oulanyah Education Fund. Thank you, so much.

There are other messages from the Embassy of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the New Zealand Embassy, the Embassy of the Arab Republic of Egypt, the Embassy of the Republic of Senegal, the Embassy of the Togolese Republic, the Embassy of the Republic of Rwanda, and the Embassy of Burkina Faso.

Other condolence messages have come from the following: Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia; the Speaker of the House of Peoples’ Representatives of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia; the Embassy of the People’s Republic of China; the Embassy of Mauritania; from Faki Mahamat.

We have condolence messages from the Embassy of the Republic of Burundi in Kampala; the Embassy of the Federal Republic of Somalia in Kampala; the Embassy of the State of Libya in Kampala; the Embassy of the Russian Federation in the Republic of Uganda; and from the Minister of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Rwanda in Kampala.

Further, there are condolence messages from: Mr Henry Ssentongo of Sentongo and Partners; Ms Edith Tusubira; Uganda Microfinance Regulatory Authority; and Dr Jotham Musinguzi of  the National Population Council.

We also have messages from Dr Joseph Muvawala, the Prime Minister of Busoga; Dr Betty Mirembe, PATH Uganda; Mr Paul Mugenyi, Prudential Assurance Uganda Limited; Hon. Sophia Nalule, Equal Opportunities Commission; the Rt Hon. Valentina Matvienko; and the Speaker of the Federation Council of the Federal Assembly of the Russian Federation.

We have messages from the General-Secretary and President of the Inter-Parliamentary Union; from Dr Sanya Wilson, Urban Authorities Association of Uganda; Prof. Mustapha Ssentongo; Mr Martin Nsubuga; and from the Uganda Retirement Benefits Regulatory Authority. We will continue reading messages as they come in. Dr Aceng, could you give us a brief history of the cause of the death. 

11.49
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Ruth Aceng): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to convey my condolences to His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, the Vice-President, to you, Madam Speaker, the Chief Justice, the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker and all colleagues in the House.

Madam Speaker, I appreciate the 11th Parliament, through you, for all the support that was given to the late Speaker. You did not leave any stone unturned in our quest to ensure he remained alive and healthy.

I appreciate all the honourable members for their prayers, which kept the late clinging onto life. In a special way, allow me appreciate the family for standing, staying together and honouring their father.

The ill health of the late Speaker started in 2019. Because you have asked me to be brief, I will summarise. In 2019, he discovered a swelling in the neck - a relatively big swelling - and he took it upon himself to seek medical attention in Germany. The swelling was removed and analysed. He was told that it was a cancer. Later on, I will summarise what the cancer was. He was started on treatment, which he finished in Uganda Cancer Institute. 

He subsequently visited several other hospitals because of the same, but we also had challenges during the lockdown and during the elections, when he was not able to be in hospital. 

On 23 January, we admitted him to Mulago where he was to stay for two weeks. During that time, we were preparing him to travel and also getting in touch with several hospitals that could provide a gene therapy treatment which did not require more chemotherapy, because he had had multiple chemotherapy that had suppressed the bone marrow. 

One of the reasons visitors were limited was because his bone marrow was not functional and he needed to be protected from infections. Therefore, it was not that visitors were barred deliberately, but that was the reason. 

Allow me to appreciate the team of doctors in Mulago, who took care of him - 15 of them led by Dr Jackson Orem, the Uganda Cancer Institute Executive Director, who attended to him from the time when he discovered the lump until he went to Seattle. 

On the 3 February, five physical people left for Seattle, together with the Holy Spirit. These included: the late Rt Hon. Speaker; Patricia Lakidi and Christine Awor - attendants to take care of him; his security guard, Ocheng; and Dr Jackson Orem, who was to ensure that the hospital picks him immediately, stabilises and takes care of him. 

While in the hospital, several investigations were repeated. The biopsy tissues from the various hospitals were recalled for further analysis. Bone marrow biopsies were retaken for analysis and details of all these were provided. 

Madam Speaker, the report I have here is a death summary report for the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah L’Okori. The causes of death are four:

The immediate cause of death was multi organ failure. The heart failed. The lungs failed. The liver and the kidneys failed. The liver started failing while he was still here in Uganda, as well as the lungs that had started collecting fluid. The heart started failing while in Seattle, as well as the kidneys. 

He had multiple infections - bacterial infections, which were discovered here and viral infections that were discovered in Seattle. Unfortunately, the treatment for the viral infections further suppressed the bone marrow. This was a consequence of total bone marrow suppression, which we call pancytopenia; in other words, his bone marrow could no longer produce red blood cells, white blood cells or platelets. He lived on blood and platelets every day. 

All these resulted from progressive recurrent diffuse of large B- cell non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma - that is the cancer - and of course, the chemotherapy that he received for quite a while. 

Madam Speaker, there were contributory conditions and these included the following: He had lymphatic system depletion. The Rt Hon. Speaker lost his spleen while he was in Makerere; I am sure many of you are aware of this. It is the spleen, - my brother, hon. Okot Ogong, allow me to correct you - it is not the pancreas. You cannot live without a pancreas. He had a splenectomy following that riot. He did not have a spleen, which is also an organ that manufactures blood cells - white, red and so on. 

He also had challenges with stem cells, which had a poor immune response because of chemotherapy. He started having gastrointestinal bleeding or bleeding into the abdomen, because of lack of platelets. He could not stop the bleeding. He had multidrug-resistant bacteria. This was Klebsiella pneumoniae, which is usually hospital acquired when you stay there for too long, and the virus was cytomegalovirus, which affected him. 

Once again, my condolences. This is the brief report. A longer story will be provided in Kololo. I thank you for the opportunity and for listening to me. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Dr Aceng, for being there for Jacob. The Rt Hon. Speaker emeritus - She worked with Jacob closely. (Applause)

11.59
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER FOR EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Ms Rebecca Kadaga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, condolences to the family, my Lord the Chief Justice and members of the family, the friends, the House, His Excellency the President and the people of Uganda. 

I support the motion and I am here to give some testimony about his work life. His education and party growth have been discussed. I just want to talk briefly about our time together because I worked with him here for 10 years. We had a good working relationship. 

Hon. Oulanyah, apart from supporting me in the House, the Appointments and Business Committee, was also the head of delegation of the African, Caribbean and Pacific-European Union (ACP-EU) and the delegation of the International Congress of the Great Lakes Region. He was in charge of external travel with the members of the Parliamentary Commission while I was in charge of the Commonwealth and the Inter-Parliamentary Union. 

I think, now that the Minister for Health has spoken, I can relate to what I remember about his health. Even for me, I think it was in 2019 that I realised that hon. Oulanyah was not well and it happened by accident. I was looking for him because we were approaching the Christmas recess. There are some items I wanted on the Order Paper. One of them was the motion on the new cities. We had sat in the Business Committee and agreed that the motion on the cities must be completed before Christmas because, one, we needed it to be in the Budget Framework Paper; two, we needed to ensure that the Electoral Commission would have an opportunity to demarcate the constituencies in good time so that the elections of 2021 were held, including in the new constituencies. 

I was looking for him because on two occasions, he had presided over the sittings and no decision had been taken. I was looking for him to find out whether having had the opportunity to listen to the debate on two occasions, there was a risk that if I brought back this matter on the Order Paper, it would be voted out. Also, I wanted to know if he would be in position to complete it or if I should do it. 

When I found him, he said, “I am not well.”  I said, “Oh, do you have malaria?” He said, “No, I have had an operation.” I asked, “What is the matter?” He said, “I got an appendix operation.” I said, “Okay. In any case, we have got three weeks to the end of the sittings, you stay home.” I was shocked three days later to receive a letter from him that he was going out of the country. I picked up the phone and said, “Jacob, I thought we agreed that you stay home. Are you going to travel when you have just had an operation?” He said, “I cannot explain, but I need to travel.” I let it pass. 

In that letter, he had told me he would come back around 28 December 2019. On 29 December, I received another letter saying that he had come back, but he wanted to go out again. I said, “Okay, we are still in the recess; you go.” 

At that time, I was due to go to the conference of Speakers and presiding officers in Canada, where - By the way, I would like to give notice that I committed Uganda to host the Standing Committee of the Conference of Speakers and Presiding Officers in 2024. So, they will be coming here. 

Due to the fact that he was not here, I had to spend only three days in Ottawa so that I could come back and start the Third Meeting, which was the budget meeting. He came back briefly, worked for a few days and then I got another letter, which puzzled me. He wrote to me that he was going to the Federal Republic of Germany on a trade association and that he was going to visit all the federal states of Germany. 

First of all, this Parliament does not have a bilateral agreement with the Bundestag of Germany. I was puzzled as to why a Ugandan official should spend six weeks in Germany and why should he visit all the states. 

I wrote to him that he should not travel since it was the budget meeting and we were about to start the budget. He did not answer. Two days later, I heard he had left. I think now it ties in with what the minister has said - why he had to spend time in Germany. He came back, worked a bit and again requested to go. 

I really got worried and took time to go and see the President. I told him, “My colleague does not appear to be well, but he has not informed me what the problem is. Your Excellency, I want you to know because you are the one who sent us there.” This went on and on. He would not stay for long in the country. The adversities you saw after he became Speaker are similar to the ones that happened when he was still Deputy Speaker. 

All I can say is that I think he was struggling, but he was also trying to fulfil his obligation - in the constituency, to the party and also to this House. We want to thank him for the work he did because we did a lot of work together. 

Honourable members, one of the things that I would want us to do for him – You have been told that he moved the private Member’s Bill for the Copyright and Neighbouring Rights Act as far back as 2006. On very many occasions, I tried to call the Minister for Justice to ensure that this thing was implemented. The musicians and artists are complaining. 

I would like to appeal to Her Excellency the Vice-President; Rt Hon. Nabbanja, the Prime Minister; the Attorney-General; and the Minister of Justice that in honour of Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, let us ensure that this law is implemented because he wanted it. (Applause) 

Honourable members, you may not know – Maybe now, many Members bring Private Members’ Bills, but in the other parliaments, we had one, two or three in five years. Therefore, I would like us to honour him by ensuring that we do something that he was committed to. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to give notice that I will not be able to be in Kololo. I will not be able to attend the other ceremonies. The Council of Ministers is meeting. They started yesterday, but I delayed my departure because of this. Tomorrow, we are busy with the budget in Arusha and then the recruitment. On Friday, we shall be in Nairobi to attend the ceremony for the Deed of Accession to the Treaty between the East African Community and the Democratic Republic of Congo. 

I would like to say farewell to my friend, my colleague, partner, member of our party, Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. May your soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you. (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker emeritus. Thank you for those kind words. As you heard earlier on, Jacob was educating over 200 students - in primary and secondary school, and at university. A Jacob Oulanyah Education Foundation has been set up. We have got contributions from the following: 

Technology Associates – Shs 10 million towards that foundation to continue educating the children; 

M/s Dott Services – Shs 5 million; 

Ms Faith Mbabazi (Shell) – Shs 2 million;

Uganda Women Parliamentary Association (UWOPA) – Shs 500,000;

M/s ROKO Construction Limited – Shs 10 million. 

In a special way, Hon. Rwamirama, as a friend, gave cows to be slaughtered at the burial place. 

Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah - before I open the debate - had a special friend in Minister Justine Lumumba. Is she around? (Hon. Lumumba rose_) Members, we are giving you only three minutes each. Everybody needs to speak - I am told it is two minutes.   

12.11
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker –(Interruption) 

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence. Of course, some of the colleagues are uncomfortable with my point of procedure, but we are in Parliament, fortunately. 

I wanted to raise this at the beginning of this session because COVID-19 remains. We are extremely congested and some of our colleagues are abandoning masks. 

Madam Speaker, the first five speakers are all ministers of the NRM. I wonder, if you do not use your authority - if the morning session is going to be NRM, we can come back and then allow other Members because of the way we are seated - 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, I am going to open the debate and you will all have time to debate. One of the reasons as to why I have called up the special friend of the late Jacob Oulanyah is that he really wanted to be a Speaker and it was this lady who pushed and made sure that Jacob achieved his dream. That is why I call her his special friend. I am giving her space to speak because she helped Jacob achieve what he wanted and I will open debate after that. Members, we shall use two minutes. 

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I convey condolences to H.E. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the Vice-President, the Speaker, the Chief Justice, the family and colleagues. 

We have lost a person in the name of Jacob Oulanyah, in whom we had a Speaker and a gallant son of Uganda. We are celebrating a life lived with flavour, purpose, clarity and humility. 

This country and Parliament have lost a critical thinker. We have some people in life who think after talking, but the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah would think before talking. He was a strategic political actor who realised that since Ugandans loved the NRM more, he joined the NRM so that he would get a platform to serve the country to achieve his aspirations. 

Therefore, I want to take this opportunity to thank the NRM party for welcoming the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah and giving him a platform to serve, and most importantly, to achieve his heart’s desires. 

He was a legislator of great admiration. He was the Speaker, whose style and service the country will miss. Whenever he was seated in the Chair presiding, he would give no space for anyone to cause litigation. 

He was a man of many practices, who demarcated boundaries between his private life, family life, his work as a professional lawyer and as the Speaker. In terms of leisure, he was so attached to the different groups in this country. 

Allow me, in a special way, to inform you that the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah respected the female creature. One time, we were in a hot political meeting. In that discussion, he said, and I want to quote him, “Had you been male, we would have sorted out this issue. It wouldn’t have come to this table. But because you are female, I cannot do what I would have done to a fellow man”. That humbled me. I saw a person who had respect for females. Therefore, I want to take this opportunity to pass a message to the males that as we advocate for an end to domestic violence, let us emulate the example of the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah; and I even cried and broke down. That means he was at pains. 

I want to thank Members for having accorded him the opportunity. In a special way, I want to thank the NRM party, especially the Members of the Central Executive Committee (CEC), under the leadership of His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. In 2016, when CEC met to get a flagbearer for the position of the Speaker, they promised the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah that he would be accorded a chance after five years. Madam Speaker, when the five years elapsed and he showed interest, the same CEC made him flagbearer of the NRM party unopposed and when he came, you supported him. Thank you for helping him to achieve that. 

Madam Speaker, I want to talk about the private life of the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. He had a very beautiful and hardworking wife called Dorothy Nangwale Oulanyah. Dorothy contributed to the development of the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. I want to emphasise one thing: whenever the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah had to address the public, he would rehearse his speech in front of Dorothy and she would tell him, “Please include this, leave out this” and even advise on the gestures. Therefore, I want to take this opportunity to ask spouses to Members of Parliament to add value to their spouses so that it is an issue of the family. You succeed as a family. 

Even in his poor health, the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah remained strong-willed, with resoluteness and with Jesus Christ at the centre of his life. Honourable members, we may have big offices and responsibilities, but we should remember that we have a creator. 

To the people of Omoro, I want to thank you for giving us a son who came and served us. As the NRM party and Parliament, we also gave him the opportunity to serve this country, to be known beyond the boundaries of Omoro and beyond this country, while carrying the flag of Uganda so high with a lot of dignity. I want to thank him and I thank his Creator. 

As the Vice-Chairperson of the NRM party in Northern Uganda, he mobilised the people. He was one vice-chairperson of the region that really mobilised beyond his constituency and subregion. He mobilised West Nile, Acholi, Lango and for the first time since NRM came to power, NRM was able to win in these subregions because of his leadership. (Applause) 

Once again, I want to take this opportunity to convey my condolences to the family and to thank the family for supporting the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. In a special way, I want to also thank those who have been supportive to the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah since he lost his wife, Dorothy. Fare thee well, Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. May your soul rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. In the public gallery, we have Dr Bitekyerezo, the former MP of Mbarara Municipality and Dr Deogratius Kiyingi, the former MP of Bukomansimbi. You are most welcome. Honourable members, the debate is open. 

12.19
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I believe the 11th Parliament knows that I was always referred to as the Rt Hon. Oulanyah’s mother. Therefore, when I stand at this moment, I expect the Rt Hon. Speaker to understand.

I want to convey condolences to His Excellency the President and to you, Madam Speaker, who was not given time to celebrate the change of leadership because of this situation. I want to also extend my condolences to your deputy, the Chief Justice, the Prime Minister and the team, as well as the Vice-President. Thank you very much for moving the motion. 

Madam Speaker, after the Minister of Health gave us details of what caused the death of our fallen Speaker, I wanted to move a motion, with the support of the majority of the House. I think before I move, all the Members of Parliament will understand why. 

Madam Speaker, you are already aware of that motion. If you give me permission, I can move the motion at this moment so that it becomes part of the motion. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, are you amending the motion or moving another motion?

MS OGWAL: I am amending the motion. 

THE SPEAKER: Go ahead and amend the motion.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I rise under rule 59(1)(k) and rule 61 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament to move an amendment to the motion moved by Her Excellency the Vice-President and seconded by the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business. 

We have heard the cause of death of our leader, the fallen Speaker, Jacob Oulanyah. It is in this regard that I move to urge the Government of the Republic of Uganda to urgently acquire Positron Emission Tomography (PET) to facilitate the Uganda Cancer Institute in early detection and early management and diagnosis of cancer. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Is that motion seconded? Hon. Ssemujju –

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, normally – and I would like to seek your indulgence – amendments are brought at the end. We now have a motion to pay tribute. To introduce an amendment before we have fairly discussed the motion to pay tribute – I support the amendment, but it will be a diversion because we will now go on to discuss the amendment before we discuss the motion. 

In the past, Madam Speaker – I know you have been here – Amendments, ordinarily, would be coming at the time when we are adopting the motion. However, to start with both – I am sorry. Maybe, my colleagues have a lot of capacity, but I know my capacity and I will have problems discussing two motions at the same time.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is not an additional motion. What we can do with hon. Cecilia Ogwal’s amendment is to bring it at the end when we are passing the motion. You can bring your amendment as one of the prayers. 

I hear Hon. Okot-Ogong saying that it has an effect on Article 93; we are “urging” Government and not “directing”. You have been in this Parliament for long.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I wanted it to be added as a prayer so that when we debate, we are mindful of it. 

THE SPEAKER: We will add it as a prayer when we are passing the motion. 

12.26
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Madam Speaker, I stand here to second the motion moved by Her Excellency the Vice-President and seconded by the whole House. 

I join the rest of the world to, sadly, mourn the passing of our own, the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. I send deepest heartfelt condolences to the people of Uganda, His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, the legislative arm of Government, the NRM party, the people of Acholi, his church of affiliation, the people of Omoro, the family, relatives, friends and the children he has been supporting. 

I had known the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah for over 20 years. When we joined Parliament here, we came in at the same time. The nationalistic and patriotic character of the late was not a subject for debate. His commitment to peace-making was not a subject for debate. His knowledge of the law that was cardinal to the legislative function of Parliament was also not a subject for debate. 

As a country, like the rest of the UN member countries, we are pursuing an agenda of leaving no one behind. The late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was among those legislators that had a clear understanding and was advocating for equal opportunities - giving a chance to those with less. No wonder, he was sponsoring many children, to give them a chance in life. We pray that those children may be helped by other people or we, who have stayed, to see that they continue receiving that support. 

The late was an honest person who would call a spade a spade. He was a joyful person, and I am certain he utilised his time well. He was a timekeeper; when he said nine o’clock it meant nine o’clock. 

The late was a role model to all generations - the young and the old. The death of Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah is a big blow to all of us. We dedicate, in prayer, our country as we go through this trying time of mourning the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. 

The late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was a dedicated Christian and we believe that he died in the Lord, and his death will be swallowed up in the resurrection victory, like it is written in Corinthians 15:20-27. May his soul rest in perpetual serenity. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Shadow Attorney-General - Honourable members, because of the congestion, when you finish speaking, if you feel you can go and sit in the lobby, please go. (Applause)

12.30
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join the rest of the Members in supporting the motion to pay tribute to our deceased former Speaker.

I got to know the late Jacob Oulanyah when we joined Makerere University Law School together in 1991. Since that time, we worked closely together and I think I am among the few Members here who knew him better. 

When we were at the law school, whenever we would be free, he would bring to our attention the plight of Northern Uganda, which was then ravaged by war. When we concluded and completed the university degree and went to the Law Development Centre, still together, our class was made up of few students - we were less than 50. When we completed LDC, he opened up a law firm as I did, but we would occasionally handle matters either together or on opposite sides. 

When he joined Parliament in 2001, I was not surprised that he was one of the influential Members in passing the Amnesty Act, because he had Northern Uganda and the people of Northern Uganda at heart. We again met in 2011 in this Parliament and I remember offering myself against him for the position of Deputy Speaker, when I was still that side; before I was expelled. (Laughter) 

The late Jacob Oulanyah had many attributes, but one of them was that he appreciated the law. I encourage you, Madam Speaker and your deputy - as Speakers, you must read beyond what the Members have read, because this House legislates on all matters of life. So, you must know economics, law, medicine, engineering and all others. The good thing is that you both studied law, but I will encourage you to read hard before you come to preside over the session. 

We occasionally get Bills that are drafted in a manner that is wanting and a lot of surgery to such Bills is made here. As a Speaker, you must be well versed with whatever Bill is before you to ensure the surgery is properly done. 

The late Jacob Oulanyah knew the Rules of Procedure so well that he did ensure that you were relevant whenever you stood up to speak. That rule on relevance helps in ensuring that matters of this House are handled in an expeditious manner to achieve the best. 

Before he passed on, he had an altercation with a few Members and me. It related to rule 235. He actually made a very powerful ruling in respect of that rule and I will invite you, Madam Speaker and your deputy, to look at that ruling and invite the rules committee to incorporate that ruling in our Rules of Procedure. This is because it was so fundamental that it touches the business of the House, especially those which might have elapsed. 

Lastly, author Shakespeare said, “Uneasy lies the head that wears a crown”. You, Speakers, based on how I used to interact with him, will get bashed by the President because the ministers will be reporting you to him, when they have themselves failed to deliver here in the House. They would want you to be their defender and everything. So, take heart and stand your ground. 

He told me that occasionally, they would accuse him before the President, saying that he would favour me for being his classmate. When ministers start reporting you, know you are doing your job. Stand your ground. Be the protectors of the House. Let us have his mission and vision achieved under your guidance. May the soul of my classmate rest in eternal peace. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. We promise to have a people-centred Parliament not minister-centred Parliament. We will be firm and we will do what is correct for the good of this country. 
Can I have the nominator?

12.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me the opportunity to pay tribute to my friend, a nationalist, a man of influence and a celebrated Speaker of this august House.

I met the late Dr Jacob Oulanyah in the Seventh Parliament in 2001. We were the last to be sworn-in because both our names start with letters “O” and “R.” He knew me. I did not know him. He came and greeted me in Runyankore, “osiibire gye?” I realised that that was a very forceful statement. I tried to speak Runyankore. He got lost and he only said, “nimarungi”. 

He was in the company of a very decently dressed lady whom I later learnt was his wife. We were both elected to the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA) branch of Uganda. He was our treasurer. That team had Hon. Dombo, Hon. Alaso, and the Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga as our leader. 

We had been elected to Parliament under the Movement system, but Rt Hon. Oulanyah was for the multi-party system, and to be specific, he was for UPC. However, as we went on, I realised that Rt Hon. Oulanyah was a very objective person; we got along well since that time.

Rt Hon. Oulanyah was the Chairman of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee. During that time, there was a controversial constitutional amendment. A majority of the committee were for the amendment, and although he did not agree with the amendment, he supported and brought the report of the majority. This distinguished him as a person who was really dependable. 

The late Rt Hon. Oulanyah was a dependable personality. He knew the law and he knew when to apply it. When he sat in the chair, you would feel that the Chairman is sitting in the chair. He was fair and very rational. That is why he pulled all of us to his side. 

He was a nationalist. It should also be known that he demonstrated it by actually marrying from another region. When you think about it, you will realise that most of his friends here in this House, and those who are outside, including the Clerk to Parliament who is presiding at Table, were non-Acholi. 

He was God-fearing. He always insisted on prayers before you did anything. I am quite sure that Rt Hon. Oulanyah is with the Lord. I know for sure before he left, he committed his life to Jesus Christ. (Applause) 

He was a man of influence and his influence was wide, but he knew the width of this influence that he dealt with every group of people and in depth. It is this depth that has united all of us even after his death. When we were coming from Entebbe, we saw many young men and children lining up to see and take pictures of the body of our Speaker returning home. 

We should really learn something from the life of the late Jacob Oulanyah. The legacy he has left should be emulated. He has left a very big legacy, and those of you who have stepped in his shoes, should emulate him. I know you are very hurt. 

We want to take this opportunity to thank those who helped Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah during the time of his ailment, especially the President, who did all he could to save his life. I thank you, Madam Speaker, and those who tried to see and support him - the Chief Justice, my brother Norbert Mao, and all friends who gave him support in one way or the other.

As Members of Parliament, we have one responsibility as we send off our colleague. When we mourn our relatives, we become very emotional, but forget the family. The Rt Hon. Oulanyah has left children, who do not have a mother. I would like to thank the Chief Justice and the Speaker for the fund, and I encourage my colleagues to contribute to this fund to support the family so that they do not miss out on education and are not disorganised. 

Thank you for your attention, and I want to make a correction; the 10 cows are part of Government’s efforts because of the demand for animal protein and the overwhelming numbers in Omoro. We were also approached by your office because of quarantine restrictions in the neighbourhood. We have a ranch in Achwa and the board had a special sitting and offered 10 cows, which I communicated to the organising committee and your office. 

May the soul of my friend and brother, the Rt Hon. Oulanyah, rest in perfect peace. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much. In the VIP gallery, we have Hon. David Migereko, former minister; former MPs, Hon. Nakawunde Sarah, Hon. Okello Anthony, Hon. Jacqueline Amongin, Hon. Semugaba Samuel and Hon. Dominica Abu, former Member of the National Resistance Council (NRC). You are most welcome.

We also have Dr Diana Atwine, the Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Health and Hon. Amoru Paul, former Member of Parliament and now Uganda’s Ambassador-designate to South Africa.

We have Hon. Alice Alaso Asianut, the Secretary-General of the Alliance for National Transformation and Hon. Kaluya Andrew, former Member of Parliament. 

All have come to witness and follow the proceedings as we pay tribute to our fallen colleague.

12.44
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Usually at death, people give flowery speeches including those who have made your life very difficult. There are lessons that I have picked since Rt Hon. Oulanyah died, and I intend to draw a list of those who will come near my body and those who will speak when I die.

Hon. Oulanyah was shot at when he was a student guild speaker in Makerere University in 1991, by this Government. The Minister of Health said that this was the origin of his problems. 

There are things that have annoyed me that I want to say before I say something about Hon. Oulanyah. First, the mishandling of his death. Of course, I cannot accuse this Government of competence. You needed to explain to the public what it means to accord someone a state funeral. A state funeral is extremely expensive, but every day, you were pleading, “This is not the budget; now, this is the budget.”

For example, Friday will be a public holiday and if you look at the money that is collected by Uganda Revenue Authority (URA), it means we will lose more than Shs 60 billion on Friday. But because of the incompetence, you have focused the whole country on discussing Shs 1.8 billion, scandalising Hon. Oulanyah. 

I would also like to caution, especially colleagues on this side; there are benefits to joining NRM. You can become a Speaker or a Prime Minister, but you must be ready to be judged by the crimes you have not committed.

People who were demonstrating about the breakdown of health infrastructure in Uganda were not demonstrating against Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. I do not know why the President chose to keep silent this time because one of the monumental stories, when I was a journalist at Daily Monitor - the very first person to be flown for treatment in Germany was the President’s daughter, Natasha. The Presidential jet eventually became an air ambulance taking Hon. Noble Mayombo and the former Speaker. However, when they were harassing a dead Hon. Oulanyah, the President kept quiet and I do not know why; but when we wrote about the daughter, the following day he was in all the papers explaining why it is important to fly people out. This Government, you need to learn.

One of the philosophers said - forgive me if you get annoyed by what he said; I am only reminding you. He was against bringing extremely very ordinary people into high positions because they would be overwhelmed by power. There are people who are overwhelmed by simple things. The budget of this Parliament is about Shs 600 billion, which means every day we sit is about one billion shillings. We have not sat for three weeks; do you want to blame Hon. Oulanyah for that expense? But they all kept quiet; they were fidgeting. 

Let me speak about Hon. Oulanyah, having made those two points. The first time I met Hon. Oulanyah -

THE SPEAKER: As you speak about Hon. Oulanyah, for the next speakers, when you stand up, speak what you think Hon. Oulanyah would like to hear. He was a very peaceful man; let us put politics aside for now and talk about our leader who is lying here.

MR SSEMUJJU: I thought that he would be happy when people are explaining the things that happened since his death, like people demonstrating -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, one thing you should know is that you have a very able Parliament and we are handling everything. We do not have any emergency; everything is moving according to the programme.

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. If it was not for the intervention of this Parliament and yourself - it is very painful, the things that have happened since the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah died. He was the first person that attracted a statutory revision of the budget. How can you bring it here and refuse the public to discuss how you are handling his funeral?

Finally, I first interacted with the Hon. Jacob Oulanyah as a lawyer and then as a Speaker of Parliament. I will say one point and sit. We were handling the Public Order Management Act and we disagreed with this Parliament. Later on, I was one of those that he ordered to be evicted. However, he was not a vindictive man. After all those problems, he reached out and actually, I learned later that it was his style of work. 

Hon. Niwagaba spoke about the Bills left by the last Parliament –(Member timed out.)

12.51
DR BAYIGGA LULUME (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here not only to celebrate the life of the late Jacob Oulanyah, but also to mourn him. I am mourning him because at his prime, he has departed. A man who has worked tirelessly throughout his youthful time, building the nation, serving his country; and when the world and the country is looking at him to offer leadership not only for Parliament, but also the country, that is when the Lord has decided to call him. It is so sad. 

However, I celebrate his life because in 1991, when I joined university, these young men had made history at Makerere University. His cohort included hon. Nobert Mao and hon. Reagan Okumu. These were the young men of the time from Northern Uganda who inspired us. It was at that time when my cohort had organised a youthful group called the Uganda Young Democrats. We looked up to some experienced young politicians who would inspire us. He was one of the people that we looked up to, to copy from - people who could inspire us to acquire different points of view on how Uganda should be managed and the Uganda we needed. That is why I celebrate a person of his calibre. 

Other members of the cohort who used to inspire us, who we used to call to inspire young people at Makerere University, included the late Prof. Akiiki Mujaju, Adonia Tiberondwa, Kagenda Atwooki, Kajabagu Karusoke of the NRM and Chapaa Karuhanga. Those are the people who nourished the crop of leaders who came from the Ugandan democracy. In that way, I want to celebrate his life –(Member timed out.)

12.55
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity to pay tribute to my friend, brother and leader. Condolences to you, Rt Hon. Speaker, the President and the family. 

We gather here with heavy hearts, feeling pain and sadness upon losing our brother. We can only speak for what we feel about him. The late Jacob Oulanyah was an all-round human being. He exhibited and exuded the ubuntu spirit. He was a true human being. He taught all of us to be patient, even when we are provoked. As a leader, provocation is inevitable, but he taught us how to manage it.

Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was a very brilliant person. His intellectual depth was phenomenal. That is why we elected him. He was not elected for affirmative action. He was not elected to represent this. He was elected because of his abilities. It does not matter which political party you are, if you are brilliant, you are. If you are a mediocre, you will be one irrespective of which political party you belong to. 

Jacob was never a populist. That is why we should take note of his counsel, as instructive as it was. He always advised us to sharpen our arguments and not our voices. That was Jacob. Honourable colleagues, it is my appeal that as we celebrate his life, let us tolerate one another. 

The principle of “the dead are not dead” is true of our brother. Spiritually, he prepared his journey to heaven. Traditionally, I see Oulanyah in the gift of his children. Last night, Andrew Oulanyah comforted us. I saw a leader. I heard his voice. He speaks like him. It is my prayer, without being controversial, that the people of Omoro see the leadership in Andrew. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I want to recognise the bikers where the late hon. Jacob Oulanyah was a member. They have been there for us since the body arrived in Uganda. They are seated out there, but one of them is inside here. President for bikers, can you stand up - He is one of the bikers. I want to thank you very much for escorting your brother.

12.58
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I come to mourn a brother; a brother who had dreams and hope for this country; a powerful force who understood that he could not stand alone; that he needed not only the people of Northern Uganda, but the people of Uganda and the people of the world for him to flourish. That is the brother we are honouring today. 

I was with him in Juba during the peace process. I was the chairperson of the observer team of the people of Northern Uganda and I worked with him. For the Rt Hon. Oulanyah, his principle - even when he was at the peace talks, he indicated that we needed to engage. Kony had given us a condition that unless the International Criminal Court (ICC) removed the arrest warrant, he would not sign up for the peace talks. 

Oulanyah came to me and said, “My sister, we must do everything to shame Joseph Kony so that if he does not sign, they do not say that people of Northern Uganda did not work. Let us go to The Hague, talk to the chief prosecutor. Let us go to UN Security Council. Let us go everywhere.” 

Indeed, we moved everywhere. We went to The Hague and to the UN Security Council, New York. We did everything. By the time no excuse would be given by Joseph Kony, that is when Joseph Kony refused to sign. However, the most important thing for us, the people of Northern Uganda, was that we signed the cessation of hostilities agreement, which was the first agenda item he drafted. With that agenda, the soldiers and all the rebel groups were moved from Northern Uganda to Owiny-Kibul in South Sudan. That was the beginning of peace in Northern Uganda. 

My brother, Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, I want to say, history will reward your accomplishments and what you have done. Generations to come will read about the contribution and accomplishments that you made for this country. Rest in peace.

THE SPEAKER: Members, you are all going to speak. The whole day is dedicated to Jacob.

1.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to extend my condolences to the people of Uganda, to you, Madam Speaker, the Chief Justice, Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker, and colleagues upon the death of our dear brother, friend and Speaker. 

Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was an effective and courageous Deputy Speaker and a Speaker who instilled in us the discipline of time management, the virtues of patience, respect and mentored many to become better legislators. 

Colleagues, he never wanted this House to be consumed by pettiness, but by engaging in debates on service delivery and the destiny of our country. He wanted productive debate and he insisted on evidence, as a guide to quality debate - a legacy I am glad to mention that the two Speakers are following and carrying on. 

Colleagues, one of the greatest tragedies in life is to watch the demise of an unexhausted potential. What a tragedy that death has cut short the potential of our dear brother Jacob! Jacob had immense potential to transform this Parliament into a centre of service delivery and strengthen this institution into a source of justice and just law. 

Dr Myles Munroe, whom we invited in 2012, to speak to us at the National Prayer Breakfast said, “The wealthiest spot on this planet is not the oil fields of Kuwait or the gold and diamonds of Africa, but it lies in our graveyard - the dreams that never came to pass and the purposes that were never fulfilled.” 

Rt Hon. Jacob had the potential of bringing parties in this House together in defence of our democracy. He believed that nothing should divide us because the people had a common history and destiny. You remember when he won the speakership in May 2021, he said ribe aye teko (we are stronger together). This is the potential we will bury on Friday in Omoro. 

Colleagues, it is painful to go through this experience. It teaches us, in the words of the Psalmist, to number our days so that we may gain the wisdom to know that on this earth, all is vanity. As the scripture tells us in Proverbs 20:30, it compels us to learn how to change our ways. 

Finally, friends, can we use this experience to once again ask ourselves who we are, our purpose and potential. May we endeavour each day of our time here on earth to use the potential in us to fulfil the purpose of working for the good of mankind and transformation of our country. May the soul of our brother, Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, rest in eternal peace.

1.04
THE MINISTER FOR SECURITY (Maj. Gen (Rtd) Jim Muhwezi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable Members of Parliament, I convey condolences from the people of Rujumbura, Rukungiri and my family to His Excellency the President, to you, Rt Hon. Speaker, his Lordship the Chief Justice, and to the people of Uganda. 

I would like, wholeheartedly, to add my voice in paying tribute to a gentle giant who made an immense contribution to this Parliament and this country at large. What pains me most about Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah is talking about him when he is lying here dead. I wish we had said what we are saying about him when he was still alive and he got to know what we thought about him. 

Today, we pay well deserved tribute to an outstanding debater whose oratory skills and eloquence graced this august House for so many years. His talent was so unique that one would wonder how God could bless a single person with all those attributes of being quick-witted, smart, - both physically and intellectually - combined with an exceptional sense of humour. 

Lying before us today is a gentleman who was capable of lighting up a dull and boring event with stupendous humour, and could get everyone cracking their ribs thereafter. Yet even with this sense of humour, he was able to maintain a very high level of seriousness and relevance to the matter at hand. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to mention and applaud the national character that the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah demonstrated. I speak for everyone in this august House when I say the late made friends across the entire political spectrum. This is no mean feat, given our sometimes very sharp political differences.
 
When Rt Hon. Oulanyah was campaigning to be the Chairman of the NRM for Northern Uganda - a campaign that was majorly conducted virtually - he made it a point to record the message in a language that could be understood in all the four regions of Uganda. 

Finally, I would like to salute the late Rt Hon. Oulanyah as a highly talented and knowledgeable lawyer. This Parliament is guided, among others, by the Constitution, Rules of Procedure, and the Administration of Parliament Act. Oulanyah’s grasp of all these laws was unmatched. His career tells it all in a nutshell - from being a Guild Speaker to Member of Parliament, chairperson of the highly demanding Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, Deputy Speaker and finally Speaker. Only God knows how much more contribution he could have made to this great nation if he had stayed a little longer. However, God decided that he had made his contribution. I now pray that we carry forward the mantle of leadership and emulate all the things the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah held in high regard. 

Madam Speaker, I condole with the family, the people of Omoro and the entire nation. May God rest him in eternal peace. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us have Hon. Nambooze, Hon. Akello Lucy and Hon. Katuntu. Honourable members, all of you are going to speak. 

1.09
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (NUP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Mukono Municipality, I wish to extend our condolences to the family. 

Madam Speaker, it is a very difficult moment when an old man has to bury his son. I am extending these condolences to the father of our fallen Speaker, the children and all those people related to him, including the people of Omoro, whom he represented in this House. We had an opportunity to work under him for over 10 years. 

Madam Speaker, colleagues have said what they have said and I want to agree with them. However, as I support this motion, I want to recall that a few years ago, Uganda thought about stopping what those people in foreign countries call “medical tourism”. A company came here, we guaranteed it and the agreement was that within two years, we would have a hospital here in Uganda, and that from then onwards, we would stop taking our own or even ourselves for treatment abroad. However, the last I heard about Lubowa was that they even chased away a committee of this House that had gone to assess the level of implementation of the hospital project. 

Madam Speaker, I, therefore, pray that this matter be brought back to this House so that, at least, even when we have to lose our own or even die, let us die near our friends and relatives. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, a case does not die. If the minister stood here and said that the Rt Hon. Speaker Oulanyah was nursing trauma and marks of torture from an attack by his own security people in the country -  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nambooze, there was no issue of torture. It was a strike at the university. Do not put words in the minister’s statement. There was nothing regarding torture.

MS NAMBOOZE: I am guided, Madam Speaker, but I was suggesting that it is high time that an inquest is set up so that this country can, once and for all, deal with the issue of the poison scare in this country. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I am also glad that Hon. Betty Nambooze is one of those beneficiaries, who has ever been taken out by Parliament for treatment. (Applause) The point she is raising about Lubowa Hospital is very important. That hospital must be worked on.

1.14
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. On behalf of the people of Amuru District, the Parliamentary Catholic Chaplaincy and on my own behalf, allow me to pay my tribute to a brother and friend. 

Madam Speaker, I got to know the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah when I was a student in Makerere. He had come to officiate at the handover ceremony of the Acholi Makerere Students’ Association. I was impressed and inspired by how he spoke. Today, I am in the august House, thanks to him. Thank you, my brother. 

Jacob was a man who loved his family. I remember there was a time I went to his office and he said, “My sister, you are going to wait because I have to take a cake to my daughter in school.” He left all of us there and ran to take a cake for the daughter. I am assuming this daughter was Atim. That is how much he loved his family. He was a pro-life man. May he continue to fight for the children even when he is in heaven! 

Another thing is that he stood for the common person. I remember how he stood strongly about the issue of the Nodding Syndrome. Madam Speaker, as we pay tribute to the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, the Nodding Syndrome centre in Omoro has gone to dust. May we resurrect this centre and make it work if we are to really remember the good work of the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, and for the sake of the thousands of children suffering from the Nodding Syndrome in northern Uganda. They are suffering and dying every day. This was something he was very passionate about. As Parliament, we need to set aside money for these children so that they also live like human beings. Rest in peace, my brother.

1.17
MR ABDU KATUNTU (Independent, Bugweri County, Bugweri): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to eulogise a brother and friend I had known for 34 years.

I do not know how many people in these Chambers had known the late Jacob Oulanyah for as long as I had. They are not many. On that account, Madam Speaker, I request that you give me an extra two minutes to tell you what I know about Jacob Oulanyah.

In 1988, I was in second year at university and I met two men, and one was very tiny and short. Later, I came to know that that very tiny and short man was from Namilyango and he had been a head prefect. Another one, tallish with a jacket, I later came to learn was Jacob Oulanyah. 

At that time, Uganda People’s Congress officials were recruiting us, students, to participate in student politics. That is how Jacob and I were recruited into student politics and we were all members of the Uganda People’s Congress. We were recruited by Prof. Kagenda Atwooki, the late Akiiki Mujaju, the late Patrick Mwondha and Hon. Ben Wacha. Later on, we met Hon. Okello-Okello and Hon. Abednego Ongom, and of course, Yona Kanyomozi.  

They took us to Uganda House to meet the boss then - who was a very patronising woman, and she has remained patronising up to today; she is seated just right behind me - Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, who was the Assistant Secretary-General of UPC. 

We indulged in student politics; we became members of the Guild Representative Council (GRC) – the students’ parliament. The late Jacob competed for speakership – like I had competed and lost to a certain Ngabo - and he beat somebody who is looking at me now. (Laughter) For the late Jacob Oulanyah’s second election at university, he beat somebody I am looking at now, who is now our Clerk to Parliament and former Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs, the Hon. Adolf Mwesige.  

Let me tell you one thing. The other short man I was talking about - if you met him and Jacob at that time, you would dismiss them. Until they opened their mouths, you would not know these guys were intelligent and good orators. Let me tell you one thing about Jacob - that short gentleman and him. I am not going to mention that short gentleman’s name because –(Interjections)– He is called Mao, if you insist.

Madam Speaker, Nobert Mao was then a Member of the Democratic Party, which he has maintained up to now, rising to being the president of the party. Jacob Oulanyah was a member of Uganda People’s Congress like me. He eventually became a member of the NRM, but you would not separate them. That was Jacob. Political persuasion did not, in any way, affect their personal relationship. 

I then asked myself, what is this that divides us to the extent of quarrelling and fighting? I think that is the biggest lesson we have to learn from Oulanyah. When I left UPC and I went some other place, I actually left him there. (Laughter) Anyhow, I have since left that place and I am in self-isolation. (Laughter) From that time, we have been together. 

The late Jacob Oulanyah left Uganda People’s Congress and joined the National Resistance Movement, rising up to being a Vice-Chairman of the party. Jacob was a very courageous person. He was intelligent and magnanimous. Honourable colleagues, do you remember the day he was elected as Speaker? Do you remember that speech? You see, if you win, you reach out to the vanquished and that is what he did. There are very few winners who apologise to the people they have beaten; Oulanyah did. That is the gentleman lying in that casket. What more would you need of a leader? 

We joined this Parliament on the same day in June 2001. When I look around, there are not many of us still around. Hon. Okupa, hon. Mafabi, hon. Amos, hon. Byanyima you are our senior and he even took a sabbatical –(Interjections)- hon. Hanifa Kawooya, just know we are the only ones. (Laughter) I can tell you for all these years from 2001, we have worked closely with Jacob.

Whether you annoyed Jacob today, tomorrow, he would call you to the office and you sort matters out and that is where it would end. (Applause). Not that we did not quarrel, honourable colleagues; we used to have big quarrels with the late Jacob. One time, we quarrelled about how the UPC Government fell. While I was accusing some people, he was accusing others and we clashed. We took about three or four days without talking. Eventually, we met and went to his office. Let me tell you, hon. Oulanyah was a man you could rely on. Jacob, I can spend the whole day talking about you, but anyway you are gone. 

Madam Speaker, what lesson do we get for those of us who lived with Jacob? One, be courageous and you can rise. Jacob rose from nothing in the NRM, from a recruit to a vice-chairman. What more would you need? That was Jacob. 

He was very brilliant and courageous, but even then, Jacob had a sense of humility. When you interacted with him, you would not tell that this was the big man. Yes, he was a little bit pompous, especially with his bowtie, looked very smart, and he was smart both figuratively and physically. 

Jacob did not despise anybody. Even when you hurt him, he would find a way of injecting humour into it and say, “let us engage.” That is what leaders should be.

Madam Speaker, we are going to bury one of the best leaders this country will ever have. It was an honour for me to know you, Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. May your soul rest in peace. Until we meet again. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Katuntu. 

1.26
MS LAURA KANUSHU (NRM, PWD Representative, National): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the 6.5 million persons with disabilities in this country, I would like to convey our condolences to especially the family of the fallen Speaker of Parliament. 

I am going to say one thing: for the few months that I had known the Rt Hon. Speaker, I realised he was a reflection of Proverbs 11, which says, pride comes before a fall, but the humble are full of wisdom. That is my only explanation of who the late Jacob was. 

I cannot forget when I walked into his office and he got off his chair, pulled a chair for me and we talked. When I was going out, he carried my bag and walked me to the door. I have never seen such a humble man. I want to appeal to us, as leaders, if you are at the level of Jacob Oulanyah, would you still be humble?

When you are in a public office – and what is killing our public offices is pride. When people get one escort, they do not look at other people like human beings. When people assume public offices, they cannot even say, “hello” to the people they are seated next to. Leaders of this country, if we can be humble, God will give us the wisdom that Jacob had, but if we do not, we shall fall and shame will be on us. You people in public offices, those offices are temporary. You will not stay in those offices for the rest of your lives. Be humble and accept people the way they come - the rich, the poor and those who are dressed in rugs when they come to those public offices, put your pride aside because God has given you that office for a period of time. Rest in peace, Jacob. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

1.29
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga North County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am sorry, I am allergic to masks. I have not been putting on masks. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Byanyima, can you put on a mask?

MR BYANYIMA: I am allergic to it. I am sorry about it. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. 

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to join my colleagues to mourn the Ugandan I met in 2001, but found him a good steward. A man whose culture of timekeeping had no boundaries; a man who believed that you should not say “she” or “he” or “they”, but “we”, Ugandans. He taught us that we should behave like Americans. An attack on one American is an attack on all of them. We, as Ugandans, do not have that. We are here on political lines. 

The late Oulanyah was special. He was one person who treated everybody equally and I would want all of us to treat other people the way we want to be treated. At the end of the day, every dog has its day. Some people have had it because of not being fair to others.

What can we do for him? It is to emulate him. To do what he used to want. For example, Oulanyah came up in 2001 when we had induction, which we have not been able to have – I appeal to you, if you want to remember Oulanyah, let us have an induction so we –(Interruption)– We are lucky that we still have good Ugandans; Hon. Ben Wacha, Hon. Mao, Winnie Byanyima, Okello Okello, and many others. These people can take us through the etiquette and decorum of Parliament. 

I appeal to you, Members, that this gentleman is not the usual Ugandan. Some of you trail on simple, trivial things, but he had bigger things. He said, “quality of debate”. You will not get good quality of debate unless you have been inducted. 

There are some senior people – people believe that we are all equal; we are not. There are people that are better in some areas. This is something he taught me. He told me, “Byanyima, never come from one sessional committee to another. Remain in one and be a specialist. Do not jump from one to another because there is life after Parliament. After being in the committee on agriculture, you will be an expert after Parliament even if you do not have qualifications.” But people jump from one committee to another one. 

He was on two committees; the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, and the Committee on Rules and Privileges. And he excelled. 

I, therefore, appeal to you, Madam Speaker, to spare some time and money; let these Members who are very willing to learn be taken through an induction and we become one. Unity of this Parliament should be something that we should pay him. May his soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Nathan. Remember, as I said at the beginning, as Parliament of Uganda, we had to forego a number of programmes in the name of trying to save the life of our leader. On that note, we are going to have orientation in two weeks’ time, now that we have fought the fight, which we lost.

1.33
MS CATHERINE MAVENJINA (NRM, Older Persons Representative, Northern): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to eulogise our great son; our great leader, who is lying before us. 

I got to know the late Hon. Jacob Oulanyah in 1991, not in the university as others have already said, but I was invited by my sister to come and cook on their graduation party. My sister is the mother of Frank Othembi, who is a Director at the Law Development Centre.

In 1991, the four of them graduated together, that is, the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, Frank Nigel Othembi, Frank Olok Asebasi, and Hon. Norbert Mao. I was elected to be the chief cook while my sister accompanied them to Makerere. I did my best. I cooked very nicely. After graduation, they all came to Bukoto and we enjoyed the celebration together with them. 

In the Sixth Parliament, that is 1996, when I joined the Parliament of Uganda, the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah and his late wife Dorothy, used to attend the same fellowship with me at Fairway Hotel. Gen. Elly Tumwine was a member of that fellowship, Mama Grace Kirya was a member of the fellowship, and Hon. Tim Lwanga and Paul Kyamate, to mention, but a few. We used to pray together and that is how I got to know the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. 

The Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, as our Vice-Chairperson for the NRM in Northern Uganda, did a lot of work. He mobilised tirelessly for the NRM and for all of us. That is how, in Northern Uganda, the majority of the Members of Parliament came on the NRM ticket. It was because of the effort of the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. (Applause)

His Excellency the President, for the first time, got very overwhelming support in Northern Uganda because of the tireless effort of the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. When he was meeting with us in Arua for the last leg of the mobilisation, he advised all of us and said, we should not allow the NRM party to slip again because we had gone a very long way. He said, “We, as cadres, must always be available to do the work of the NRM using our own resources, sacrificing our time and effort to enable our party to go ahead.”

He did a lot of work. I want to thank His Excellency the President, and all of you, Madam Speaker –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you

1.38
MS PATIENCE NKUNDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My condolences to His Excellency the President of Uganda, to you, Madam Speaker, and to all Members of this House. I want to thank God and the people of Kanungu who gave me an opportunity to be part of the 11th Parliament where I met Jacob Oulanyah.

I am delighted to have met Jacob Oulanyah. He was such a professional force in this House and in Uganda. I was part of his mobilisation team, which saw him become our Speaker of the 11th Parliament. 

Every time I met the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah in this Parliament building, he would stop and call me and say, “Thank you for being who you are. People underestimate your capacity”. He always encouraged me never to change who I am because I am in this Parliament. He always said, “You are stronger than people think when they look at you.” 

I pray his legacy continues with such an impeccable reputation and I pray that God gives you comfort where you are. You have hiked your best mountain and I pray that you sleep well. My prayers and condolences from the people of Kanungu. Rest well, Jacob Oulanyah.

1.39
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker – (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Members, you are going to speak. Stop complaining

MR NSEREKO: I would like to send my condolences and those of the people of Kampala Central, on the loss of a gallant soldier of this country. 

The Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah has a number of attributes well known to most of us. For those that were in contest with him and also worked with him, we have a lot of stories to tell. 

In 2016, I was involved in a contest for deputy speakership with the late. He was someone worth a contest; you could never hear any single word of negativity or blackmail coming out of him.

Even after his victory, he extended his hand towards me and called me into his office and said, “Mohammed, this is our office because we were all vying for it; whatever you need from me, you will get.”

Whenever he would get trips, he would extend to me invitations and say, “Brother, if you want to go with me, it is available” then it was your discretion. 

The last trip we shared together with the late was in 2020 when we went to Montpellier, France and he was sourcing for cheaper and clean energy, and he had identified a place to put solar panels and generate over 100 megawatts of power for this country.

The Rt Hon. Oulanyah – the late today - will be known as a unifier, a patriotic gentleman, a great sportsman and someone who used to say, “No” and “Yes”. His “No” was “No” and his “Yes” was “Yes”. He used to address me in this House as “our landlord” - and as the landlord, please, remember to accord me an extra second. 

Madam Speaker, as the Rt Hon. Oulanyah departs, we must sympathise with his family – first, the father; no parent would like to look into the grave of his son - then the children.

I would like to applaud you, Madam Speaker, for the path you set; that we should carry on with the responsibility of taking care of the children of the late and the trust fund for education of the children - because that is the best we can reward a gentleman of his character within life and hereafter. May your soul rest in eternal peace. You were such a great man and leader!

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, “landlord”. Members, kindly bear with me; just know that we are balancing the House. Before Hon. Kivumbi speaks, the Rt Hon. Oulanyah is survived by eight children. As Parliament, let us accept within ourselves to take responsibility for those eight children. If you loved the Rt Hon. Oulanyah, those will now become children of the Parliament of Uganda.

1.43
MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI (NUP, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you Madam Speaker. I rise to associate myself -

THE SPEAKER: Members, a kind reminder that the body will spend a night here; kindly join us for the overnight vigil. 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, I join the rest of my colleagues to pay tribute to our mentor, brother and a gallant son of this country. For us to say that the Rt Hon. Oulanyah died “too soon” can only be a true notion.

In my humble view, the country was yet to see the finest Rt Hon. Oulanyah because we were yet to see him as a head of this institution - and he was well inclined to serve this country to the best of his ability. In the Rt Hon. Oulanyah, we learn a few things.

I have seen you, when you were Deputy Speaker, sending us to harmonise on contentious issues; that is the legacy of the Rt Hon. Oulanyah. He started that culture - not on one or two occasions. Whenever matters were contentious, he would say, “Can you retreat and establish a common ground?” And that is something we need to carry forward, as an institution. It would be in his honour.

It also tells us that while we are in public life - those of us who have spent a little bit of our life in the public - there are things that we should always care about. Like Hon. Mao and the Rt Hon. Oulanyah, some of us started politics at a youthful age and while you do that, you recall that one of the key things that could have affected his life was an injury he got as a student leader.

He was not demonstrating to be in the university; he was there as a government-sponsored student. Therefore, he was demonstrating so that the poorest of the poor could still access university. It is because of that demonstration that we still have Government sponsorship in public universities today.

Government had decided that public education should be privately-sponsored at university level. So, we would like to honour them and commit that we shall continue with the fight; and that we shall have a better country; and we shall struggle for Uganda to stand as a nation. 

That is something we owe this country; it was put together by colonialists. Let us avoid hibernating in our own tribal - I am a chairperson of the Buganda caucus and can only justify my stay as a chairperson by bringing Buganda to Uganda and not taking Buganda out of Uganda. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. In the public gallery, we have Hon. Ninsiima Rhona, former Member of Parliament; Hon. Nusura Tiperu, former Member of EALA; and the current ambassador to Turkey. You are welcome.

We have Hon. Grace Bagaya, former Woman Member of Parliament of Nakasongola; Hon. Amoit Mariam, former Member of Parliament; Hon. Kataike Sarah; and Hon. Capt. John Emilly Otekat, both former Members of Parliament. You are most welcome.

1.47
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Mawogola West County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do stand here to condole with the family, relatives, the President and the country at large, for the loss of our dear Speaker, the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. 

As many have said, I am one of the people in this House, especially ladies that have been privileged to be here for some time. So, I have known the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah as a mentor – and I know that the new colleagues will definitely miss his mentorship. But I am happy that we got the Speaker and Deputy Speaker who have been privileged to be mentored by him.

The late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah’s humour in this House - when it came to new Members of Parliament - was unmatched. He always encouraged us to be conversant with the Rules of Procedure. Even if you stood up and you were irrelevant in your presentation, he would be kind and polite enough to say, “Allow the Member to deliver his maiden speech.” He would not embarrass anybody.

That is how he built confidence in all of us. He encouraged us to stand here and ensured that we had the right to talk, whether what we were saying was meaningful or not. Then the next time, he would call you and say, “This is how things are done.” 

Other than confidence building, he wanted to balance all of us in this Parliament; the old, the new or those who have been here for a long time like me; and those who came for the first time to show their capacity and capability as to why they are people’s representatives. He ensured that he accorded each one of us time. He had time for us in the office. 

I want to assure you, Madam Speaker, that for the few months he had been here, he definitely showed that he mentored you. Personally, I was touched. I was sworn in, in May 2021 and I was competing for the highest position on the African continent; as Vice President for the Pan African Parliament on the African continent. I was sponsored by the then Speaker, Parliament and Government. I reached the Pan African Parliament and was sworn in for a second time. 

As I was concluding my time in the Pan African Parliament, I was called here to become a minister - I was sworn in a third time. When I met him, he said, “You see, patience pays. You were struggling. You have been sworn in three times more than I, your Speaker.” He said, “How do you feel?” I said, “Rt Hon. Speaker, patience, of course, pays because God’s ways are not our ways.” My friend, my mentor, may your soul rest in eternal peace. 

1.51
MS FLAVIA NABAGABE (NUP, Woman Representative, Kassanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Today, I stand here to remember the late Rt Hon. Speaker, Jacob Oulanyah, as a man who was a huge advocate for women empowerment. In his words he said, “If a girl is given all resources right from her first 1,000 days of life, that girl will grow up to challenge patriarchy and all the powers wielded against her.”

Madam Speaker, as we stand here today, we have many issues on the battlefield in the backlash against women’s empowerment. It is real in this country. However, I am glad to say that the Rt Hon. Speaker, Jacob Oulanyah, who is lying here with us, recognised that women economic empowerment was not only the right thing to do, but also the core and smart objective in this country. It is not surprising that he was educating a number of girls across the country. 

With that women’s advancement on gender equality, I call upon this august House to once again, revamp and reopen the conversation on the Marriage and Divorce Bill in this country so that we are able to help women and girls out there. 

Finally, the Rt Hon. Speaker, Jacob Oulanyah, was the person I was very much looking forward to learning from because he was a mentor in his speeches. When he presided over plenary, he mentored us, especially the new MPs, and he protected us against senior colleagues who would bully us as we made our contributions. Therefore, I learnt a lot from him; and may his soul rest in peace. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The senior Member who was bullying Members – Hon. Ssegona. (Laughter) We shall have the Minister for Lands, Housing and Urban Development and the Minister for Foreign Affairs.

1.53
MR MEDARD SSEGONA (NUP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, in my history, bullying stopped in 1991, when I was in senior one and a student was killed in Namilyango College. Therefore, for the record, I am a peacemaker and I do not encourage bullying. 

Colleagues, we congregate today to celebrate the life of a brother because it is worthy. We are not here to celebrate the life of the Rt Hon. L’okori Jacob Oulanyah, who I fondly referred to as Ladit - we are conducting a ceremony because we owe it to a man of his personality.

Ladit Jacob Oulanyah is somebody I knew when I was in high school. I was first attracted to his brain when he handled the case of Candida Lakony, the woman who had been mistreated in a barracks. I admired Jacob as a defence lawyer. At that time, I had nursed ambitions of being a lawyer and I can say that the ambition was reactivated by the cross-examination of Jacob Oulanyah against some lieutenant, who had been pictured doing the abominable act on that lady. 

While I was in Makerere, as the Speaker of Makerere Law Society, I was tasked to organise a symposium, in which I invited the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. He came and spoke to us. Since that time, we became friends and our name for each other was “ladit,” as you have witnessed. Ladit, among us the Luo, is “friend.” (Laughter) I have been telling people that I have very close roots from Nwoya. I always teased him that I am more Luo than him. 

The Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was an intelligent man. It is such people that we need to lead this country. We both agreed that this country does not need strong men but intelligent, compassionate and caring leaders. In him, we have missed that kind of leader. I said we are not mourning because he has carried the cross. He has fought his fight and won the battle. He is, therefore, worth our celebration. 

Before I conclude - because we have very limited time - permit me, Madam Speaker, to bring to you condolences and to the family. First, of course, from the people of Busiro County East but more officially, from the Afro-PAC leaders, where I represent this country as the Vice-Chairman of the Association of African Chairpersons for Public Accounts Committees.

I also bring condolences from the subregional networks namely, the East African Public Accounts Committees (EAPAC), the Southern African Public Accounts Committees (SAPAC) and the West African Public Accounts Committees (WAPAC). They jointly conveyed condolences to you, Madam Speaker, to this Parliament, and to the family of the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. 

Finally, if there is nothing we can get from the passing on of Rt Hon. Oulanyah, let us get one thing, which is to be united as a country. The Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah told us one day that when you enter a public office, your journey out of that public office begins. If only we could understand that, Uganda would be - and I believe, will be a better place for us, and for our children, and generations in the future. 

I join the Vice President in agreement that this is a motion worth our support. I support the motion without reservation. I thank you. My brother; may you rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Ssegona, the senior bully. (Laughter)

1.59
THE MINISTER FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Judith Nabakooba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support the motion moved by Her Excellency the Vice President, which was supported by all Members of Parliament. Condolences to you, the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament, His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, and to Ugandans at large. 

Madam Speaker, the leader lying before us was unique. The Jacob Oulanyah I knew was a man who would always listen to whoever went to his office. He was there to guide us, he was there to encourage us, and he was there to always support us in the course of our work. 

One thing I remember about the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah is that he was a patron of the children’s forum and I was an executive member of that forum. He used to support matters to do with children. It is no wonder that even practically, he had been helping a number of children by educating them. He helped us a lot in passing the Bill on child sacrifice and the amendment of the Children’s Act. He would always encourage Members, give views and also lobby most of you, Members, to enable us have those Bills passed in Parliament. 

Madam Speaker –(Member timed out.) 

2.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Ms Grace Kwiyucwiny): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity. I convey condolences to you, to His Excellency the President and the people of Northern Uganda. We have lost a great icon of peace and unity, and a man who loved people. That is why he was always referred to as, “dano pa dano” (a man of the people). 

As far as unity is concerned, if you go to his home, where you will be on Friday, he built two churches – a Catholic church on one side and a Protestant church on another side within a distance of less than 100 metres. This means that even in religion, we can be united. 

He was a great human rights activist, always fronting the girl-child and women empowerment. We worked with him in northern Uganda. During the campaigns, he was very visible, always arriving at campaign venues in style, with energy, singing or blowing his horn and dancing. He was a great man of peace. He lived a holistic life. 

He visited the whole of northern Uganda when we were consulting to see if we could get NUSAF IV because poverty was still prevalent in northern Uganda. He always said, “We can always do it differently.” I want to thank Government – the Cabinet – for allowing NUSAF IV to take root. 

He was always peaceful. When you met him, he was welcoming. He said things like “thank you”, “I am sorry” and “excellent”. I remember when I gave my reports, when I was the Chairperson of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government, he would tell me, “Excellent report.” I felt good that I could be appreciated by a leader. 

Under the leadership of Her Excellency the Vice President, we are mobilising funds, which we shall give to his education fund; and we shall do it in time. 

He preached on many occasions during his last moments. He told us, the leaders of northern Uganda, to be as busy as a bee making honey, which will bring people together - “Do not be as busy as a fly, which will bring filth.” Therefore, we take it from him and we shall follow in his footsteps. Right honourable, rest in peace. For God and my country.

2.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS) (Mr Henry Okello Oryem): Rt Hon. Speaker Jacob Oulanyah –(Interruption)

MR SASAGAH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that in the African culture, the in-laws speak last. I have looked at the composition of this Parliament and all regions have been well represented, apart from the region of the in-laws. Isn’t it procedurally right that after the honourable minister is done speaking, the in-laws also say something? Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: In the African culture, in-laws speak last and we will appreciate you for giving us a woman from Bugisu. The senior in-law is seated next to Hon. Mbayo. Senior in-law, you will speak last and we will thank you for giving us a wife. Indeed, Hon. Oulanyah was a nationalist. He was born of Lango, domiciled in Acholi and married in Bugisu. 

MR OKELLO ORYEM: Thank you. Rt Hon. Speaker, Jacob Oulanyah! Rt Hon. Speaker, Jacob Oulanyah! Rt Hon. Speaker, Jacob Oulanyah! Madam Speaker, Jacob Oulanyah is not responding anymore. Oulanyah’s voice will not be heard in this House. Oulanyah will not respond to calls of his name. Oulanyah lies in this House how he left us. 

I have spoken so much about Oulanyah. Just like you said the other day that you would not cry anymore about Oulanyah, Madam Speaker, I am not going to speak much. 

However, I would like to pick one thing and then extend my appreciation. Oulanyah was born an Acholi but he was beyond being an Acholi. By the time Oulanyah died, Oulanyah was an Itesot, a Langi – he was even a Zambian, Kenyan and European. There is nobody that I have come across in my life - 62 years in this world – who is like Jacob Oulanyah. 

Oulanyah, in all bits and pieces, was not a relative of mine. Oulanyah had daughters but I could not even allow my son to think of marrying in Oulanyah’s family because we were that close. We were like relatives. I would feel embarrassed if my children married into the Oulanyah family. 

He was that character who was above everything. When I visited Oulanyah in a hospital in Dubai, he did not tell us his challenges. I told him, “You are no longer Oulanyah; you are the property of the people of Uganda. You belong to the world. You have a responsibility to them.” That is what Oulanyah was by the time he died. 

I want to just thank God for giving us this wonderful man; a wonderful brother; and for giving his children a wonderful father; and giving his father a wonderful son. I want to thank God for giving this Parliament, Jacob Oulanyah, during our time. 

I am glad that God, in His wisdom, gave me the chance to be in this Parliament at a time the Rt. Hon. Oulanyah was in it. I think I would have regretted if I came to Parliament after Oulanyah was dead. Those who will come after us will miss the opportunity to be served by a man of all men; and a giant of all giants. 

I want to thank God for the life of the Rt Hon. Oulanyah. I want to thank his father for the life of Rt Hon. Oulanyah. I want to thank the Speaker for the life of Rt Hon. Oulanyah. I want to thank the President of the Republic of Uganda for letting Rt Hon. Oulanyah preside over this House. Colleagues, Members of Parliament, I want to thank every single one of you for the love and respect you have shown for the Rt Hon. Oulanyah. 

I want to thank this country - those who stood by the roadside when the body of the Rt Hon. Oulanyah came to this country, those who spoke, cried in the houses, those who have even never met him but are out there shedding tears. They just watched this man on television and saw his behaviour but said, “I wish my father was like that, I want to grow up and be like that man…” I want to thank every single one of you. God bless every single one of you, in your capacities, for being so generous to this wonderful son and brother that God gave us. 

Madam Speaker, give me the opportunity to thank the governments of the different countries, especially the United States Government. I want to thank the US Ambassador and the Deputy US Ambassador for going out of their way - really going out of their way, beyond their duty and obligation - to expeditiously process matters that enabled the Rt Hon. Oulanyah travel to Seattle - the visas, special clearance for the aircraft, the delegation and the crew. 

The United States Government, through the US Embassy, did everything possible, at every single moment, beyond working hours, so that the Rt Hon. Oulanyah could be expeditiously flown out of this country. They did this by giving Uganda Airlines special status and special registration to go into the country. Otherwise, it would have been impossible. 

We will have delegations that will be coming to Uganda. We have delegations coming from Tanzania, Kenya, the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), Zambia, the East African Legislative Assembly, Burundi, and South Sudan. We have close to 100 delegations that are coming to bury the Rt Hon. Oulanyah. I believe members of the diplomatic community in Uganda will also come to see off the Rt Hon. Oulanyah. Thank you. God bless every one of you. May the spirit and the soul of my brother rest in eternal peace. Amen!

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.  

2.13
MS CATHERINE LAMWAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Omoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to fully associate myself with the motion that was moved by the Vice-President and seconded by the Prime Minister. 

Madame Speaker, the man we are talking about, the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, was a colleague in the constituency and a big brother. 

I first heard about the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah through my father. During that time, they were congressmen. The man, whose body is lying before us lifeless today, was a great man. He achieved his greatness through hard work. 

When he was in the Ninth Parliament, the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah advocated and lobbied - because he was very passionate about services reaching the common man on the ground at the grassroots, he pushed hard and created Tochi County out of Omoro County in the then Gulu District. Shortly after that, the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, still because of his passion about the common man at the grassroots, again lobbied the Government and made sure Omoro District was created out of Gulu District. 

Madam Speaker, the man we are talking about here, today, rose to greatness through hard work. As a district, we mourn him but we shall also dearly miss him as a father. He contributed a lot to the establishment of Omoro District. He was very passionate about the issue of child education, health, and economic transformation. 

Madam Speaker, on behalf of the people of Omoro District, I want to say that when we look at the issue of cancer in our country, our brother was stolen away from us by death. The cause, among others, was clearly spelt out by Hon. Dr Jane Aceng as cancer. 

It is my appeal to Government to fast-track the establishment of the cancer institute in Omoro District, which at the moment is limping. We will be grateful also, as Omoro District, if special attention is put into the establishment of a fully-fledged Nodding Syndrome centre in the region because he really stood for it. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, you have heard about the trust fund. On behalf of the people of Omoro District, we will be very grateful if colleagues and the whole country stood with us in establishing this trust fund. 

The man we are speaking about here today was great, not because he had too much money, but because he was able to touch so many lives in this country. Madam Speaker, you are aware that because he valued life more than money, he even faced ridicule while he was on his hospital bed, suffering and fighting for his life, by those who value money more than life. 

The late understood and valued relationships and that is why even here in Parliament, whenever there were issues of national concern that needed urgent attention in the constituency, whenever you consulted him to raise it as a matter of national concern or take on a minister on the Floor, he would advise that we better go diplomatic; he was a man who valued relationships. 

It is my prayer that from his good attributes of life, as a Parliament we carry forward what our son, the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, stood for. 

On behalf of the people of Omoro, I want to thank you, honourable colleagues, for standing with us. I want to thank the people of Uganda for standing with us. I want to thank so much Government, in particular, for standing with us. 

We will be very much appreciative if our son is accorded the most befitting burial. We look forward to meeting you all in Omoro. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

2.17
MS IDAH NANTABA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for according me this time to pay tribute to our fallen leader, a brother and a friend. 

The late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, now lying before us, whose journey we are celebrating -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nantaba, put on a mask - she has a problem with the mask?

MS NANTABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for bearing with me. A life to celebrate and a journey to remember. Personally, I will remember our fallen brother for several reasons. In this country, we have all heard of the so-called mafia, and many of us have faced the wrath of these mafia in our term of service. 

Madam Speaker, I faced them and at one point, I realised that it is always important to have leaders leading this Parliament, who are objective and independent-minded. That was Jacob Oulanyah. 

In 2012, when I was appointed the Minister of State for Lands, Housing and Urban Development, when these mafia learnt that I was going to take them on, they had to put up a serious fight. They influenced the leadership of this House to block that appointment until such a time when Jacob had to step in and say “Enough is enough. I will not allow external forces to influence the leadership of this House, and I will make decisions independently.” That is how he managed to allow us to serve our nation in the capacities that had been designated to us. That is why and how I will always remember him; for standing for, and making independent decisions. 

Secondly, this country has a fully-fledged medical board. According to the Minister for Health’s report about Oulanyah’s health, I read between the lines that those competent doctors knew that Oulanyah’s time was drawing nigh. If they knew it, that whole jet had the space to accommodate his family. I have learnt that it was so painful for him to die miles away from his closest family members. How I wish they had accommodated them, maybe to have them at his last hour. Next time, it could be me or you; let us always consider the feelings of those close to us, especially in our families, to always be close when we breathe our last. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Kayunga, I condole with the family and convey our sincere message –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. In the gallery, we have councillors from Soroti City Council. We have Councillor Daniel Okello, and Mr Sylvia Okorapot Edoku. You are most welcome. They are represented by Hon. Jonathan Ebwalu. 

2.23
MS MARY NAKATO (Independent, Woman Representative, Buyende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join the rest of my colleagues and the entire country to mourn a great man, the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. I would like to convey condolences from Buyende District and I want to say the following: 

One, I want to appreciate you for being a caring mother because you looked after the late Rt Hon. Speaker, even when he was experiencing his last pains. 

Two, I also want to take this opportunity to thank Hon. Mao and our Chief Justice for being genuine friends to the late Hon. Oulanyah. (Applause) 

Lastly, the previous election for the speakership left Busoga divided. I want to call upon the Members from Busoga region that the cause is now no more; but let us come together as   one. It is not a war for anybody to decide and choose to defend or support a side. 

May I join the rest of the friends and pray that the fallen great man rests in eternal peace. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Members, do not heckle her; that is her maiden speech. 

2.24
MR ROBERT MWESIGWA RUKAARI (NRM, Mbarara North Division, Mbarara City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I come here to speak on behalf – 

THE SPEAKER: Order.

MR RUKAARI: I come here to speak on behalf of the people of Mbarara City, North. I have five things to talk about the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. 

One, Jacob and I have been members of a club for over 32 years from Makerere University. The incident that is commonly talked about, known as the “Black Monday”, happened when Jacob engaged with security and I was about four or five metres away. Jacob, as my Guild President, has been talked about as a very good speaker; his oratory values were unchallengeable. I became friends with Jacob because of Chairman Mao up here. In the 1990s, when they started their chamber, Oulanyah, Onoria & Co. Advocates around Buganda Road, Jacob became my personal lawyer. 

How Jacob joined politics: In all Jacob’s campaigns, I would fund him. I have done business with Jacob and he was not a business person. I am the one that would force Jacob to do business. 

Jacob was a member of the CEC; to us in CEC, he was a beacon of hope. Once we caucused with Jacob Oulanyah before the principal, or any other person, he would push our ideas through. 

Jacob Oulanyah was my friend and brother. In the evening hours, I have been going to Jacob’s home all the time. However, from what I have heard from colleagues and other people, Jacob Oulanyah had self-sacrifice like the saviour. When you would see Jacob walking, for human beings in the last month, none of us would do it. When you would go to his bedroom and you are with him, and the person who was outside is smiling, you would get worried. 

I last met him physically in December at around 10.00 a.m. in his home, in his bedroom. We had just travelled like a week before; we had travelled to Ofwono Opondo’s home with Chairman Mao and others and we found them there. I flew with him in a private jet. Because of his time, I delayed and found him seated on the plane and he ridiculed me - “Ambassador Rukaari, you are supposed to keep time.” 

We travelled and went to Mulanda and came back. He would be smiling and dancing to Yoo Leng at the function. We came back home and you could not see anything about his ailment until he had entered his bedroom. 

Madam Speaker, as I conclude, while in his bedroom he told me like two or three times, and when he would say it, he would walk away. He said, “Robert, but my children” - three times - and he would walk away and come back and change the topic. I regret why I did not engage him then. I have just seen the signal he was sending to us. I am happy with the foundation we have started to contribute for his children. 

With those many words, I would like to say that he cut across all subregions; we are brothers. May God rest his soul in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Robert. I really want to thank Chairman Mao and the Chief Justice for being true friends to Jacob. 

2.30
MR DAN KIMOSHO (NRM, Kazo County, Kazo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join the rest of my colleagues to extend my condolences to the country and to the people of Omoro County. 

It has been 16 days of a very painful experience, mourning our leader, the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. However, at some point when you reflect, you feel a sense of hope - A sense of hope that when there is a deficit of honest leaders, we can have one to eulogise and say, “He was an honest leader.” A sense of hope that when we have high tribal undertones, we can eulogise one and say, “He was a unifier and a nationalist.” A great sense of hope that we are talking about a person who embraced transformational politics; that from UPC, he fitted well in NRM. Even within the NRM, he ascended to the highest level of leadership and everyone appreciated him as a great leader. That is the hope that some of us feel even amidst great pain, and it resurrects our soul to believe that greater things are yet to come.

I was keenly following when we were bringing the body of our leader from Entebbe Airport. There is something spectacular that came out - the adorable people standing on Entebbe Road to wave to the Rt Hon. Speaker. It demonstrated love and acceptability. How I wish leaders emulated this! 

Madam Speaker, I also want to congratulate you because for the very first time, you have had the Front Bench full. I wish they continue to do this in remembrance of our fallen Speaker.

Finally, how I wish that the spirit of the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah keeps us awake and we end medical tourism in this country. There are very few people who can afford what the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah has gone through in his medical journey. We have talked about Lubowa, we can talk about other facilities? It is time in the 11th Parliament – even if it does not do anything else – we put our foot on the ground and end medical tourism. We will have enriched him, wherever he is. 

May his soul rest in peace. Thank you. (Applause)

2.33
MR MOSES MAGOGO (NRM, Budiope East County, Buyende): Madam Speaker, I join the rest of my colleagues to convey condolences from the people of Budiope East, but also from another fraternity that the late belonged to, that is not represented in this House; that is the sports fraternity. 

As we are all aware, the late had many attributes, and he also had an attribute in the area of sports. He was a renowned biker as already mentioned, but as some of you know, he was also a boxer and a goalkeeper. When people die, the only way we can remember them is by taking forward what they believed in and what they valued. 

I am fortunate to have hosted the late Speaker in one of his last public appearances when he was jovial and humorous, and that was just in December. In his own words he said, “I sit in a place that takes decisions, which decisions affect people…” - and I am quoting him - “…I will make sure that where I sit, we are able to provide what is required for the fraternity of sports in terms of infrastructure, in terms of funding and in terms of the law.” (Applause)

These are words that are going to remain on my mind. I call upon this august House that if there is anything we need to do, it is to make sure that we take forward what he loved and what he believed in. 

In my belief, I will say, Inna lillahi wa inna ilayhi raji’un.” Thank you (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Aisha, you will translate that at your own time. (Laughter) 

2.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Beatrice Anywar): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here to second the motion moved by Her Excellency the Vice-President of the Republic of Uganda. I condole with His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, the Vice-President and you, Madam Speaker, and the people of Uganda at large. 

Madam Speaker, here we are for a great man. I thank all those who tried to save Jacob’s life, starting from His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, and all the doctors in their various capacities, who tried to save the life of the Right Honourable Speaker. I also thank those who were by his bedside. 

In a special way, allow me to thank Patricia Lakidi, a lady whom I believe gave the last glass of water to the Rt Hon. Speaker. I thank you, friends from all across the country, for loving and honouring Jacob, the son of the soil. 

The gentlemen in this House - if you looked at them today across the board – if only my brother Jacob could open an eye, he would point a finger at you and then give you a very broad smile. I just want this unity to be kept for all of us. 

Since he was a leader from Northern Uganda, we can only thank you, fellow countrymen and countrywomen, for the love and the unity you have exhibited, and for the testimonies you are giving about our fallen son. He has indeed been a unifying factor. 

I implore this Parliament to amplify the passion the Rt Hon. Speaker had for the children suffering from nodding disease. You are aware these are forgotten children and he was our mouthpiece. We have a home in Tumango and Omoro, which was built by an American doctor called Suzanne. She put up those structures. However, as we speak, it has been abandoned. Therefore, I would like to request that we reinstate this facility. Otherwise, we have children from Kitgum, Pader and Omoro suffering from Nodding Syndrome.

Lastly, we have all agreed that we need to support the family of the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. I would like to tell the children to be proud; your father was such a great man. Walk with your heads high. Do not be shy. We are here to testify.

Friends, as we leave this place, I pray that we make a firm resolution that does not invade the will. As Parliament, we at one time agreed to contribute to purchase the cancer machine in Nsambya Hospital. All Members of Parliament contributed about Shs 1 million. If we are serious about the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah Education Trust Fund, let us agree and make a one-off contribution, which the Rt Hon. Speaker will take into that fund. We can contribute Shs 1,000,000. This money will be deducted once and it will be delivered to that fund to cater for the children of our fallen friend. 

Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, may your soul rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Anywar. There is a suggestion that we contribute Shs 1 million for that fund in the spirit of ubuntu. Is that seconded? [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes”] Honourable members, I put the question to that request.

(Question put and agreed to.)

2.41
MR YORKE ALIONI ODRIA (NRM, Aringa South County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to join all of you to convey condolences to the bereaved family. 

Honourable members, I know it is a sad moment for us. When I joined the 10th Parliament in 2016, I received a call from the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. He told me, “Alioni, I have done my research. I want to meet you”. He directed me to his home and we met. He then told me, “From my research at Makerere University, I am told you made Hon. Henry Kibalya a Guild President”. I said “Yes, Sir” and he is a Member here. Again, he said, “I am told you mobilised and made Hon. Gerald Karuhanga a Guild President.” Indeed, he was also with us in the 10th Parliament. Madam Speaker, you are aware about that.

Honourable members, Rt Hon. Jacob told me, “I want you to join my team. I am going to contest as the Speaker of the 10th Parliament”. Indeed, I joined him. We took it head-on until the last days of getting into office but later, he went for the position of the Deputy Speaker. In the 11th Parliament, God blessed us and he became our Speaker; unfortunately, the Lord has taken him.

In January, he called me and said, “I am coming to thank the people of northern Uganda, but I am starting with West Nile, for having voted me as the Vice-Chairman of NRM and the Speaker of the 11th Parliament.” Indeed, in January 2022, he was in West Nile and I hosted him. Every time he was in West Nile with his entire team, all his meals were served in my house. After the function, he went to my farm and planted a mango tree, which I named Omoro.

In February this year, he fell ill and I thank His Excellency for the team he sent to pick him from his house. After six days on the seventh floor in the Specialised Women’s Hospital, Mulago, the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah instructed the security to call me to come and see him on his sickbed. Honourable members, I went on a Monday but I could not believe it. I was with him on Monday and on Thursday, he was flown to Seattle. He told me, “I have been sick before; I know the pain of sickness but this one is too much. I am not surviving any more. I have a few days to go”.

His son, Andrew, was there and he is my witness. I broke down. (Member timed out.) - He told me to tell Members and the Acholi people that it is all about forgiveness. 

(Whereupon the Speaker, Ms Anita Among, exits the Chamber.)

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, presiding_)

2.45
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not usually like doing that but there was an extremely special relationship between Hon. Alioni and the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, which the late told me about. Let us give him another one minute to say what he wants to say.

MR ALIONI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, I am going to pick five people from each side. This is free sitting. I request those on my right hand side to remain seated. Let us have Hon. Felix Okot-Ogong, Hon. Auma Hellen, Member for Wakiso, Hon. Gilbert Olanya and Hon. Balimwezo. It will be strictly two minutes so that each one of you at least can say a word.

2.46
MR FELIX OKOT-OGONG (NRM, Dokolo South County, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I stand here to pay tribute to my brother, the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. Fare thee well, my brother, friend, and my hero. You have gone so soon and left behind unbearable pain and sorrow for many people.

The thought of never seeing you again brings tears in my eyes, even more so because it was a big surprise to me. The memories of our student days at Makerere University remain so fresh and vivid in my mind. I will never forget the good times and jokes in our room - C41, Mitchell Hall.

Our journey continued with colourful episodes and fond memories and we remained close and shared many secrets until your departure. My brother, Rt Hon. Jacob L’okori Oulanyah, I will always miss you. I miss your smile, infectious laugh, the happiness that you always had. I feel so low because you passed on so soon before achieving your dream - your dream of a united, peaceful, democratic, and transformed Uganda; your dream of a corruption-free – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am not adding a minute to anyone. I want other colleagues to get a chance.
 
2.48
MS HELLEN WANDERA (NRM, Woman Representative, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. With due respect, I extend my condolences to the family and the whole world. The late Rt Hon. Speaker was not only useful in Uganda but he extended his knowledge to different countries. Our neighbouring country, Kenya, sends its condolences to Uganda. 

The little I know about the late Speaker is that he was critical. The Rt Hon. Speaker used not to talk because he wanted to talk; he had evidence and he would always do research. 

He was also a developmental character. He worked hand-in-hand with us. Last December, when we were going to Arusha, I was left out but I had been good during training. When I approached him, he told me, “Mama Busia, you have to go to Arusha” and I made it there. 

With these few words, may his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, all of you here are equal. I have just heard a Member going out, saying, “This is stupid. How can they give me just two minutes; the whole of me?” Please, you came through the same channel that others used to come here. Therefore, if you think you are special, you will go for your own Parliament, not the one I am presiding over. (Laughter)

2.51
MS BETTY NALUYIMA (NUP, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We condole with you and the entire nation upon the demise of the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah.

From the Rotary family, it is very evident that the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah served above self. It is clear that he stood for the values of Rotary, which include service, diversity, integrity and leadership. It is very key that we all emulate this, as we continue to mourn him. 

I was aided very much when it came to the motion I first presented - the motion concerning the locally-raised revenues in local governments. He mentored me. I want to ask, once again, that this Parliament supports local governments such that his role as Speaker - as a mentor, tutor and coach to us who are first-timers in this Parliament - does not go in vain. 

I want to pray that every one of us, as we remember the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, will always support local governments. In this budget, let us see to it that we increase that support. Thank you. 

2.52
MR HASSAN KIRUMIRA (NUP, Katikamu County South, Luwero): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The people of Katikamu South and the Muslim community condole with the entire country upon the demise of our leader. We pray to the Almighty Allah that the soul of our beloved Speaker rests in eternity.

Every situation is a learning one. It is incumbent upon us to learn from the death of the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. In his final engagements with the leaders, he was talking about leadership without position. He enjoined us to be leaders without positions, as new entrants in Parliament. Actually, he advised us to read the book “Leaders without Position.” I enjoin each and every Member of Parliament to go and read that book because it will give us a clear way forward. Thank you. 

2.54
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Text expunged.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Olanya, you are done. Let us be mindful about the language we are using. Colleagues, I do not want to appear harsh but there is a language we shall not accept on our Hansard record. I request you, colleagues, do not push the presiding officer into a corner. Clerk, expunge the record of Hon. Gilbert Olanya from the Hansard. 

2.56
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga West County, Kagadi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My condolences to the family and the grieving nation about the death of our fallen colleague, Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah.

The Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah found me when I had served one term and particularly, when we were having party primaries and he wanted to become the Deputy Speaker. As we were caucusing, he said, “You man, you came after me at Makerere University and I remember, you were in Mitchel Hall. You remember very well the anthem of our hall, that we have to carry the banner. I am not carrying the banner alone. I want to carry the banner with you.” 

It was my first time to interact with him. I thought about it but I had my candidate. The point is that he won the election and became the Deputy Speaker. When he was in that chair and convinced about a position that would serve the country, he would stick to it. I think in 2015 we were passing a motion to create Kagadi District and there was a lot of controversy –(Member timed out.) I seek your indulgence, Mr Speaker – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, Hon. Tinkasiimire. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: At least let me sing the anthem for Mitchel Hall. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Tinkasiimire, please be orderly. 

2.59
MR RONALD BALIMWEZO (NUP, Nakawa Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Nakawa East Constituency – [Hon. Tinkasiimire: “Procedure, Mr Speaker.”]

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, Hon. Tinkasiimire, first of all, you are out of order for accessing a microphone without my permission. Please, you cannot access a microphone without my permission.

MR BALIMWEZO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Nakawa East Constituency and on my own behalf, I want to express sympathy to all Ugandans for the great loss of the country’s best orator.

It is not how many years you have lived on the earth, but the legacy that you are leaving. Jesus Christ lived for a mere 33 years but he was able to leave a legacy. The Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah has left a legacy and it is not too late for us to emulate him. 

Mr Speaker, Jacob was a passionate believer of the fruits of the Holy Spirit. He loved peace, joy, patience, and he was a hard worker. Therefore, we should emulate him. 

I remember the time he embraced one of us. I am a person living with a disability and I am the captain of that team. There is a little person he paid fees for and this little person is a volunteer here. I think he is called Yubu. How I wish you could help that little person to acquire a job here because he was singly supporting him. I want to always remember this gentleman. 

We have lost a man, particular –(Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if we can use two minutes, each one of us will get the opportunity to speak. Hon. Otimgiw, you are losing your opportunity. I had chosen you. Please get closer to the microphone. Okay, let Hon. Nandala-Mafabi first speak; you will come next.  

3.01
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence. We are two Nathans that were told by doctors not to put on masks. 

I again seek your indulgence that you give me slightly more than two minutes –(Interjections)– I will explain; please listen to me. One, this gentleman was our son-in-law; two, I came here to Parliament in 2001 with him; three, if you remember the famous motion on the sale of Uganda Commercial Bank (UCB), for which I was the mover, he was the seconder. That shows how he loved this country. That is why I am seeking your indulgence for an extra minute. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

In 2001, I came to Parliament with Jacob Oulanyah. By then, we treated each other as brothers and friends. He used to call me “Mukhwasi”, which means brother-in-law. During all our time together, we referred to one another as brothers-in-law - Mukhwasi. In fact, even one time in the House here, he made a mistake and said, “Mukhwasi, speak”, forgetting those are the things we talked about outside the House. 

He was a gentleman. When he was the Deputy Speaker of Parliament, there was a crisis in this House, and that is why I want you to learn from it as the Deputy Speaker now. There were colleagues who caused havoc here and they were suspended and instructed not be in this House for 10 consecutive sittings, and it was a ruling. He was very angry. He looked in my face and I smiled. He wrote me a chit saying we should meet in his chambers. 

I told him, “Sir, you have never been harsh like that always but I think as a Christian, forgive.” The colleagues who had been suspended were Hon. Ssemujju and Hon. Odonga-Otto. The following day, I was made to speak on their behalf and he agreed to rescind a decision, which he had taken the previous day. 

In 2002, we wanted to go and capture Uganda House, as young congressmen. We were being led by Hon. Amuriat Oboi. Indeed, we were determined. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal and the late Okullo Epak got us on the steps and said, “You, young men, you are onto something wrong.” It is Hon. Okupa who betrayed us. He said we were going to Uganda House to capture it. Of course, Jacob felt a bit bitter but he smiled. He had a very good smile. We agreed that we shall plan that for another day. Unfortunately, the day never came. Instead, many of us left, but he stayed in Uganda House for some time, until he left UPC. 

Mr Speaker, Jacob, despite all our hard times, was one of the peacemakers we had. That is a serious issue. He would have that smile and things would go –(Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I can only give you four minutes. I cannot give you six. You have already used four. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay. Thank you very much. Let me conclude. Mr Speaker, he has died, we are all going to die, but I am very sorry to hear some people clamouring for money. If he was here, he would have called us to his office to talk about the budget, but he cannot do that. In my culture, we contribute money to send off people, not to eat. For those who are clamouring to eat it, I am asking God to call them immediately to go with him. (Laughter) May his soul rest in peace.

3.07
MR ISAAC OTIMGIW (NRM, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for according me time. I bring sincere condolences to the family from the people of Padyere County in Nebbi District and my fellow Members from the West Nile Region. 

Mr Speaker, for the little time I got to know the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, he was very inspirational because he was always trying his best to mentor you every time you spent time with him. It was as if he knew he did not have much time to be with us. I am sure Members will say the same - that the little time one met him, he would make sure that he did not say goodbye without saying a word or two that may help you along the way. 

I would also like to thank our late Rt. Hon Speaker because when he came back the first time - he was really absent because of sickness - he made sure that he toured the West Nile Region, Gulu and Lango regions to thank the members there for voting the NRM; he made that journey despite the fact that he was weak. He has gone, but he left after thanking the people. 

I hope all of us, Members, whoever had any grievances or anything against the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, leaves it so that he may rest in peace. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

3.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Rubanda East and on my own behalf, I would like to extend condolences to the family of the late Jacob Oulanyah. 

In 2015, when we were enacting the Public Finance and Management Act, I got an opportunity to get close to the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. He told me that he did not know that I was very brilliant until he realised that from the debates and logical arguments some of us were putting forward. 

Later on, in the 10th Parliament, I became the chairperson of the finance committee and I got an opportunity to work with him very closely. I have a lot to talk about him, but because of time, I want to say one point about the late, which is about reliability. 

He was the kind of person whom you would agree with and you would not panic whether he would do what you have agreed upon or not. Whenever I would call him to thank him for doing what I had asked him to do, he would just tell me, “But you know me.” That was the sense of reliability I picked from him. 

The other point was trust -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, in the gallery, we have the following: 

Hon. Ogama Ismail, former Member of Parliament;

Hon. Kafeero Ssekitoleko, former Member of Parliament;

Hon. Maganda Julius, former Minister of State for East African Affairs;

Hon. Komakech Lyandro, former Member of Parliament and a very great friend to the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah; 

Ambassador Mumtaz Kassam;

Mr Owere, NOTU Chairperson;

Hon. Jack Wamanga-Wamai, former Member of Parliament;

Hon. Caroline Okao, former Member of Parliament and former Minister of State for Microfinance;

Hon. Umar Lule Mawiya, former Member of Parliament;

Hon. Atim George, former Member of Parliament;

Hon. Akurut Violet, former Member of Parliament;

Hon. Adong Lilly, former Member of Parliament;

Hon. Akello Silvia, former Member of Parliament;

Dr Siranda Gerald, the Secretary-General of the Democratic Party. 

3.12
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Central Division, Fort Portal City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Our fallen gallant son of Uganda was a strong Pan-Africanist. I am the patron of the Uganda Pan-African Pyramid and he was our member. We still believe in the importance of this colour, and we are very proud of it as Africans. 

He hated tribal differences. In this era, as I speak, Uganda has deteriorated so much; we have become extremely tribalistic and this is very dangerous for the future of this country. How I wish people who are here remembering this gallant son - can’t we carry this spirit and take the Uganda we want forward? 

These are very serious matters. If you really think you loved Oulanyah, love Uganda with one heart; love Ugandans and work for Ugandans. These tribes wll never take us anywhere in this 21st Century. 

I believe, very strongly, that why I was so close to the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah is because we believed in a strong Africa; we believed in raising the competence of this colour, such that we can be globally competitive and enjoy the global cake as human beings on this planet; that was Oulanyah. Therefore, Oulanyah, my friend, we have shared a lot. Rest in peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, I am receiving chits from you but you see, the chits you are sending - I have already received about 50. I know each of you and I am sure you will all speak. Just let us do two minutes each so that we all speak.

3.15
MS AGNES KIRABO (NRM, Youth Representative, Central): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am so sorry, countrymen and women, especially the youths of the central region who I represent, and our colleagues, the youths of the northern region, for the loss of our big brother, our mentor, and our friend, the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. 

He has been an extremely reliable person to the young people, irrespective of the political spectrums. As a first-time parliamentarian, I will always remember, and forever apply his guidance as he guided us in line of execution of duties as parliamentarians. 

If I remember well, he once said that we should always put national interests above self and party, because in life, one might change the political party, but it is very hard or even unusual to change nationality and citizenship. Therefore, I encourage all Members to put the interests of the people we represent at the top; we should prioritise the interests of the people of Uganda over the political parties we are affiliated to. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.17
MR JACKSON ATIMA (NRM, Arua Central Division, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of West Nile, Arua City and Arua Central Division, and on my own behalf, I wish to extend our heartfelt condolences to His Excellency, the Parliament of Uganda, the people of Northern Uganda, and those of Omoro upon the demise of our beloved brother, the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. He has been a great leader, a mentor, a counsellor and a friend.

I want to sincerely say that this country has lost a great man. Last year in December, he invited me to his office and said, “Hon. Jackson, can you come and we decide when to go to northern Uganda so that I thank the people for giving me the position of Vice-Chair northern Uganda, and for electing you, Members of Parliament, who gave me the responsibility of leading in the Speakership?”

Indeed, when we went to northern Uganda, the man you see lying here went and spread the word of unity and love to us. We went to West Nile, Acholi, Lango and his –(Member timed out.) 

3.19
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (PRESIDENCY) (Ms Milly Babalanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I condole with His Excellency the President and all Ugandans.

Before us is a remarkable son of this land. In Jacob, Uganda has lost an authentic, truthful and God-fearing leader who expressed courage and strength of character in his entire life journey. The Parliament of Uganda has lost a mentor and a big development resource.

We will always remember his integrity, honesty and power of speech. His straightforwardness, boldness and determination in action will forever be marked to his memory. When he determined the right course of action, he stood by his word. He did not change anyhow and he spoke his mind.

We all unite here to speak these departing words about Jacob as testimony of the deep-hearted appreciation for the earthly works that the Lord enabled him to do. May the Almighty God grant his soul eternal peace. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Rwakoojo, Hon. Remigio Achia, Hon. Sarah Opendi and Hon. Omara and then, I will go this side. Colleagues, I have picked 10 people from this side and I will also ensure that I include that side.

3.22
MS ROBINAH RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba West County, Goma):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Permit me to extend sincere condolences from the people of Gomba West to yourself, to the President, and to the three arms of Government as they stand.

Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was a seasoned lawyer. He was a lawyer par excellence. He was the Chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs from 2001 to 2006. Right now, I am the chairperson and he had a special relationship with us. 

He was a master of legislative procedure. He taught us in this House by correcting us and being insistent on proper adherence to the Rules of Procedure. He was a narrator and he had a sense of humour, which he joyfully shared with the House. 

He was God fearing, a singer and he loved culture. He was a sportsman and he loved biking. He had a big heart as it was manifested in the number of children that he educated. 

Permit me, Mr Speaker, to request Members of the legal profession and those on the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to stand up and bow in his honour. Thank you.

3.23
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nabilatuk): Thank you, Mr Speaker. All of us want to say something. We may not exhaust all this today.

I want to move under rule 61 of our Rules of Procedure to cause an amendment to the motion before us, that we establish a memorial day to honour the life, the challenges and the benefits we derived from the life of Oulanyah. Colleagues, there is a precedent; this is the first man to die in the chair as the Speaker. In Bank of Uganda, there is the Mubiru Memorial Lecture; and in the Directorate of Public Prosecution, there is the Joan Kagezi Lecture. 

Can I now move under rule 61 that this Parliament supports the establishment or declaration of a day when we remember the life of Oulanyah, so that we can always have him remembered in our lives and have the Jacob Oulanyah Memorial Day? I beg to move. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, I think we could do this at the time of prayer, like the Speaker had earlier on guided. Before we make a final resolution, we shall capture it under the prayers. This is a very brilliant idea, honourable, and we have taken note. When the time for passing the resolution comes, let us capture it under the prayers so that Members can vote on it.

MR ACHIA: Mr Speaker, if it is so wished, I can, at a later date, formally move an amendment to the prayers to make prayer No.3 say that the Jacob Oulanyah Memorial Day be established and celebrated every year by this Parliament. Thank you.

3.25
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you very much – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, if you have heard very well, he is saying, “by this Parliament.” So, it is an internal matter; it is not that costly to the Government or a public holiday. This is an issue we can look at internally as a House.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I bring condolences to the family, Parliament and Uganda as a whole from the people of Tororo and myself, for the loss of this gallant son that I met in 2011, when we had all been elected. 

I remember as NRM Members of Parliament, we were travelling to Entebbe for the very first meeting and the late jumped into the bus with his bowtie and said, “Here I come, please, support me for the position of Deputy Speaker.” That is history now. 

We are paying tribute to this gallant son and we shall have mourned and eulogised the late in vain if we do not do the following things: He was extremely passionate about children and there are very many children on the streets - close to 15,000 now. There is a lot of torture and violence against children. We need to make this a risk adventure because every day, we are seeing on our TVs children being tortured by either their stepmothers or other people who are in their charge. 

We shall have mourned and eulogised the late in vain if we do not end the road accidents. He was a biker and one of the reasons he was not riding his bike is because the roads are not safe. I would wish to see a Uganda with four lanes as we move upcountry, not the two lanes. That is why we – (Member timed out.) - have eulogised the late in vain – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Sarah Opendi. 

MS OPENDI: May I conclude, please?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As the Chairperson of UWOPA, please conclude.

MS OPENDI: Thank you very much. If we do not end the issue of corruption - I did not support the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, but as soon as he won the elections, I went to his office to congratulate him and we had a long chat. I had indicated that we maintain the status quo, that we support him as the Deputy Speaker and Hon. Kadaga as the Speaker. All that ended. 

He told me, “I have cases of corruption here. There are people receiving money on behalf of Members of Parliament and this is tarnishing the image of this Parliament.” He had hoped that we would find time and deal with this challenge as an institution. Unfortunately, it was not done. Honourable colleagues, if we are really serious with mourning and eulogising the late, let us deal with this cancer called corruption, first as an institution and then outside.

Lastly, on behalf of the women and men of this Parliament, I wish to convey our condolences but also to urge each and every Member in this House to plant a tree in memory of the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. This is because he was also very passionate about environmental issues. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, after Hon. Omara, we have a situation - we have to be practical sometimes. We have our Muslim brothers and sisters but we have not arranged for breaking of the fast (Iftar). We do not have any arrangement of that nature, yet the time for breaking their fast is coming. Therefore, I will allow a few of them to speak and then we proceed.

3.30
MR PAUL OMARA (Independent, Otuke County, Otuke): Mr Speaker, on behalf of the people of Otuke and my own behalf, I would like to send our condolences to you, to the President and the nation for the untimely demise of our brother, the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah.

I had known the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah for the last 33 years, from our days at Makerere University. However, I got to know the character of the man during the recent Speaker’s election. Many of us were on his side mobilising for his election. 

There is something I learned from the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. As usual, we were trying to deploy strategies and tactics to win but he strongly disapproved of some. As his mobilisers, we wondered what kind of man he was. He respected his opponent and the rules that were put in place by the CEC. We would say, let us do this but he would say, “No, you cannot do that”. He maintained the spirit of obeying the rules and procedures to the dot. 

One of the missions of the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was to have a debate in this House about the Uganda we want. We have never had that debate. I would like to urge you, Rt Hon. Speaker, to have a day or several days where this House can discuss the Uganda we want –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Omara, that is not how you ask for more time. Hon. Huda Oleru.

MR OMARA: May God rest his soul in eternal peace.

3.32
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Aringa East County, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I got to know the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah when he was the Deputy Speaker in the Ninth Parliament, but I became close to him when I was part of his delegation to the ACP–EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly. That gave me the opportunity to have more discussions with him. I got to know him better, especially when he joined the CEC of the mighty NRM party. Therefore, I want to speak on behalf of the CEC members who are not Members of Parliament and cannot talk about the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah.

In 2016, when the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah expressed interest to stand as the Speaker, members of CEC took a decision that he should remain as a Deputy Speaker. Being a loyal cadre and respectful, he retained his position as the Deputy Speaker, although it was very painful at that time. He had mobilised but he respected the decision of CEC.

In 2021, he came to us and said “CEC members, here I am again today. Last time, you told me to wait. Today, I am here. I want to hear from you. What are you going to tell us?” Even when CEC members wanted to say, “Please, remain” it was very difficult for us at that moment; we had no option but to endorse him –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, each one of you is fighting to speak. It seems you want to leave me with the body of the late here. I do not know why you are rushing. I have assured you that I will not leave this seat until all of you have spoken. (Applause) I am scared because from the way you are pushing me, it seems like you want to just speak and leave me here. (Laughter)

In the VIP gallery, we have our very own, the Rt Hon. Amama Mbabazi, the former Prime Minister (Applause). Thank you, Hon. Amama, for honouring us with your presence. We also have Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu, and Hon. Fred Bagoole, former Members of Parliament; Hon. Vincent Woboya, who was with us in the 10th Parliament; Hon. Wadada Fema, former Member of Parliament; Hon. Harold Kaija, the Deputy Secretary-General of FDC party; Rev. Fr Frederick Tusingire, the National Director in charge of the Laity, Uganda Catholic Secretariat. I think I see my sister, Hon. Winnie Kiiza. (Applause) Thank you for coming. 

Now, as I move to this side, I have observed that there is a corner we usually forget. I also want to represent that corner. Let us have Hon. Awany Tony, Hon. Judith Alyek and Hon. Margret Rwabushaija, then I will come again to the main line.

For the Muslims, I had gotten scared but we have now prepared something for you. You are going to break the fast with us here. There is no reason for you to speak and go. 

3.36
MR TONY AWANY (NRM, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I stand to pay tribute to a great man, who has been a mentor, and a peace builder; and I also want to pay tribute to a man who loved his culture. 

I met the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah in 1998, when I was the Chairman of the Acholi Makerere University Students Association. He gave us the opportunity, as young men of the time, to get up and speak and add our voice to advocacy for peace. I want to thank him for having given us the opportunity at that time, to speak and advocate for peace in Northern Uganda. 

I want to remember Oulanyah, the peace builder. During the Juba peace process, the Lord’s Resistance Army rebels came up with one very important question that almost derailed the peace process. This question was put to Hon. Oulanyah as one of the draftsmen of the peace agreement. The question the LRA had put was whether the traditional justice system of mato oput would absolve them from the International Criminal Court (ICC) indictment.

Hon. Oulanyah, the man who spoke the truth to peace, told them, in no uncertain terms, that the traditional justice system would not, in any way, absolve them from the ICC indictment because the crimes they had committed were not only localised among the Acholi people, but among other communities. I thank the late for having stood up and spoken the truth to peace.

Finally, I speak in reference to a man who loved his culture. When I was in diplomatic service in Dubai, for the first time we danced Larakaraka. He went there and seriously advocated for commercial diplomacy. He told me, “Tony, I want us to go and dance Larakaraka in Nwoya and any other side of Uganda –(Member timed out.)

3.39
MS JUDITH ALYEK (NRM, Woman Representative, Kole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Kole, Lango subregion and Lango Parliamentary Group, I stand here to pay tribute to the fallen Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah.

We are aware that he was a man of integrity. He was man who had been recognised in almost all aspects of life. Mr Speaker, when we hosted the Rotary International President, he was the one chairing and you were the one who moved a motion, and I seconded it on this Floor.

The late was a major donor to Rotary. I have been advocating for this and I will not stop – even in the national organising committee meeting: we need to have a slot during his burial so that the Governor of District 9213 of Rotary International, is given time to say something about the contribution the late made to this country.

We are aware of the activities of Rotary clubs in this country and internationally. One other thing that I would like to bring to this House is that we need Rotarians here, in memory of the late –(Member timed out.)

3.41
MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow us, the workers of Uganda and I, to convey our heartfelt condolences to the bereaved family of our late hero.

As we mourn the departed gallant son of Uganda, who was the Speaker of this august House, I am reminded of a renowned playwright of the olden times, William Shakespeare, in his play Julius Caesar. Julius Caesar was a politician. When he died, one of his buddies, Mark Anthony, went for burial and had this to say: “I am here to bury Caesar but not to praise him.” As people got so amazed, he added, “The evil that men do lives on even after they have gone, but the good is interred in their bones.” He meant that quite often, we forget to talk about –(Member timed out.)

3.43
MR MAXWELL AKORA (UPC, Maruzi County, Apac): Thank you for giving me the opportunity to convey heartfelt sympathies and condolences from the people of Maruzi County upon the death of our brother and leader, the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. 

Life is a generational game and every generation plays its part. The Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah and I belonged to the same generation. We were born in the same year. I always teased him that I was his contemporary but then he would say, “Ah, but I was born in March and you in August.” So, he was my elder and I called him “ladit” in respect of that. 

He was ahead of his game. He stood out amongst his equals. His equals were men like Hon. Norbert Mao, Hon. Patrick Amuriat, Hon. Katuntu and many others in this House who were mentored in the party of Uganda People’s Congress.
 
He was a man of many talents. He cherished his Luo culture, was a nationalist who served his country with distinction –(Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Maxwell, I know you had a lot but let us just do two minutes.

3.45
MS PASKA ACIRO (Independent, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Pader District, allow me extend our condolences to all the countrymen and women of Uganda. The Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, lying in front of us today, was my mentor from childhood. 

I was among the children who would carry his fliers to old people, advocating for them to vote him. When I became the Woman MP for Pader District, he met my husband and I. He asked my husband, “How did you meet this young beautiful Acholi girl?” (Laughter) My husband said, “I was doing fisheries work in northern Uganda. So, I met her.” The Rt Hon. Oulanyah said, “You managed to fish a beautiful Acholi girl. So, do not stay with my sister for free.” 

Mr Speaker, what my brother, Jacob said, made my husband to grace, bless, honour and marry me. (Applause) Allow me summarise. 

Mr Speaker, I want to appeal to the honourable members; the Rt Hon. Speaker Jacob Oulanyah was a forgiving man. When you forgive, you will always be forgiven. 

3.48
MS SANTA OKOT (PPP, Aruu North County, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am born in Omoro District but also a grandmother to Karlynn Atwon Oulanyah and Kimberly Oulanyah. I stand here to pay tribute. 

I am going to speak on the good part. I met the Rt Hon. Jacob in 2001 when we joined this Parliament. He came from Omoro and I came from Pader District. It was during the Movement system. Even if he was in the UPC, it was a Movement system so we could not show our political divide. 

At that time, we had a lot of war in northern Uganda but we agreed, as the Acholi Parliamentary Group, to go and mobilise and comfort the people in northern Uganda. This is the first time that I saw that Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was a very good speaker. We divided ourselves in such a way that the first person to speak would be the person of the constituency. At that time, if he spoke before you and you spoke up after him, nobody would listen. 

The other thing that I noticed with him at that time was that he loved his culture. In Acholi when something good happens, we sing and dance. (Member timed out.)

3.50
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Gulu City and on my own behalf, I would like to convey my heartfelt condolences to the family and to Uganda at large for the loss of my dear son, my dear student. 

I taught Jacob Oulanyah in S.2 at Layibi College in 1981. I did not know him very deeply; I got to know him deeply when we campaigned for him. He would roar like a lion - “this is a time for us to work. The Gulu people deserve better.” He was there to work for the Gulu people. He left a very big mark. 

We campaigned for him to become the chairman Gulu District Local Council. He was not successful, but he was the best. His messages were very clear. He used four formulae of arithmetic, that is, addition, subtraction, multiplication and division and he said the fifth one was “lanywen”. It became his name. He would always introduce himself as Oulanyah Jacob Lanywen because he did not like people who would confuse things. That was the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah.

In 2001, when he came to Parliament, it was through the UPC in Gulu. Gulu was still a big district and so, UPC negotiated –(Member timed out.)– Let me say only this. I am his teacher. He took over from Hon. Ongom Abednego, who was his uncle. We negotiated and said, “Let Jacob go,” and Jacob came. 

I knew him a lot. I cannot say it all but together, with his late wife, Dorothy, he would always tell me, “With Dorothy, I was in heaven.” –(Member timed out.)

3.53
MR JOHN TEIRA (NRM, Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I bring condolences and greetings from the people of Bugabula North Constituency in Kamuli District upon the demise of our Rt Hon. Speaker. (Interjections) Mr Speaker, I beg for your protection. 

Since the news of the demise of the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, the country has been united by his death. From the time the body arrived in Entebbe, you would see in all the trading centres all over this country that people were saddened. Many of them did not have a personal relationship with Jacob but they had a lot of expectations in him. In our interactions with several of them, they saw him as a beacon of hope. Right now, they are in their respective areas listening to us saying what we have to offer after Jacob Oulanyah. This gives this House a very big test on how to preserve the legacy of the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah.

The Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah advocated for quality debate. In his explanations, he insisted on addressing the issues that directly affected the people of this country. The people need electricity. That is how we shall preserve the legacy of Oulanyah. The people need good roads. That is how we shall preserve the legacy of Oulanyah. 

Mr Speaker, in order to pass this test, resolutions must be made in this Parliament on how to fund research in the health sector in this country. Resolutions must be made in this Parliament on how to tackle the scourge of cancer. (Member timed out.)

3.55
MR ALEX BRANDON (NRM, Kagoma North County, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have about two special things that I have learnt from the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. First, that you may not work together but later, you become friends. We became friends after some time of not working together. 

Secondly, he was a man of style and swag. He had a lot of life. He would smell nice and some of us as Members of Parliament should look at this. As a neighbour, we shall miss you. Rest in peace. Thank you.

3.55
MS FAITH NAKUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me a chance. I remember the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah for three things, which are unfinished business. 

First, when we campaigned for him during the election for speakership, he promised that we would have a debate for two weeks and that would be on the Uganda we want. I pray that we have that debate at some point in honour of the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. Sickness could not allow him to make that debate happen.

Secondly, his love for children - not only his biological children or the children of Omoro, but the children of this country. The principals of pre-primary teachers’ training institutions of Uganda came to me in December, just a week before he adjourned the House, and we went to him and they presented a petition. He said, “We will have a holistic debate on pre-primary care and education in Uganda.” Unfortunately, he has gone before doing that. I pray that we have that holistic debate for the children below age eight so that we see how to support these children as a country, rather than the way it is now in the hands of private practitioners. 

Thirdly, he was a nationalist. I remember in this House when I was complaining about how the response to a certain region was sluggish compared to another on disaster issues, he rebuked me. He did not want a tribalistic debate in this House. I pray, Mr Speaker, that in honour of Jacob Oulanyah, we continue that debate on unifying Uganda; that, maybe we bring the Anti-Tribalism Bill because it is biting in this country much more now than it was before. 

Those are my three prayers. To the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah lying here, you have gone too soon. This was not the time to die and this is not how to die –(Member timed out.)

3.58
MR MOSES WALYOMU (Independent, Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to also join honourable colleagues in paying tribute to this eminent Ugandan, the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. 

The eminent Ugandan, Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, had all the four qualities of a leader. One of them was communication. Honourable members, you will bear witness that when Jacob Oulanyah rose to give a speech, you would know that a leader was speaking. 

He was empathetic; he was someone who could understand somebody’s problem. The moment you went to Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah’s office, he would know that this Member had a problem. 

Another quality that he had was integrity. Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was a man of integrity. He was also confident. When the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was seated in that seat you are in, Mr Speaker, as Members of Parliament, we felt that a Speaker and leader was there.

Mr Speaker –(Member timed out.) 

4.01
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Oyam and on my own behalf, I send my condolences to the family and to all Ugandans. 

The late Jacob Oulanyah was the closest Member of Parliament to me at the constituency level. My residence is at the border and his is also at the border. The late Jacob and I come from the greater Okaruo clan. We have Okaruo clan in Lango, Acholi and Teso. Being the uniting person that he was, he dreamt of these clans in Acholi, Lango and Teso coming together. 

The late Speaker had a vision for this Parliament. He wanted us to debate about the Uganda we want. I remember he assigned Hon. Nsaba Buturo here – it is good to hear you come up with a motion. It is my prayer that you, as the presiding officer, accord us time, as Parliament, to debate that motion. 

Thirdly, he was a God-fearing person, a person who would start each and everything with prayers and belief in God. 

He was also a family man. He loved his children very much. He respected his father so much and listened to him. 

On the issue of the education fund, I want to support that if there is a legacy that he has left us with, which is very rich, we have to support the children, not only the biological ones but also these other children that he had been supporting. 

Mr Speaker, finally –(Member timed out.)

4.03
MR OKIN P. P. OJARA (FDC, Chua West Constituency, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support this motion that has been brought before the House. Before that, let me congratulate you on being elected to this position. This is the first time we are interfacing. 

Mr Speaker, a lot has already been said about our fallen hero, but I want to thank three categories of people. I would like to thank the following: 

The family of Jacob Oulanyah for having nurtured him to be the person we are now talking about. 

The friends of Jacob Oulanyah; in this case, I will not hesitate to mention those who were in school with him and those in Parliament here who also ably guided him to be the person we are talking about. 

The community of the Luo for the principles and the value system, which I believe Jacob Oulanyah inherited. The Luo are dependable people. No wonder Jacob Oulanyah was dependable. The Luo community are brave people. No wonder Jacob Oulanyah was actually brave. Luo people are trustworthy –(Member timed out.) 

4.05
MR JAMES OLOBO (NRM, Kioga North County, Amolator): Mr Speaker, I stand here to convey the condolences of my people of Amolator District, the centre of Uganda. 

I am a Member of Parliament of Amolator in Kioga North. I also served as the District NRM chairperson of Amolator. The reason I mention this is because I was part of the people who made Oulanyah Vice-Chairperson of northern Uganda. When Oulanyah took up that position, in that short period of time he knew the problem of northern Uganda, which all of us knew; that we were divided. 

However, Oulanyah started on a keynote of uniting the people of northern Uganda. Within this short period of time, he had done a lot to unite the people of northern Uganda. Oulanyah, as the Vice-Chairperson of northern Uganda, was among the first people to go back and thank his people. He went to West Nile, to Lango and to Acholi, and thanked his people. We had agreed with him that the next move was to go to each district and thank the people who voted for him. 

You see me standing here, Oulanyah was among the people who encouraged me. He told me, “Mr Olobo Dubai, you have served the NRM, but now I want you to stand.” Indeed, when I passed, I came to this Parliament. He told me, “Didn’t I tell you?” Therefore, Oulanyah was a unifier and he had the courage to unify the whole country. I was even looking at Oulanyah replacing Museveni in the future because he had that – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, colleagues, on this side now, let us just make it very easy. I am going to pick Hon. Zijjan, Hon. Ssenyonyi and Hon. Nancy for now, and then I come back here. 

4.07
MR DAVID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I represent the people of Butembe in Jinja, on whose behalf I deliver this tribute to the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah -(Interjection) - I am the dean of independents as they have said. 

“Teach us to number our days that we may gain a heart of wisdom.” The Right Honourable Speaker understood that you would not live on the earth forever. Therefore, in everything he did, he worked to redeem the time. 

The Right Honourable Speaker did not subscribe to the foolish saying of some sub-Saharan Africans that Switzerland makes watches, but Africa has the time. We will do the Right Honourable Speaker well if we spent more time researching before we debate than spending time in the canteen and in the corridors of Parliament. 

The Right Honourable Speaker was a champion of and for unity. He always said Uganda was enough for all of us. He understood that there was enough space for the existence of the Government, the Opposition and the Independents. He did not subscribe to the mindset that the big fish must eat the small fish to survive. Under his care and guidance, the Independents felt accepted and included. 

Mr Speaker, as things stand as of now, the space in this Parliament continues to shrink. The Independents had to be remembered as an afterthought. The late Right Honourable Speaker understood that we are a shade of opinion worthy of inclusion and recognition- (Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, we shall sort out that one; you have stolen an extra minute. Members, please do not access the microphone without my permission. Hon. Mapenduzi, I had picked you; I tried to look for your face but I could not get you. Therefore, I am going to ensure you speak before I go this side. 

4.10
MS NANCY ACORA (Independent, Woman Representative, Lamwo): Mr Speaker, honourable colleagues, I join other Ugandans to condole with the nation for the great loss of my brother, Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. On my behalf, and on behalf of the people of Lamwo District that I represent, I want to say that we have lost a great hero. As a country, Uganda has darkened from the time Jacob passed on. 

However, I want us to remember one thing, that even with all the good deeds we have been saying about him, if we do not pick up from where he stopped, then we have been wasting time here. All the good deeds that Jacob did in the 56 years of his life on this earth, we need to emulate him by walking the talk. 

I also appeal to my fellow Members of Parliament that since Jacob believed very much in truth and fairness, let us always speak the truth and practice it. 

He was also a humble man. The humility in Jacob, which we saw when he went through the elections as Speaker - he publicly apologised to anybody that he might have offended in the process. I want us to remember and follow in his footsteps. 

As I sit down, I want to say that Jacob was a great lawyer who believed in justice and fairness. As someone who comes from Acholi subregion, I do not want to sound like a tribalist, but I want us to remember the legacy that Jacob has left in this country - let Government create a faculty of law in Gulu University so that he can also be remembered –(Member timed out.) 

4.12
MR MARTIN OJARA MAPENDUZI (Independent, Bardege-Layibi Division, Gulu City): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. From the very many positive statements that have been made, it is clear that the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was not just a politician but also a gifted leader. It is unfortunate that we live in a country where there are many politicians but few leaders. 

The Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah strongly believed that leadership is not about titles and positions, but he looked at leadership as a responsibility. Mr Speaker, the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah believed in mentoring young people. He believed in nurturing leadership. That is why last year he invited me to his office, gave me an assignment to study a document that gave birth to the motion I brought on the Floor of Parliament, urging Government to ratify and sign the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons. 

Mr Speaker, finally, we are living in a very difficult time. When the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was taken for treatment, we witnessed very unfortunate behaviour of some Ugandans, who went in front of the hospital to demonstrate. I think that action was intended to break him down. Much as some people think it was an activity to demonstrate the need to scale-up our health sector, I think the intention was bad, and that has to be condemned. 

The Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was a peace builder; he believed in dialogue. I think this country needs to get into that level of deeper reflection so that we begin to see how we can reconcile this nation and we begin to treat one another with respect. Otherwise, this country is taking a direction that is not the best. Thank you.

4.14
MS AISHA KABANDA (NUP, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I condole with colleagues and the nation at large. I want to address myself to the Rt Hon. Oulanyah, that is departed now. 

I want to address him in my capacity as the Deputy Secretary-General of the National Unity Platform. When the Rt Hon. Oulanyah was taken to Seattle, some NUP people demonstrated. I am here to tell our senior colleague that those that demonstrated did not have a grudge against you; they did not hate you; they held you in very high regard. However, they intended to send a message to the Government that you served; if there was any grudge, it was against Government that for 36 years it has failed to provide health services that are deserving for the nation. 

We condole with everybody; it is a great loss. In addition, we assure Ugandans that when we fail to provide services and only provide for the few that we airlift outside, we shall continue to demonstrate when some people are taken abroad for treatment.

Just think about what the honourable minister has just said here; that when the Rt Hon. Oulanyah was in Mulago Hospital at the Uganda Cancer Institute, 15 doctors attended to him. In addition, the statement from the Ministry of Health says that there are only 20 specialists for cancer in the Uganda Cancer Institute. Therefore, if out of 20, 15 were attending to him, the rest of the nation was left to be attended to by only five. There has been a ceiling on recruitment of professionals for a long time. We are here to say –(Member timed out.)

4.16 
MR JOEL SSENYONYI (NUP, Nakawa Division West, Kampala): Mr Speaker, on my behalf and on behalf of the people of Nakawa West, I convey my condolences to the family and to the nation. 

I hold a book that has 256 quotes of the late Jacob Oulanyah L’Okori; I will read just one quote, which he said on March 31 2018 while at St Charles Lwanga Mutetema Catholic Church. He said, “We believe that humanity is more important than anything else, especially politics. We believe that politics should be used to give us the position to deliver services to the people.” 

Mr Speaker, there are people who occupy offices in this country and forget that they are supposed to use those offices to deliver services. Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah was talking about you. While there are those who fail to do what is expected of them, Mr Speaker, there are those who do what they should not do. 

In December 2019, the Rt Hon. Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah was at Kololo and he decried the high levels of corruption in this country. I appeal to the thieves in this country, wherever they are, to change their ways. Whether they are here in this House or somewhere watching us on TV, Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah would say, “Let us put our country before ourselves.” 

Rest in peace, Rt Hon. Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah.

4.18
MR GOEFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo North County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is lent and Jacob, you have gone. May the Lord have mercy on you and may the blood of Jesus cover you and your family.

I have been here for a while. The late Ayume passed on but I did not see this love. The late Wapakhabulo passed on but I did not see this love. Thank you very much, honourable members. 

Mr Speaker, we do not have time to speak about Jacob and I want to propose that we establish a digital memorial, where after today, we are all recorded together with other people. 

I met Jacob in 1992 with his wife. He has left children. Ojok, we are going to stand with you to the very end together with your sisters and brothers. Mr Speaker, Jacob delayed to remarry after the death of Nangwale. When I met him, he told me, “Honourable, my brother, I have one child sleeping here and another one sleeping here. How can I bring another woman here? I need time to grow and nurture these children.” He loved his family. 

Finally, Mr Speaker, Jacob loved this country. Even the day we were in Kololo, he was not well but he served this country. Can we pray for him? My brother, may your soul rest in peace. 

4.19
MS PHIONA NYAMUTORO (NRM, Youth Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I might not find the right words to describe a leader so distinct that even in death, we all mourn in admiration. 

One thing stood out for sure about the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. He dreamt of a better Uganda with a spring of leadership across the divide. Because of that, Mr Speaker, allow me to thank the late for creating inspiration among the young people.

The late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was very passionate about young people. Whenever we had an interaction with him, as Youth Members of Parliament, he told us that he missed his young times because he believed that when one is young, all odds are in your favour. He always encouraged us to spread the same inspiration and hope among our peers. He would always close the meeting by saying, “I am very proud of you, my young people.” Today it is our turn to say, on behalf of the young people of Uganda, we are extremely proud of you. May your soul rest in peace.

4.21
MS RUTH LEMATIA (NRM, Maracha East County, Maracha): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to convey condolences from the people of Maracha East and from myself to the children and the family, to Parliament, Government of Uganda and the North at large.

I got to know Jacob in 2010, but before that, I knew Jacob’s wife, Dorothy. Dorothy was a schoolmate of my late daughter. So, that made me get to know Jacob very easily. 

Jacob may not have known your age but he would sit there and say, “Let us have Mama talk.” That time, I had a lot of problems with my knees and everybody knew about it. Jacob was very sympathetic for that. I cry because I can walk a bit. However, I cry for the North; Jacob was our diamond and you know very well diamond can only be cut by diamond. It was very difficult for the NRM to penetrate the North, even in my own area, but when Jacob came around, he convinced everybody and the number of votes shot up. We shall miss Jacob –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, Mama, please, conclude. 

MS LEMATIA: I am crying for the NRM, particularly in the North. Jacob had led us down here very well. Fare thee well, Jacob. I know you are doing well with your Creator because you were my prayer partner in your office, and I am sure you can see how people are appreciating you. 

I thank you for what you set, particularly for us from the North; especially on how to live with people in harmony. Thank you very much. 

4.24
MR DOMINIC GIDUDU (NRM, Older Persons Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the older persons in the eastern region, I extend our deepest condolences to all Ugandans.

The late Jacob Oulanyah came to be known to me during the burial of his father-in-law, the late Engineer Nangwale. He kept that relationship with us and so, the people of Bugisu subregion also send deep condolences. 

The late Rt Hon. Oulanyah was impactful. He exuded confidence. He left a legacy of excellence of service to Uganda.

Above all, he was loyal. This was shown at the time CEC chose its candidate for speakership. We assessed and found that the late Oulanyah scored 70 per cent in loyalty and we made him our candidate for speakership. He went through and became a Speaker. He also campaigned and became the vice-chairman of northern region.

He played a major role and gave us a lot of victory in the North. He managed to bring all our brothers and sisters in the North together. Definitely, we – (Member timed out.) 

4.26
MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Nakasongola County and on behalf of the Seventh Day Adventist Parliamentary Association, I want to convey our condolences to the Ugandans but also to the family and the Omoro people. Uganda has lost an asset. Uganda has lost a leader. 

Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah exhibited leadership in this country. He also fought against corruption. I want to mention that one day at Kololo Ceremonial Grounds, Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah boldly stood up before the President and said, “All Ugandans are corrupt. Without attitude change, the fight against corruption is just a show”. We need to fight corruption, as Ugandans, so that we can have a better Uganda. 

Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah has been a parent. If you saw the many children and students who were paraded, whom Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah had been sponsoring – considering what he had been going through – it signifies that Members of Parliament have a load and they are “small governments” in their constituencies. The President does not want to hear that Members of Parliament are going through hardships to manage –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have a corner which has been here since morning. They are very loyal. (Applause) I have seen them very well. I will start with the Hon. Rwemulikya, then Hon. Gume and my brother, Hon. Oboth Oboth.

4.28
MS MARGARET AYEBARE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to say one or two words about our fallen hero. On behalf of the people of Mbarara District and on my own behalf, allow me to register our sincere condolences to you, the Members of the 11th Parliament, the family of the late Jacob Oulanyah and the whole nation. 

I want to speak about one thing that I admired about the late Jacob Oulanyah - humility. I vividly remember when we had just been sworn-in as Members of Parliament, on that day, there was a national incident when Gen. Katumba Wamala was attacked. He came to the House and informed us. The plenary sitting was taking place outside in the tent. The way he came and asked us to let him go and find out what was happening and later came back to inform us of what was there, showed us how humble this man was – (Member timed out)

4.30
MR IBANDA RWEMULIKYA (Independent, Ntoroko County, Ntoroko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I come from Rwenzori. On behalf of the people of Rwenzori and Ntoroko in particular, I would like to extend my deepest condolences to His Excellency the President, the Rt Hon. Speaker, the family of the late, the people of Acholi and Uganda at large. 

The Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah had a nationalistic character of loving his country. We saw him dedicating his entire life to serving our country. We saw him during Juba peace talks; he faced the LRA rebels in order to pacify the northern part of the country. We really thank him for what he did. 

The man who is lying here was a person who would fight against corruption. Corruption is ravaging our country. People have huge appetite to “eat” public funds. We saw him fighting against corruption. He wanted accountability. I want to ask all of us that, in remembering his contribution, we should be at the forefront of fighting against corruption.

The Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah loved his work. You saw him keeping time. He knew the Rules of Procedure well and he wanted quality debate in this Parliament. Indeed, we need to take this forward. 

Lastly, the Rt Hon. Speaker was a unifier. The Acholi, West Nile and Lango subregions were now becoming – (Member timed out.)

4.32
MS JOANNE ANIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Madi-Okollo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The late Jacob Oulanyah exuded many virtues but allow me to speak to his virtue of humility. 

In January, the late Jacob Oulanyah came to West Nile to visit the NRM members. When he was leaving, there was space on his flight and I was able to take up that space. I felt like the odd man out because all the other people in the plane were ministers and members of his staff. At that particular time, I had forgotten my phone and I was too scared to tell the Rt Hon. Speaker that I had left my phone. 

As we were boarding the plane, one of the ministers next to me told the late Jacob that Joanne has left her phone. He stopped the plane and waited for my phone to be brought and we boarded the plane. When we arrived in Kampala, he still turned to me and asked, “Joanne, how are you reaching home?” I said I did not know. I got the privilege of being driven and dropped home by the late Jacob Oulanyah. 

The Book of Revelation says that “blessed are the dead who die in the Lord for their deeds will follow them”. I wish the late Jacob to rest in eternal peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Frontbench, I will be balancing you with the backbenchers.

4.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (COOPERATIVES) (Mr Frederick Gume): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I bring condolences from the people of Bulamogi North West Constituency in Kaliro District. 

Mr Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, you remember we agreed to sleep here today. So, whether it means sleeping in the Chamber, each one of you will have a chance.

MR GUME: Mr Speaker, I take the same opportunity to thank the people of Omoro for having brought us a man of integrity, an orator, a man filled with a sense of humour, a man who mentored other leaders and was a great timekeeper, among the many other qualities.

In the 10th Parliament, I had an encounter with Hon. Odonga Otto. I was seated on the Front Bench. I had never made a speech in Parliament and hon. Odonga Otto rose on a point of order. He told the House that I was a stranger in the House. Many colleagues can attest to that.

I fell short of words. I did not know whether I was supposed to introduce myself or say I was in order. The Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah invited me to introduce myself to the House. After introducing myself to this House, I mentioned that I was from Bulamogi in Kaliro District. He baptised me a Lamogi. 

It has been a cordial relationship and I will miss that relationship and submission. By the time we completed the 10th Parliament, Hon. Odonga Otto was one of my best friends. We can defer ideologically and politically in so many things but we must unite because –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In the VIP Gallery, we have Hon. Yona Kanyomozi and Hon. Nalubega Mariam, both former Members of Parliament; former presidential candidate in the 2021 general elections, Mr John Katumba; and Hon. Isaac Musumba, former Member of Parliament and minister.

Honourable members, on abuse of social media - I saw a story this morning saying Hon. Isaac Musumba is in ICU and about to die, but he is here. 

We also have Mrs Claudia Ofungi, spouse to the former Inspector General of Police (IGP), Luke Kercan Ofungi.

We welcome you all.

4.38
MS RITA ATUKWASA (Independent, Woman Representative, Mbarara City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Mbarara City and on my own behalf, I say fare thee well, Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. When God gives, he does without reservations. When God creates, he does the best, in reflection of his image, for us to glorify his name. God gave us but he has also taken. 

The Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah had a talent of tolerance and inclusiveness and always referred to me as “my gender activist” and I am proud. He had an eye for skill, mentorship, and it has brought us this far, and on the Floor to speak.

The fallen Ugandan hero knew it very well and understood that education is not neutral but rather for liberating human kind. It is no doubt that he reflected that in the many children he has been able to pay fees for. In his oratory skills –(Member timed out.)

(Whereupon the Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, exits the Chamber.)

(The Speaker, Ms Anita Among, presiding_)

4.40
MR DAVID KABANDA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to pay tribute to my friend. On my own behalf, as a Member of Parliament for Kasambya, I take this opportunity to thank you –(Interruption.)

THE SPEAKER: Your point of order is on what?

MR DAVID KABANDA: I send my sincere condolences to you, His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, and the family of the late Hon. Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah. 

When I got elected into this House, I made up my mind to support Hon. Jacob Oulanyah for Speaker of the 11th Parliament. He had told me before that he desired to be the Speaker of this Parliament and I joined those who were willing to make sure he achieves his dream.

Madam Speaker, I remember very well, you telling us that when Hon. Jacob Oulanyah recovers and returns from Seattle, USA, we would go to receive him at the airport, not knowing we would receive his body.

He was my friend, a good man, and I campaigned for him. Many people who are crying here abused me because of OJ, but later he reconciled with them. I thank him because he was a unifier, a leader and not vindictive. He became a true Pan-Africanist. I would like to pay tribute and may your soul continue to rest in eternal peace. 

4.44
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will also follow the others in paying tribute to the Speaker. 

We are not very many in this House - I got a chance of going to the Holy Land and he brought me an article of faith that I am putting on in this jacket; not many of you got that kind of chance. When I got this article of faith, I was challenged by the late Hon. Fr Lokodo (may he rest in peace); he said, “Ssewungu, were you once a priest?” I said, “No.” He then asked, “Why are you wearing our articles, us priests?” I replied, “It was brought to me by the Rt Hon. Speaker.” Since then, I took it off but today I had to enjoy it physically. 

Madam Speaker, whatever has been going wrong outside was counted on Parliament, and I want to thank you very much for the time you have spent ever since your boss was not okay. However, I would like to suggest that we go back to the earlier suggestion that if, for example, Hon. Ssewungu dies in Kalungu, the Chairman LCV cannot be the chairman of my burial ceremony; it must be a fellow Member of Parliament, even if from the other side. It is funny to see a minster chairing burial meetings and a lot of anomalies taking place, which are going to remain in the public domain.

We have the Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister, the First Deputy Prime Minister and the Vice-President. This person has been No.3 in hierarchy, why are we killing protocol in this country -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssewungu, I just want to remind you that we are one Government. Even if a minister on the other side is chairing a committee or whichever, we are one Government and we complement each other. 

4.46
MR STEPHEN MUGOLE (NRM, Kabweri County, Kibuku): On behalf of the people of Kabweri, I would like to pay tribute to a fallen hero for whom the announcement of his demise sent a quiet moment to the entire world. It caused an eczema-like situation on the epidermis of every loving Ugandan. Most of the mothers felt a labour pain-like situation because of the falling of this hero. 

I would like to pay tribute to a friend and a neighbour, who has been very good in this country, whose eloquence was really in a style of its own nature. He exhibited all the three-pitch tone style of speaking: low, high, and flat. He could vividly leave everybody awake when he was speaking. We thank him for that legacy. 

I remember his humility and meekness when we passed the NSSF (Amendment) Bill. He was quite happy. He called me to his office the following morning and said, “My young brother, I thank you because you have answered my call for giving a debate, which is evidence-based and well researched. I thank you.” He picked a bottle of water and gave me to drink and promised me that, “I think you will be a good debater even when you have just come. I will continue to mentor you.” Sorry that you have gone before we reach that level.

Even if the presidium is of able leadership, I am very sure we cannot step in your footsteps but we shall just follow. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, do not send me your chits because I know all of you by name. (Laughter)

4.49
MR STEPHEN KANGWAGYE (Independent, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  On behalf of the people of Bukanga, the NRM party, allow me to take this opportunity to extend my sincere condolences to His Excellency the President, to you, Madam Speaker, the august House and Ugandans.

I want to speak on only one issue. The issue is timekeeping. Everyone knows that the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was good at timekeeping. He exercised it, implemented it and had a love for it. 

How did I come to know that the Rt Hon. Speaker was a very good timekeeper? It was the day I went to his office in the 10th Parliament. We invited him to visit the people of Isingiro. He did not hesitate and he came.  However, he asked me, “My young brother, my son Kangwagye, will you manage my time?” I said, “Yes.” He asked, “At what time do you expect me to be in your constituency?” I told him that I expected him at 10.00 a.m. The gentleman was in Isingiro by 10.00a.m. I asked him, “Rt Hon. Speaker, did you sleep within Isingiro?” He said, “No, I have just left Kampala but I never wanted to see that you have to challenge me.”

When he reached there, we allowed him to come and address his people and he told me, “Hon. Kangwagye, in fact, I was supposed to be in Isingiro - if your road was not all that bad – before the agreed time.” I told him, “It is good you have seen it.” When he stood up to address his people he said, “My people, I have seen.” He pledged to the people of Isingiro that the road from Rakai to Isingiro is going to be fixed. 

It is my appeal, Madam Speaker, now that you are in this chair - I appeal to the Ministry of Finance that even if he has gone, let us continue. Let us work together and ensure that this road is done in honour and respect of what the gentleman has done for this nation. Thank you. 

4.52
MR STEPHEN BAKA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people I represent, I wish to convey my condolences to this House, to you the Speaker, the President of the Republic of Uganda, the Vice-President and the entire House, upon the demise of this great son of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, at 57 we may say that the Rt Hon. Speaker could have lived enough years but to me, he left too soon because the country was yet to see his best in mentoring this House. For the 10 years the Speaker would have been a Speaker of this House, we are very sure that he had great plans, which were going to transform this House. 

We have a lot of hope in you, Rt Hon. Speaker, and your deputy, that you will positively impact on this House after his demise. We pray that you pick on from where he has left to ensure that in 10 years, we see a real change in this House. 

Finally, he has left too soon because just around the corner, we are seeing a political transition in this country that requires men and women of character, men and women from all the regions of the country who can guide this country in this transition. As a star from the North, we shall miss him when the time comes for the political transition, which we expect to come. 

Hon. Nakato talked about our divisions in Busoga but she was, I think, misquoted by Members in this House because I saw the reactions.  Hon. Nakato was misquoted when she said the demise of the Rt Hon. Speaker should unite us in Busoga. I wish to join her by appealing to all Members of Parliament from Busoga - we have two caucuses in Busoga; a caucus that was allied to the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah and one that was allied to the former Speaker. With the demise of our brother whom we loved so much, let us get together and move forward as a region. Thank you. 

4.55
MR FREDERICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I bring condolences from the people of Tororo County and Tororo County South, to be particular.

Jacob has gone but I want to bring memories to this House of very good comments that we used to receive from the Rt Hon. Speaker.

I also have a bit of a problem with the mask –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Angura, put on your mask. That is a public microphone. 

MR ANGURA: Thank you very much. Although I have some allergy, I will cope. The Rt Hon. Speaker, Jacob Oulanyah, emphasised factual positions and research. I recall in 2017 in the 10th Parliament when our issues of Tororo were rocking the Floor here time and again, we got an opportunity to correct this by going for a factual position in London. 

Rt Hon. Speaker, Oulanyah called me to his office and said, “Now that you have been asked to go to London, be patient and go to London; all the facts that have been missing, as far as the issues of Tororo are concerned, are going to come out.” Right Honourable, I want to say that what you said is true. We brought the facts from there, but we are waiting for the Executive to dispose of that.

I would also like to inform this House that Rt Hon. Oulanyah discouraged raising issues of national importance here. When you went to him and you had an issue of national importance, he would guide and tell you to come up with a question for oral answer. He would say it is better that way because the Executive that would be coming to answer the question would come with an informed position; other than coming here to say a few things and at the end of the day, you get a casual response. That is one important attribute that we are going to miss. I hope it is also encouraged by the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker because a question for oral answer comes with a researched formal position from the ministries to which the questions are directed. 

Madam Speaker, when we were preparing to go to Spain, I led a team of young – (Member timed out.) 

5.00 
MR RICHARD OSEKU (NRM, Kibale County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The country and this Parliament are united by a sad fact of life, and that is death. The unfortunate part of it is the death of who. This is where we have to come to the reality that we have lost a great son of this country; a gallant son who has made a very great contribution to the affairs of this country and that of humanity. I have no complaints because the Bible is very clear about life. There is a time to be born and there is a time to die. What matters is: what have you done while you are alive? 

Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah has made his mark and contribution to this country. As a student leader, he fought for the rights of the students. He has been a leader, representative of the people, a Member of Parliament, a member of the NRM Central Executive Committee. He has done it all as Deputy Speaker and Speaker. A lot has been said, a lot is being said and a lot will be said; still, a lot will remain to be said because there is too much about the mark that Hon. Oulanyah has left behind. 

This takes me to the verse that His Excellency loves most in the Bible - Matthew 5:16 which says, “…let your light shine upon men, that they may see your good works and glorify your Father in heaven.” This is precisely what we are seeing and what we are talking about – (Member timed out.) 

5.02
MR LAWRENCE SONGA (NRM, Ora County, Zombo): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the people of West Nile and on behalf of the people of Ora County, I send our condolences to the family of Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah and all the people who are concerned about his demise. 

We have lost a man who was a uniting factor in this country. We have lost a man who would use evidence, data and information to explain his point. We have lost a man who would direct the decisions and the debate in this House. Now that he is gone, let us remember him for the unity he promoted, the evidence he promoted in our debates and service delivery. He wanted us to eradicate poverty in this country. To do that, let us be united and use our budget, not for consumption, but to generate more revenue so that we can eradicate poverty in this country. 

The last time he chaired the House, he talked about my road, where a woman got stuck - that road from Nebbi to Paidha to Vurra. I am happy that he has gone when we have brought our sister, the Rt Hon. Speaker, who is also passionate about that road. May we use that passion to construct that road in memory of Jacob Oulanyah. 

Finally, this man would represent Uganda anywhere without us getting embarrassed. Let us check ourselves –(Member timed out.) 

5.04
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I convey condolences from the people of Kinkizi East constituency that I represent in this House and also the NRM people from Western Uganda, where I am the Vice-Chairperson, and Jacob was Vice-Chairperson for Northern Uganda. 

I came to know Jacob in 1990 during our university days, and since then, we have known each other and have worked closely, including in NRM as CEC members. When he became Deputy Speaker, I was also voted Parliamentary Commissioner, together with Hon. Okupa and others. We did a lot of good work in the Parliamentary Commission. 

One thing which used to puzzle us is that whenever we would be drawing a budget for the Commission, we would have to budget for how many Members of Parliament would die that year. It is very sad that Jacob is lying in a coffin here. We pray that nobody else comes here up to the end of this term. We would budget for four to five, but you would not know who would come next. Let us learn how to accept death; that this is a journey all of us have to take and we should always prepare ourselves. 

Jacob was known for many things. He was incorruptible and he never had interest in material wealth. He was honest and reliable. If you agreed on something, he would do it. He was resilient and he loved work. Can you imagine when he chaired Parliament in Kololo, when the budget was read, he had been operated the previous night? However, because of the love for work, he came to chair Parliament. 

I visited him in his home when he came from Dubai. He had been operated; we had a discussion about his health, but he wanted to come and chair Parliament. I said, “No, you first rest and recover.” He had big love for work and we salute him. 

May the good Lord receive him and rest his soul in eternal peace and comfort members of his family, particularly the children. Thank you very much.

5.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Hamson Obua): Madam Speaker, today’s special tribute motion in memory and honour of the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah reminds us, bit by bit, of the moments we individually and collectively had with him as a student leader, a lecturer at the Law Development Centre, a member of the Juba peace talks, a Member of Parliament, the NRM regional Vice-Chairperson for Northern Uganda, Deputy Speaker and Speaker of Parliament. 

During his lifetime, the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah demonstrated, with distinction, his natural human, political and professional prowess, expertise, capability and skills. He exuded perfection and served with precision. The Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, by all standards, was a very magnetic human being, inspiring and motivational. We will miss him. 

We will remember him as the Deputy Speaker and Speaker, who laid a strong legislative foundation on research, evidence-based submissions, evidence-based legislation, post and pre-legislative scrutiny. 

Madam Speaker, his slogan in the constituency was “dano pa dano.” Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, iweko wa oko, omina. inoto wa; ikelo wa karacel. We will miss you.

You ran a good –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Switch on the microphone and conclude your statement.

MR HAMSON OBUA: Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, wherever you may be, you fought a good fight, you finished your race. May the angels in heaven receive you and handover to you the crown of eternity. We will miss you but we will join you at the right time, one by one, when our time comes. Fare thee well, Jacob. Rest in perfect peace. Thank you. 

5.08
MS ANNA ADEKE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to pay homage to an astute leader whose precision, meticulous nature and style in executing assignments was highly impressive. 

Every time he took the international stage, he took it like it was his last and he did his best. I watched him speak at the UN and I could not have been prouder! That is how he held our flag high. He was so meticulous in everything he did. He wanted all his t’s crossed and i’s dotted. He had such high standards and he wanted quality work. 

The last time I spoke with him, we discussed the application of Article 91(3) and rule 125 of our Rules of Procedure. He stood very firm to maintain that the 30 days rule had not been adhered to and that we had not saved parliamentary business. In doing so, he stood by the law as it was. That is the leader lying before us. 

We must be predictable leaders who give confidence to the public that consumes our work. He was so hell-bent on rebranding our image as Parliament. Madam Speaker, his dream lives on in you. Continue to rebrand our Parliament as a people-centred Parliament that is going to make legislation and have debates that can change the lives of the common man. 

As he lies here today, he is promoted to glory and we pray that he is granted eternal rest and that the Lord Almighty will be merciful upon him, rest his soul in eternal peace and comfort his family. 

On my own behalf, on behalf of the people of Soroti District and the FDC, I convey sincere condolences. Thank you.

5.10
MS GORRETH NAMUGGA (NUP, Mawogola County South, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On my behalf, my family and the people of Mawogola County South, the greater Mateete, Ssembabule District, I extend my heartfelt condolences to the entire country and specifically to you, Madam Speaker, for losing a friend and a mentor. 

As new legislators, we have missed the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. In the book entitled, “256 Quotes from the Great Lawyer & Politician”, on page 30, under the chapter on economy, public resources and private sector, he said, “As we despair about how public resources are mismanaged in this country, there is hope that something can still happen in the right way”. 

Madam Speaker, we should stop extravagance in expenditure of public resources. The country is watching. We should stop the pretence. A lot needs to be done in this country called Uganda so that it thrives and the economy should be uplifted by us, the legislators. May we see Ugandans enjoy the country wholeheartedly. May the soul of the Rt Hon. Speaker, Jacob Oulanyah, rest in eternal peace. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us have the Member for Mukono and Hon. Jane Avur.

5.11
MR ABDALLAH KIWANUKA (NUP, Mukono County North, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I convey condolences -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Jane, stop disturbing the young man. 

MR KIWANUKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On my behalf and on behalf of the people of Mukono North, I extend condolences on the loss of the Rt Hon. Speaker, Jacob Oulanyah. 

I first learned about him in the year 2000, as an active advocate of time, rule of law and good governance in this country. Later on, he led a crusade of legal aid in the aftermath of the LRA war in the year 2000, where he provided legal aid to the people in Northern Uganda. He spearheaded the passing of the Administration of the Judiciary Act, which streamlined the administration of the Judiciary and its independence. 

The Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, from my interaction with him in the recent past, was strict on the applicability of the Rules of Procedure when transacting parliamentary business. 

I would like to submit that this country has been suffering in regard to the health sector. When I Googled the Seattle hospital, I found out that it is about 28 years old and it is the best south of the Atlantic –(Member timed out.) 

5.14
MS JANE PACUTO (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me, on behalf of the people of Pakwach and on my own behalf, to extend condolences to His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, the people of Uganda, the family of the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah and the institution of Parliament. 

I first met the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah way back when we were at university. We were together as students of economics and later, we joined Makerere Guild Representative Council (GRC), where the Rt Hon. Jacob served as the Speaker. He was the first Speaker I met in my life. 

I want to agree with the Member who said that the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah worked his way through leadership. As a student then, I was on the other side when we were campaigning. However, because of his eloquence, convincing and negotiation skills, I was compelled to join the Mao camp. Later on - I see Hon. Bwino here; he was on the GRC as well. 

That aside, the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was a very supportive leader. I joined the 10th Parliament about one year and seven months later. The first time I walked to the Deputy Speaker’s Office, I had a matter of national importance. I had studied how debate goes on in this House and I admittedly asked the Rt Hon. Speaker to guide me on the Floor, and indeed, he mentored me on how I should go about these matters. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was not a person of blame games. I recall when we were celebrating or marking the Anti-Corruption Week, Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah asked all Ugandans to examine ourselves as to who is not corrupt. That memory remains in my mind. If you are to live the legacy of the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, let us all re-examine ourselves as leaders in this country, so that we can live a mark in this country and our people can get the right service delivery. 

That is why he had asked us to debate on the Uganda we want. Madam Speaker, I pray that that debate will one day take place in honour of the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, go well and rest in peace. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. In the VIP gallery this afternoon, we have hon. Jovah Kamateeka, hon. Bernard Atiku, hon. Margaret Baba Diri, hon. Tete Chelangat, all former Members of Parliament. You are most welcome. We also have Mr Simon Opoka, the Deputy National Chairman; you are welcome. Thank you for joining us. 

5.18
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (Independent, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, it is really a sad moment for our country, Uganda. For my colleagues and the people of Omoro, on behalf of the people of Busia Municipality and Busia District at large, including our traditional leader, the Omwene’ngo, I would say we have lost a mentor and a political godfather. 

In Samia setting, it is said, when a godfather dies, he does not disappear but turns into flowers. I see Jacob has turned into flowers of kindness, love and joy.

It is very sad that at the time Uganda wanted you, you have gone. When a godfather turns into that, he becomes a messenger of the people he has left on earth to God. I am happy that you are now seated with our Father in heaven and I request you to plead for Uganda, for the high costs of commodities that are killing citizens of this country. 

Madam Speaker, at the same time, I request our beloved late Speaker, Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, to forgive sincerely the principals of NUP who encouraged their people to demonstrate when you were in the hospital in Seattle. Forgive them so that they know that what they did is bad and they should never repeat it –(Interjections) - We believe that too much democracy has spoilt this country – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Aisha, what is the point of order for?

MS KABANDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Is the honourable member in order – 

THE SPEAKER: If somebody is mourning and said you have killed my person, you do not interrupt that person. Please, continue.

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, as I summarise, I would like to say that the people who have done it are guilty. I pray that the soul of my beloved brother rests in eternal peace. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. By the way, I do not like that echoing; go and sit the other end. This Parliament belongs to all of us. Tomorrow, you will be in that position and you will leave this Parliament for other people who will come. So, let us live like we only have today to live. Hon. Patrick Oshabe –

5.21
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Condolences from Kigulu County South – 

THE SPEAKER: I thought you had gone away. Okay, hon. Muwuma and then hon. Patrick Oshabe. 

MR MUWUMA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Condolences from the people of Kigulu County South, Iganga District. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members who are fasting, we have organised dinner for you together with other Members. Feel free and go to the canteen because we are sleeping here. Hon. Milton Muwuma.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Condolences from the people of Kigulu County South, Iganga District. If you study the book of Exodus, the life of Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah can be equated to Prophet Moses; he had an assignment and a task to the deliver the 11th Parliament to the promised land. Unfortunately, his life was cut short. God has now zeroed on you to be the Joshua to carry forward the 11th Parliament to the promised land. 

As we pay condolences to him, I would like to say that he has been a team player. For the 10 years I was in this Parliament - that is from the Eighth or Ninth Parliament - I had never seen one sitting being chaired by two Speakers. However, because he was a team player, the day he was sworn in, there was a time one Order Paper was managed by two Speakers. This is the culture that you are carrying forward. I salute him for that and I thank you for carrying that legacy forward. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, when we invited the late to open the orientation workshop for the Members who subscribe to the Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Children, the Speaker tasked us to come up with a legislative agenda that will fight for the rights of the children of Uganda. As we send him off, I want to appeal to colleagues to join hands to ensure that we identify gaps in the existing laws that will protect the children of Uganda. The late Rt Hon. Speaker will rest in peace if we followed that trend. 

Madam Speaker, I pray for lenience on this one. His maiden visit to Busoga was on invitation for a memorial service of a former Member of Parliament, Hajjat Rehema Watongola. When he went there, he said the following: “You can never know that you have been sleeping until you wake up.” That was a call to the people and Members from Busoga subregion that, please, get united, stop bickering and quarrelling amongst yourselves, unite and we move forward. 

He made a commitment that any programme that is geared towards development of Busoga, he would always support it as long as he is seated on that chair. It is unfortunate that he is no longer there. Madam Speaker, we look at you for the programmes that will push forward Busoga subregion. I thank you. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

THE SPEAKER: I can comfortably pledge that we will support all the programmes that the late Rt Hon. Oulanyah was handling. We will do that in the whole country. Hon. Patrick Oshabe.

5.25
MR PATRICK OSHABE (NUP, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for – 

THE SPEAKER: Is the Chairman of Acholi Parliamentary Group here? 

MR OSHABE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity you have given me. May the soul of our dear Speaker rest in peace. 

When hon. Jacob Oulanyah chaired the first sitting here, he told us that he is not a vindictive person. When he talked to us, he said that he was ready to work with whoever supported him and those who never supported him, and that he was ready to work with everyone. 

He reminded me, Madam Speaker, about the 2016 elections when he stood for Deputy Speaker and you mobilised us to support Hon. Nsereko and I feared him most of the time. However, when I went to his office, when I had the matter of bringing in the law on local content, he welcomed me very well. Often, I thought he was a man that would not listen to me. However, when I brought the matter of local content, he said, “No, we are going to pass this one because it is very, very important for the people of Uganda.” 

In fact, when we brought the motion here asking for leave to bring a law on local content, Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, the Deputy Speaker then, never allowed debate. He said this was a law the people of Uganda needed. Recently, when he became Speaker, he told us to re-work on those laws. 

I was waiting for him, thinking that when he would come back, he would help us work on that law and we finish it because it remained somewhere. I am passionate about the matters of local content. I pray that that law on national local content is given opportunity in this House. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, he requested us to have a debate on the Uganda we want. I am just requesting - and I know you were around and you know it - that you please give us the opportunity, after his burial, to debate about the Uganda we want in memory of our Speaker.

5.28
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Bugiri Municipality, the Parliamentary Sports Club, the Muslim Parliamentary Caucus and on behalf of the Justice Forum Party where I am the whip, I extend my deepest condolences to you and the country upon the demise of Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah whom I have known since 1998. 

In 2006, and I mentioned it here in the 10th Parliament, that the late Jacob, the late Bamwoze and I were together on the taskforce of the late Hon. Aggrey Awori when he was campaigning to be President. When the body of the late Bamwoze was brought here and the President was there, Jacob was seated there and I reminded him of our times together.

In one of the sessions that he chaired, I had a disagreement with him over the interpretation of our Rules of Procedure. After the House, he invited me to his office and we disagreed on the interpretation. The following day, when he came on the Floor, in his communication he made reference to the fact that he had called me to his office, we had discussed and disagreed about the rules. He then directed the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to consider bringing proposals to amend the rules to clarify on the issue of business that had expired with the previous Parliament. The rules committee has not – I hope that we do that for the good of Jacob because he wanted it done. 

Finally, the Parliamentary Sports Club will miss the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. He was one of the goalkeepers. People have spoken about biking and the rest but Jacob was one of the goalkeepers; in fact, one of the pioneer goalkeepers of the Parliamentary Sports Club. When he stood in the goal with his giant towering figure, he would scare opponents. (Laughter) Those who played with him in the East African Parliamentary Games know it very well. That is an aspect that I want to be captured. Those who are profiling the history of Jacob should recall that he was a very good footballer and particularly that he was a very good goalkeeper for the Parliamentary Sports Club. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, President of JEEMA. Clerk, we should have the report from the rules committee in the next sitting.

5.31
MS BEATRICE AKORI (NRM, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Agago District and on my own behalf, allow me convey my heartfelt condolences to you, Madam Speaker, to the family and the country at large. 

The person lying before us here, the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, was a unifier. He was a peace-loving citizen. He was a mobiliser, whose legacy I see in you. You are a great mobiliser and you are giving us hope, but he was a unifier. 

In northern Uganda, as I speak, we are united because of Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, something which has never been there before. In the past, you would find Langi, Acholi, people from West Nile each on their own. Right now, as I stand on this Floor of Parliament, we are united because of his effort.

I call upon Ugandans, as we mourn our late Rt Hon. Speaker, to unite our country. Let us love one another. He showed us love and unity. Let us unite as a country; let us love one another. 

Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was a peacemaker. I remember he went to Juba for peace talks. Those days, in the company of his fellow – (Member timed out.)

5.33
MR MUHAMAD SSENTAYI (NRM, Bukoto County West, Lwengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I bring condolences from myself and the people of Bukoto West, Lwengo, to you, Madam Speaker, the President of the Republic of Uganda and the entire country, upon the demise of our Speaker, Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah.

The late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah will be remembered for so many things, but I will mention one. I am aware that in June 2015, the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah introduced and also promoted coffee growing as one of the cash crops in his region, in Omoro District and the Acholi subregion. He did so while being supported by the late Hon. Matthias Kasamba. It is so shocking that within a space of one year, we have lost two giants in as far as championing coffee growing is concerned. 

Today, and in the most recent weeks, we have seen a debate circulating all over the country about who is caring about the coffee industry. Over the weekend – (Member timed out.)

5.35
MR GYAVIIRA SSEMWANGA (NRM, Buyamba County, Rakai): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In the same way, allow me convey my condolences to the family of the late Hon. Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah, the Rt Hon. Speaker. I want this House to remember the late for two things. One, he respected those under him. He was our boss as Members of Parliament but whenever we looked for help, he would respect us. Two, he used to balance us here. I remember one day I was seated in the last row and was traveling in the evening to the Albertine region with the Committee on Physical Infrastructure; on the Order Paper, I was at the bottom and I had a question for oral answer. When I approached him, he gave me a chance to shine.

The late Hon. Jacob Oulanyah used to call us by name in a very soft way; that was a sign of welcoming us as Members of Parliament and we felt so loved and welcomed in this House. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

5.37
MS JACINTA ATUTO (NRM, Woman Representative Kapelebyong): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity to eulogise a gallant son of Uganda. I rise on behalf of the people of Kapelebyong and myself, to pay tribute to the Rt Hon. Speaker, Jacob Oulanyah.

He was a generous person who advocated for justice and fairness for all. He was also an icon for peace and unity in Uganda. I believe today, we shall miss the oratory skills and encyclopaedia in Hon. Jacob.

As we celebrate the life of this noble statesman, let us give God the Glory for so many good things that he did because today, most of you have attested to them.

It was a wonderful time and experience having worked with him when I was at the Parliamentary Pension Scheme and as an MP today. I pray that the good Lord grants solace to the entire family and to the people of Uganda. Fare thee well, Hon. Jacob Oulanyah.

5.39
MR HASHIM SULAIMAN (NRM, Nebbi Municipality, Nebbi): Thank you for this opportunity, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Nebbi Municipality and on my own behalf, I want to join my colleagues to sincerely condole with H.E. the President of the Republic of Uganda, the Parliament of Uganda, the people of Omoro, the children and the family of the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, upon the loss of our Speaker, Jacob Oulanyah.

I came to know Hon. Jacob Oulanyah as a humble person, down to earth, very accommodative, approachable, and a great timekeeper. I personally interacted a lot with the late on several occasions; notably, I remember in the 10th Parliament when he went to my constituency. He really impressed my people.

He especially excited them when he joined them during our traditional dance called Agwara. He went to the extent of playing the drum himself to the excitement of our people.

As our Vice-Chairman of the NRM in Northern Uganda, he outlined for us an elaborate development programme to undertake in the next five years for our region.

We know that God gives and takes as He wills. However, He has taken our Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah too soon when we needed him most. May the soul of our Speaker, Jacob Oulanyah, rest in peace.

5.41
MR ISAAC MODOI (NRM, Lutseshe County, Bududa): Madam Speaker, I come from a constituency where the wife of the late Hon. Oulanyah came from. The late has left a legacy; we must agree that ever since he departed, we have observed rare characteristics. There is a sense of forgiveness, apologies and at the same time hope.

You may realise that at the time of his death, a few people who were not content with some issues made remarks. You recall very well that the Chief Justice made an apology and from thereon, we have seen apologies and togetherness.

Unfortunately, both of them are not with us. He married from the family of Eng. Nangwale, who was a Member of Parliament. I recall at the function, he said that he had come to Bududa to get a wife who would stand with him. In fact, as we talk, they are watching us. I want to appeal to you that let us try to help that family. Let us not make emotional promises that we shall help the family and tomorrow these children have nowhere to go, then –(Member timed out.)

5.43
MR FRANCIS ADOME (NRM, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to start by appreciating all the Members for their extreme smartness in paying tribute to our fallen hero. 

I stand here on behalf of the Karamoja subregion to convey our sincere condolences. We have lost someone that we all looked up to. Karamoja region believed so much in the late and we pray that the leaders that are left will exhibit the same character by not only attending to the regions they come from but listening to the entire country, because the late honourable was a unifier and listened to problems from all over the country. May his soul rest in peace. Thank you.

5.45
Ms JANE BAINOMUGISHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to extend my sincere condolences, on behalf of Ibanda District and on behalf of myself, upon the demise of this gallant man of God. Very many things have been talked about Rt Hon. Oulanyah. Allow me to add my voice to my fellow colleagues. I have a lot of things to talk about Hon. Oulanyah, but I have one in my memory. 

When I was giving my maiden speech, Rt Hon. Oulanyah mentioned my district – I represent Ibanda District. I remember very well, in his voice, he said, “Ibanda District”. After I had submitted, he said, “Thank you very much, Jane”. So, I really remember that; it comes to my memory, and I really feel this man had the whole Parliament in his mind. For some of us, he even knew our names in the very few months that we were in this Parliament. 

A few months after I joined Parliament, I realised the Rt Hon. Speaker had Uganda in his heart because he was a man who supported socio-economic transformation. He liked development, unity and effective representation. I realised that those are the core principles and I put them at the forefront every time I am doing my leadership obligation.

Sincerely speaking, we shall live to emulate that good thing that he has done for us - nurturing us. Also, when he mentioned my name on the Floor of Parliament, he boosted my self-esteem and confidence as a woman. So, I really thank him so much. Remember that when Jesus died, he left us with the Holy Spirit. So, let us always pray for our Rt Hon. Speaker and we know now that the power of the Holy Spirit – (Member timed out.) 

5.47
MR GODFREY WAKOOLI (NRM, Butiru County, Manafwa): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Butiru and on my own behalf, allow me to extend my sincere condolences to the family, but also to you, Madam Speaker, and the country at large for the great loss of a great son of this country.

For us, the young legislators, and also the youth of this country, in the death of the Rt Hon. Speaker, the library has burnt down and we shall greatly miss him. I remember the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah during the campaigns for the speakership race. It was our first time to interact with hon. Jacob Oulanyah. 

Some of us were not on the side of the Rt Hon. Oulanyah but after the election of the Speaker, where he became the winner of that election, we had an issue as a Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs; we had visited Masaka City on a factfinding mission about the panga-wielding men. When we were trying to see if our report could be presented to this House, we went, as a committee, to interact with him and ask him why our report was not seeing the light of day. I remember how he handled the issue. Of course, we knew that perhaps, he had received the report but what he told the Members was, “I am going to handle your issue; only give me time. When I get the copy, I shall let you know.”

On behalf of the people of Butiru –(Member timed out)

5.49
MR BOSCO IKOJO (NRM, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In a special way, I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, for lifting our flag very high. On behalf of the people of Bukedea, I want to join the rest of the country and particularly this legislative House in praising the fallen Speaker of Parliament, the Rt Hon. Dr Oulanyah Jacob.

Dr Oulanyah was an icon of peace and unity, and we also understand he was a very good orator. He was a man who spoke with a lot of honesty and with boldness. I remember at one time, during that Anti-Corruption Week, the Rt Hon. Speaker Oulanyah said, “Mr President, we are all corrupt”. He said, “unless Africa makes a formal declaration - never again to corruption - the fight against the vice of corruption shall be in vain.”

Madam Speaker, the fallen hero, the Rt Hon. Speaker Oulanyah, was not a vindictive person. He was a person who respected processes. I remember, after the election of the Speaker, he called me to his office and said, “JB, who put you in that office? Let us work for our people.” He really had love for this country. 

Madam Speaker, we have lost a brain. We have lost one of the lights –(Member timed out)

5.51
MR SANON BWIIRE (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to sincerely send my condolences to the family, to you the Speaker, to the President and to my fellow Members of Parliament.

Madam Speaker, I am from a constituency called Bulamogi and I am not from Acholi. I was surprised that I became one of the few friends to the late, and this was way back in 2010, when he was the patron of our association of district speakers in Uganda. He could come and try to mentor the district speakers’ association. I really want to appeal to the office of the Speaker of Parliament to continue doing this because it was from there, when he used to speak to us, that we could pick the courage to contest and also become Members of Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, I had the opportunity to be with him in Dubai. One morning, he was meant to present a paper but he told us - the delegates he moved with - that we were going to speak to these people and we had to convince them that Uganda was more or less equal to Dubai. He said, “We are going to market our country and defend it.” I really saw a man who was focused and indeed, when he stood up to speak, he was comparing –(Member timed out)

5.54
MS OLIVER KOYEKYENGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. On my behalf and on behalf of the people of Buhweju, allow me to convey my condolences to you, Madam Speaker, to the President of the Republic of Uganda, the family of late Jacob Oulanyah and the people of Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, we are grieving because we have lost a great leader with rare character. I came in the middle of the term in a by-election and I remember we had an issue in my district of understaffing in health centres. I ran to the office of the Deputy Speaker and told him about my problem. To him, that was an emergency because women were dying while giving birth. When I talked, he was like, “This is an emergency.” He called the line minister and told him to make sure that they work on the issue of Buhweju. That was among the many factors that brought me back to the Parliament of Uganda. His humanity was exceptional. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to remember the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. One day, he was seated in that Chair and we were discussing the issue of Nodding Syndrome in northern Uganda –(Member timed out.) 

5.56
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On my own behalf and on behalf of the people of Adjumani District, I convey sincere condolences to the family, to you Rt Hon. Speaker, to our Head of State and to the whole country. 

Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was a man of intellectual authority. He had the knowledge that everybody wished to have. His presence brought hope and a smile. He was very humble and jolly with a forgiving heart. 

I want to thank the family that gave us the late Rt Hon. Speaker. He was very patriotic, nationalistic and reliable. I would like to say one thing; our colleague, who is lying before us, helped us when we had problems, especially health challenges where one had to be treated in or outside the country. In my culture, when an elder falls sick, you have to respect them. Therefore, we needed to do the same for the late Rt Hon. Speaker. 

At this point, I want to thank the Head of State, the Rt Hon. Speaker and her team that ensured our brother was –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ababiku is from Apaa and the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was the chairperson of the committee that investigated the Apaa boundary dispute in Amuru and Adjumani districts.

MS ABABIKU: He did it for us. If he did it for other colleagues, know that he did it for you. Therefore, this is my appreciation to you, Rt Hon. Speaker, and the Head of State for having flown our dear brother out of the country for better management. Let us respect that. 

Madam Speaker, as people of northern Uganda, our unifier is lying here. He tried his best but the journey is not over. The question is: How best can we finish this journey? My brother, may your soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us have Hon. Avako and Hon. Emigu. I am going to the ministers next. Kindly, bear with me.

5.59
MS MELSA AVAKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Madam Speaker, I thank you so much for the opportunity. On behalf of the people of Yumbe District and on my own behalf, I convey sincere and heartfelt condolences to Parliament of Uganda, His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, the family, and the country at large. 

Madam Speaker, I was fortunate enough to work closely with the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. Whenever we met him, we were struck by both the force of his personality and the quality of his intellect. He was a father indeed. As many have said, he would call us by name and he identified with us. We feel we have lost a father. 

Many times, he said to Ugandans, “We must never tire; we must not give up; we must persist.” His legacy will stand as an example for all of us to pursue our progress. May Almighty Allah reward him with paradise. We shall miss him. Thank you. 

6.01
MR JULIUS EMIGU (FDC, Ochero County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The people of Ochero County in Kaberamaido District speak a fairly similar dialect with that of the late Rt Hon. Oulanyah. In that case, they treat the people of Rt Hon. Oulanyah as their own. Actually, when they heard of his sickness and his eventual death, it pained them up to their bone marrow. I would like, on behalf of the people of Ochero and my own behalf, to commiserate with the Parliament, the immediate family of Rt Hon. Oulanyah, and the whole of Acholiland. 

When I joined Makerere University, I found dust that had been raised in Makerere and it was trying to settle down - the Mao government, in which Rt Hon. Oulanyah was the Guild Speaker. I got to know him suddenly when I saw him. I did not know the whole team, but his oratory skills were so special. He was intelligent and all the attributes that people have talked about him were really great, but Oulanyah did not brag about any of them. He was simple and he remained humble.  

Madam Speaker, after I finished Makerere and disappeared for about seven years, I bumped into Rt Hon. Oulanyah again in the UPC circles, when I was trying to look for political belonging. However, things did not work out in the UPC and I eventually settled in FDC, where I am today. 

When I joined this 11th Parliament, Rt Hon. Oulanyah was elected as Speaker of this Parliament and I thought I was going to benefit from his guidance, experience and intelligence. Unfortunately, death has betrayed us. 

Jacob, for the great things that you have done on earth, I would like to pray that they inspire us to emulate you. I would like to ask God to have mercy upon your soul and protect your family. Rest in peace, brother. Thank you. 

6.04
MS CHRISTINE NDIWALANA (NUP, Bukomansimbi North County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Bukomansimbi North County, I wish to convey a condolence message to the people of the Republic of Uganda and Members of Parliament at large. 

The late used to respect the culture and norms of this country. I, therefore, stand here to beg you to follow that trend and allow us, the mourners, to view the body of the late Rt Hon. Speaker before any proceedings again. 

Secondly, the people of Bukomansimbi have been very inquisitive about the cause of death of the late Rt Hon. Speaker Oulanyah. Now that the Minister of Health has given us an elaborate medical report concerning the cause of death of the Rt Hon. Speaker Oulanyah, at least we have confidence about what we are going to say when we meet our people. We have been carrying the burden on our heads thinking of what to explain to them. They have been asking us about what killed our Speaker. 

I, therefore, thank the minister and I ask her to continue with that spirit. She should also go to the media, especially CBS, which is well listened to by the people of Bukomansimbi, and continue to narrate the cause of death –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much, but I am also not sure whether the Rt Hon. Oulanyah is the only person who has died of recent. I am happy you appreciate what the minister said; I also know that you trust me. I viewed the body on behalf of Parliament. I did view the body yesterday and dressed him in the Parliament attire, on your behalf. 

6.06
MS MARGARET MAKHOHA (Independent, Woman Representative, Namayingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. On behalf of the people of Namayingo and on my own behalf, allow me extend our heartfelt condolences to the family of the late.

I am the Chairperson, Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Children, and the late had been our patron. We shall surely miss the man who had been our mentor and opened his door widely when it came to issues of children. 

The late has been an advocate for and lover of children. He would be available whenever we went to consult him on anything concerning children. I remember, vividly, when we invited him when we had the orientation programme for the new Members of the 11th Parliament. 

We narrated all the challenges that children go through in this country. Because he was results-oriented, he challenged us to stop adding another chapter of “Lamentations” when it came to issues of children, but rather open up a new chapter of “Acts” of the 11th Parliament when it comes to issues of children. 

We shall remember him for that. Indeed, we have come up with a draft of the legislative agenda about issues of children. I want to request you, Madam Speaker, that you open your door for us as a forum -(Member timed out.)

6.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (DEFENCE) (Mr Jacob Oboth): Madam Speaker, it is definitely hard for me, and many of us, to pay tribute and speak about Jacob Oulanyah. Allow me say that we did not only share the name Jacob, which he was very fond of, but we shared many things in common. His death is a great loss to this Parliament. His death, to this country, is unprecedented.

The mysteries of death and life are only known to God but for the vision that you, Rt Hon. Oulanyah had, I pray that as we bury you on Friday, your visions may not be buried. I pray that as we bury your legs, the mission and destiny may not be buried; and that as we bury your head, the ideas you had will not be buried. 

You had a passion for ubuntu. You were a great speaker about ubuntu because you were omuntu. You spoke for all of us. You accepted all of us. You inspired all of us. 

Madam Speaker, a great Speaker makes great Members of Parliament, and great Members of Parliament also make a great Speaker.

I ask us that we should not compare the Speaker we have with the Speaker that is past. We need to support the Speaker, who is there, as a different person. Oulanyah was a different brand. Nobody will ever be Oulanyah in this House; do not even try to be him. 

Jacob, you knew me, I knew you. There are things that we can never talk about. You knew my home I knew your home. You knew my children; I knew your children. The journey you are taking, none of us will miss. We are going to follow suit. May God lead you.

THE SPEAKER: Amen. Let us have Hon. Bwino and then the Chairman Busoga Parliamentary Group. I am now going to parliamentary groups.

6.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Mr Fred Bwino): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. Allow me to convey my condolences to the family of our departed hero. Allow me, also, to convey condolences to the House, the other arms of Government and the nation. 

Many people have spoken about our fallen brother. All I can say is that our brother lying here now was a man of very many good attributes. I concur and associate with all that has been said about him. I only request that you allow me to elaborate on just a few of his attributes. 

I am among those few Members of Parliament who served with our late friend in the Makerere University Guild Representative Council. I was a member of that students’ parliament and also a member of the executive, led by Hon. Norbert Mao. 

At the peak of our service, we had a bad incident on what is now known as the “Black Monday”. I have a very vivid memory of Jacob Oulanyah leaving his hall of residence – Mitchell Hall – and moving up to Freedom Square, very energetic and wearing his red gown. All of a sudden, things became dramatic and bullets started flying. I was a few metres away from him. I saw him falling down. 

The lesson I want to pick from this is that much as he went through terrible pain, he was not vindictive and did not carry grudges. At the time of his demise, he was part of the NRM. 

As leaders, we must emulate him. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Chairman Busoga -

6.15
MR IDDI ISABIRYE (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to pay tribute to the fallen giant, the lover of peace and reconciliation.

I came to know the late Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah in 2011. I supported him to become the Deputy Speaker of Parliament and we served together. I did not make it to the 10th Parliament. I came back later and here we are. 

The giant lying before us here had committed to reconcile the entire Parliament and the messages that he used to give were full of reconciliation. Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was a friendly person. How I wish he was here today, to see how Members of Parliament are dressed. I would look at him smile because of the way we are dressed. 

Madam Speaker, we shall miss Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. He was a very simple man, down to the earth. He would call me brother. He was a person who would love to make sure that his work is accomplished. He loved delegation, one of the principles of management. 

The last public appearance of Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was in Busoga region. Throughout his message, he called upon the people of Uganda and wished that everyone should be given a chance to breathe. If I can quote him, he said, “The people of Busoga and Uganda, welcome to breathing.” It is very unfortunate that today, Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah is not breathing. He wished everyone could breathe. That was him! Today, he is no longer breathing. 

We want to ask Allah, the sustainer of peace and love, to always remain with us. May his soul rest in peace.

6.18
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me this opportunity to pay tribute to our great hero, the giant of Omoro County. I am here to convey condolences from the people of Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga, and from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development over this big loss.

I have been here over the last 11 years and I have enjoyed that time with the late Jacob, who taught me a lot of things, especially on matters relating to budgeting in Parliament. In fact, much of the jargon I use here I learnt from him over the last 10 years, when I was presiding over the Budget Committee for eight years. 

The last time I had a very close encounter with him, or close association with him, was when he presided over the House to read this year’s national budget. Indeed, that was his first budget he presided over as Speaker of this Parliament. I enjoyed the opportunity, where he read the letter, appointing me to read the national budget. I really enjoyed that opportunity. 

Indeed, I recall very well that was the time when I had also just recovered from Nairobi Hospital, where I had been over the last one and a half months after being in Mulago for two and a half months. So, I almost went through a similar experience, save for the fact that I did not come to lie in Parliament. So, I learnt a lot of things - that God remains God. This House should become a living example in respecting God. 

Madam Speaker, I want to move because a lot has already been said about the late. Many of us go to church every Sunday and on other days, we go to mosques, but one thing that we do not do in this country is to recognise God by way of tithing to him. As an institution of Parliament and indeed, the various MDAs of Government, I am proposing in memory of the great Speaker that we create in our charter of accounts, a code where institutions should tithe for God, because it is really God that gives and takes away, and you never know when this comes. 

When I was in Mulago for two and a half months, I saw very big people dying and I was there also struggling for my life, but I managed to survive. Others die and nobody has control over this. Now, why wouldn’t we recognise this great Creator that has all the authority over all living and non-living things? 

Madam Speaker, at the right time, I want to move that as a House, we create that charter of accounts, where a country tithes to God. I have seen this in countries like Malaysia; they actually include in their budgets provisions for taking care of religious institutions like mosques. They make that provision. Why don’t we have such provisions? We have provisions for building schools and we have provisions for doing this and that, but we have no provision for rewarding God for keeping us alive.

A lot has already been said, so I really take this as a great opportunity, having worked with the late Jacob Oulanyah. It is very unfortunate that he opened an opportunity for me to read the budget, but I was the same person that moved a motion on statutory revision for his burial. I think you can appreciate that God has his ways for all of us and you can never know. That is why we need to prepare ourselves well and we need to respect God because He is a giver. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

6.24
THE MINISTER FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I go further, allow me to make a brief report to you; I have just come back from Tanzania where we had a sectoral council for defence ministers for the East African Community. 

In her wisdom, our Rt Hon. Speaker arranged a photograph of our deceased Speaker, Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, in the East African Council Hall. What happened is that all the ministers and their delegations lined up to sign the condolence book, yet it was not announced. Everybody saw the photograph and went there. We had to line up to sign that book. This means that all of you who have said that this man has lifted our flag high, spoke the truth. I saw it myself. It was very evident that everybody respected this man not only here, but also in the region at large. I wanted to report to you and thank you for organising such. 

This man has given us a lot of pride. I would like to condole with you, Madam Speaker, and all the Members who are here, and of course subscribe to what you have said about our brother. All these values you have mentioned here are right. 

I would like to say that when we are leaders here, we have divided loyalty because the higher you go, the more burdens you carry. It is not easy for a Speaker or an MP who is a chairman of a committee to be able to serve here, be loyal to the post he has gained here and also be loyal on the ground. 

When I was Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah took me to his constituency to establish coffee growing. This was not only in Omoro District but in the whole northern region. He wished his people well. He wanted his people to get rich. 

Again, he came back and said, “No, as Ministry of Agriculture, you have land in Omoro; our people are poor, we need this land to construct the district headquarters of Omoro”. He did not mention this anywhere. He did not organise a party. We consulted the President and he allowed us to get this land for Omoro people. Nobody would ever know since he did not celebrate it. However, now I want to mention it. All these were achieved by him. When you go to Omoro, the land on which the district headquarters is, you will see, was a result of the efforts of the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. 

I would like to thank the President and you, Madam Speaker, for what you did to try to save the life of our brother. But God decided as we see today. I would like to condole with you all and wish that the good Lord rests our brother in peace. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Can I have Hon. Cecilia Ogwal for Lango Parliamentary Group? (Interjections) We have a pending motion that we need to clarify, that is why I want us to listen to Hon. Ogwal. 

6.29
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I am not a member of the executive of Lango Parliamentary Group, but I am speaking as one of the members. 

The short time you have given us is good enough because if all the 500 of us say something, we would have summarised the life of Jacob. I would not have to speak about the Jacob I knew in a session. We would need some kind of guiding notes to guide us on who Jacob really was. 

Jacob never forgot his humble beginnings. Wherever he was, he always remembered his humble beginnings. He always spoke for the vulnerable, for the poor, and he always did something for the rural poor. 

Secondly, Jacob always reminded me about what our master teacher, the late Milton Obote, used to tell us. We are very few cadres of Obote left. Hon Ben Wacha is still around, and the Katuntus had to learn from me because they were too young. Obote used to say, “do not judge us by history, judge us by the difference between realism and legalism.” If there are mistakes that were there or if he was confronted, he always wanted to make sure legalism guided his final decision. 

Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah has left a giant footprint in the politics of Uganda and I would want Ugandans to write it in their hearts. I know that the people of Lango, the people of Acholi, particularly the warriors, fought and died and many of them had their homes and granaries torched, in order to protect the life of Buganda and the Kabaka and Omukama of Bunyoro. That alone - together with the life of Rwot Awich - should bind us naturally. 

Nobody should speak any other language other than uniting the people of Uganda. This is because while the Baganda were denouncing their king, the Langi were ready to die to protect the King of Buganda. That spirit should be kept alive. Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah never forgot about it. I am very happy where we are going to bury is where Rwot Awich comes from, where Lokech comes from, and it is something which we must resurrect in our politics.

I would like to say my son, Jacob Oulanyah, you have made an impact in the politics of Uganda. Let us never forget. Do not just recruit cadres; recruit cadres, build them up and help them. Do not just use someone at the time the person is most needed. 

There are so many women who have come up in politics. The moment they lose an election, they are lost. Even Oulanyah, when he lost an election, he had to struggle on his own. It so happened at that time he lost his wife, lost his mother and he had no job. That should have been the time to prove that they valued that particular cadre from the UPC.  What I am saying is that in case you poach again from any other party, please look after them in hard times and in good times. May God bless you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Have you since dropped your motion? Dr Aceng is here to respond to your motion. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, you know I am a coward. The moment I hear people whistling, it means time is going or things should be done differently. 

I had already introduced the motion. I move this motion under rule 59(1)(k) and 61. I would like to thank the Vice-President for this motion, seconded by the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business. It is good for us to talk about the Rt Hon. Oulanyah, but it is my wish and the wish of the 529 of us that this painful death do leave an impact.

I amend the prayer of the motion to include that I urge the Government of Uganda to urgently acquire the Positron Emission Tomography (PET) to facilitate the Uganda Cancer Institute in early detection and diagnosis of cancer.

This is the prayer I would like to add to the prayers which have already been listed in the motion, which Her Excellency the Vice-President moved. I beg to move and the motion has been seconded by Hon. Sarah Opendi and Hon. Rosemary Nyakikongoro. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I am not sure whether we have reached that level of secondment. Can we first hear from the minister, because we may be talking about a machine that we already have?

DR ACENG: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for a second opportunity. I appreciate my mother, Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, who is always concerned about health, and indeed the entire House.  

This financial year, Parliament appropriated Shs 45 billion to procure a Positron Emission Tomography (PET) scan for the Uganda Cancer Institute and the contract was signed yesterday. We shall have the PET scan.

In addition, this Parliament appropriated money to construct a nuclear medicine unit, which will not only have the PET scan, the linear accelerator but also be able to offer other treatments, including the type that we were seeking for in Seattle.

Allow me, on behalf of the Ministry of Health, to appreciate this Parliament and for the opportunity to provide the information. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, you have heard; we had already given money for the same. What we would want to know is how long it will take for the machine to be operational.

MS OGWAL: She has given me information and I would like to respond. I want to thank you for the information. However, we have lived with this crisis for years and it is strange to my ears and to this institution of Parliament to hear that the contract for the purchase of this very important equipment, which you only find in Aga Khan in Nairobi, was signed yesterday.

The institution of Parliament - and I insist that our prayer will remain in our resolution and we will have to give a timeline that the ministry and Government should assure us when this machine will be operational. As far as we are concerned, our prayer remains and the motion is on the Floor and has been seconded. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: There is information from Dr Ayume, the chairman of the Committee on Health. 

DR AYUME: Madam Speaker, I am the chairman of the Committee on Health. I want to get clarity. The treatment of cancer is beyond these wonderful machines we are talking about. We heard that there were issues to do with blood transfusion, where our departed Speaker was being transfused every day. This financial year, no money was appropriated for regional blood banks in Moroto and Hoima. We have a shortfall of 150,000 units of blood. 

So, the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development who is here, can we please have the right money appropriated for the regional blood banks so that we can cover this shortfall, and the 109 ambulances we are asking for? These machines are just a drop in the ocean.

THE SPEAKER: Can we first resolve the issue of the PET machine? I thought that the information you were giving us was on the PET machine.

DR AYUME: Madam Speaker, in addition to the information the minister was giving to us, there are more things that we require besides the PET machine. 

THE SPEAKER: We are in the budgeting process, please do budget for whatever is required. We need blood in all the regional hospitals. 

DR AYUME: We peeped into the policy statements and some of these things were not budgeted for. Thank you.

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, it is very painful to counter it but in view of the information given that this is already a process ongoing, I am wondering how Mama wants us to proceed with that motion, and there should be no motion that would be - 

THE SPEAKER: It is an amendment to the motion.

MR OBOTH: Yes, it is an amendment but I think Mama could modify on the timeframe, now that she knows that this is being procured and the Minister of Health is here. I am just seeking her indulgence not to insist on a substantive motion to amend, but help us process on the timeframe so that Government can be urged to fast-track.

THE SPEAKER: We need to fast-track the process.

MS OGWAL: He is bringing an amendment to an amendment in which case I can say, yes, we can insist that it is done in the immediate term and let Government tell me their interpretation of “immediate term”. My interpretation of the immediate term would be six months, but let them tell me their interpretation of “immediate term”. However, I would wish that the equipment be acquired and arrive in this country to assist us within the next -

THE SPEAKER: When you talk about acquiring the equipment, then you are affecting Article 93. Since we are saying the procurement process has started, what we need to tell the minister is to come and present to this House, say after two months, how far they have gone.

In the next sitting, the minister should come and lay on the Table the agreement that they signed with the other institution. It does not necessitate us to include it in the motion.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I think it is still important that we include that within two months, the minister should update us about the acquisition of the PET equipment.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, update us in two months’ time on how far you have gone with the machine. It does not necessarily require an amendment of the motion.

DR ACENG: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

6.44
MS CATHELINE NDAMIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to join the rest of Ugandans to mourn our gallant son, the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. It is so sad that we have lost him. 

Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah was not from Kigezi, but if we were given the opportunity, we would take him up if he was not from a very prominent clan. He was as bold as the Bakiga. I remember a time I visited his office and tried to imitate - you know, when a lady enters a big office - I started looking up and down but the late Rt Hon. Speaker asked me, “Catherine, I thought you are a Mukiga; why can’t you be bold enough?” 

I stood firm and told him “Rt Hon. Speaker, the women in Kabale who give birth to premature children have lost them all because of lack of incubators.” He laughed and –(Member timed out.)

 6.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE VICE-PRESIDENT (Ms Diana Mutasingwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here with sadness to convey my sincere condolences from the people of Buikwe to all Ugandans and the family of the beloved Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. 

It is very unfortunate that I, and some new honourable colleagues here in the august House, never had enough opportunity to enjoy the short-lived tenure of Rt Hon. Oulanyah. However, in the few months I interacted with him, it was as if I had known him for long. He was very humorous, straightforward, approachable and his honest character is what we shall miss. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to thank His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda and you, Rt Hon. Speaker, for doing your best to fight for the life of Rt Hon. Oulanyah by offering high-level treatment and care. However, God overpowered us and took him away because He wants eligible people like Rt Hon. Oulanyah for His special assignments.

I call upon Ugandans, and in particular my fellow leaders at different levels, to emulate the good deeds of Rt Hon. Oulanyah. It is the only reward we can give to him. 

To the family and relatives of Rt Hon. Oulanyah, please, put all your trust in the Lord because He is the giver of life. He gives and He takes. Please, let us all keep his legacy alive. (Member timed out.)

6.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (ECONOMIC MONITORING) (Mr Peter Ogwang): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Ngariam County, Katakwi District, I stand here to pay tribute to my friend, boss and brother for the time I have been with him since the Ninth Parliament. 

Most of us have given good messages about the late. I only want to remind you of the following attributes of the late, who is lying before us. Madam Speaker, the late was a God-fearing person for the time I came to know him. Like you have all said, the late was a good Speaker. The late was a good timekeeper. The late loved his culture. The late was a peacemaker. The late was corrupt-free. The late was an honest person. The late was a hard worker. He was a dependable and reliable friend.

The late loved details and this is where - Madam Speaker, I want to request for your indulgence and time. The time I spent closely with the late, one thing he liked most was his dress code. All of you here can attest to that. His dress code was matched with the brain. The late was an intelligent person. If you gave him a speech, he would read it and be able to internalise and explain to the audience what he was going to speak. That is the person lying before us here. 

I also want to put this on record: We had tough times in the 10th Parliament. If I do not say this here, then I will not be honest to my friend, who is lying before me here. As Members of the Parliamentary Commission – I am happy Hon. Cecilia Ogwal is here. Most times, Hon. Cecilia Ogwal was a peacemaker. I want to ask if there is anyone of us here whom the late wronged to forgive him. I request this as a friend. 

Whenever the late had an issue concerning anyone of us here, he would always try to speak to that person. However, there were moments when he failed. I want to thank you, Hon. Cecilia Ogwal. You stood for him at all times. Whenever he would break down, you were there for him. Thank you very much for being a great mother and friend to the late Rt Hon. Oulanyah.

As I conclude, what do we learn from his demise? Friends, I have heard all of us today giving the best messages about the late Rt Hon. Oulanyah. The question remains: What have we learnt from him? We have kept on referring to the Nobert Maos, Ben Wachas and Wandera Ogalos; what do you ask of ourselves today – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, do we have consistency? Do we keep our friends? Are we reliable? Do we have integrity? I know that is what Hon. Peter Ogwang wanted to mention. Can I have Teso Parliamentary Group? Where is the chairperson? He went. Can I have Buganda?  

6.53
MR GEOFREY KAYEMBA-SOLO (NUP, Bukomansimbi South County, Bukomansimbi): Madam Speaker, thank you for giving me an opportunity to represent the Buganda Parliamentary Caucus. On behalf of Buganda and the people we represent here, we send our condolences to the family, the Parliament of Uganda and the nation at large for losing such a great man. His love and respect for culture is undisputed.

On behalf of the Buganda Kingdom Parliamentary Caucus, we have been demanding ebyaffe - our properties that were taken away by the central Government – and Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah helped. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, we would like to request you to go ahead so that the great Buganda Kingdom can become great and big again by getting back its property and portions. I beg to submit. Rest in power, Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. 

6.55
MR WILLIAM CHEMONGES (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Madam Speaker, allow me to pay tribute and condole with you on behalf of the people of Kween. I bring condolences from the entire Sebei region to the Parliament of Uganda - 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Julie, you will speak after Hon. Chemonges so that you take the baby home.  

MR CHEMONGES: Madam Speaker, receive condolences from the entire Sebei region to the Parliament of Uganda, the people of the North and the family of the late Rt Hon. Speaker, Jacob Oulanyah. The entire community of Sebei is very much aware of all the good that has been spoken about the late. In fact, there is no doubt that it is hard to find someone that can match what the late had. We cannot continue lamenting because with life, it is only God that gives and takes. For now, we all pray that the soul of the late rests in eternal peace. 

6.57 
MS JULIET KINYAMATAMA (Independent, Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to extend my sincere condolences to the family of the late, the people of Omoro and Uganda at large. 

The late Rt Hon. Speaker was an international icon and Uganda was blessed to have him. He was a Pan-Africanist and very patriotic. I had the opportunity of sharing closely with him while we were at the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly. Whenever we had tough motions to be voted on, they consulted Uganda first – Africa consulted Uganda, the Caribbean would consult Uganda. Whenever Uganda was up to something, led by the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, that motion would pass. He would, first of all, consult the interests of his country and Africa. We have lost a library for Africa and Uganda. 

The Rt Hon. Speaker was a very straightforward person. Whether you liked it or not, he would tell you the truth. He was a man of his word. I am very sure that all of us here would take it in whenever he would tell us something. He would fulfil and keep his word, which meant he was not a politician but a leader. He was someone who –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have been here from 10.00 a.m. and it is now 7.00 p.m. Can I have the dean of UPDF -Members, please, take your seats. 

7.00
COL CHARITY BAINABABO (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to commiserate with you, the President of the Republic of Uganda and people of Uganda over this great loss. 

As the UPDF, we have lost a great comrade. He stood with us and was counted when we were pursuing peace in northern Uganda. We shall miss him for that. 

As a person, I have lost a mentor. One day, I stood up to catch the eye of the Speaker, when we had just come in. Indeed, I caught his eye but the eye told me to sit down and keep quiet because I was going to speak on matters that were not in my line. When I met him with you, Madam Speaker, he gave me a very quick and firm lesson on what I should and should not say as a non-partisan Member of Parliament. I will miss him for that. 

To the family of the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, may the good Lord comfort you and may the soul of Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah rest in eternal peace. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let us have honourable minister, Harriet Ntabazi. She has been here since 9.00 a.m. Muslim Members, please, first go and break your fast. Do you, Members, want to sit here until 10.00 p.m.? You know I can do it. 

7.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Ms Harriet Ntabazi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for allowing me to give my presentation. 

On behalf of the people of Bundibugyo, Rwenzori region and the ministry where I serve, I would like to extend my condolences to the family, Parliament and the nation at large. 

Madam Speaker, I happen to be a member of the organising committee and I travelled to Omoro. I interacted with the community of Omoro; they loved their leader. It was also proved that Rt Hon. Jacob loved his community. 

I have only two issues to present. One of which is that you told us – and we agreed with you – that this Parliament is going to father and mother the children of Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. He had a dream, which we shall find on the ground when we go. He had constructed a very big facility, which had not yet reached its completion. When we looked at the budget for the completion of this project, it would take us Shs 2 billion. When you look at the young family that the Rt Hon. Speaker has left behind, if we do not come in as Government, his dream will not be realised. I beg you, through this Parliament, to engage the Executive so that we take this on as a project of Government. 

Secondly, I want to thank the Members of Parliament; the spirit and smartness that we have really shown today is incredible. This is emulated from the smartness that the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah showed the country. 

As a leader, there are positions that need smartness. There are positions where you cannot just get out, pick any type of cloth and put it on. Jacob showed us a picture of a true leader. If you are a CEO, minister, or a Member of Parliament and you are just wearing whatever you want, please, it is time to change. Let us show credibility like what the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah has shown us. Thank you so much. May God bless you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much. I am also happy that you are a member of the Executive; you can raise that issue while in Cabinet. Ours remains on the education of the children. You can raise that with the Executive because some of us do not go there. Can we hear from the Chairman, Acholi Parliamentary Group -(Interjection)– Hon. Akol, have you spoken?

7.06
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, I do not know where people saw me speaking.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are supposed to go to Acholi and this is the person supposed to receive us. So, we want to hear from him. Maybe he has a vote of thanks to the Members of Parliament. You have done a lot to make sure Jacob’s body returns home and he is lying there. So, we want to hear from the owners. 

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, let me take this time to first thank the Almighty God for giving us the late Rt Hon. Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah. 

Let me also take this opportunity to thank his father, Mzee Nathan Okori, for taking care of him to the level that the country can recognise that there is somebody who was raised from Acholi subregion, and who has done a lot for this country. Let us thank Mzee Nathan Okori. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, it has not been a simple period from the time we heard about the sickness of the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. You will remember that many Ugandans killed him even before he was dead. You would wake up in the morning and see a tweet, or people posting on social media that he is dead; this is a shame to the country. 

I remember when he first got sick and returned to the country after treatment, he said, “If you hear that somebody is sick, your task should be to pray for the person”.  This should be a shame to the country; if anybody has been doing that, they should pray to God for forgiveness.
 
We have forgiven those who were marching and talking about his being in that hospital - even when they come back to Uganda - although I think they need to pray to the Almighty God to forgive them. This country deserves better people; we deserve unity in the country. Irrespective of where we come from, it is very important that we respect each other in this country. 

Madam Speaker, from the time the first person spoke to the last one before I took the Floor, I have been listening very carefully; I have not heard anybody talk about how much money the late Jacob Oulanyah left in this world or what kind of building he left. What lessons can we take from that? The lesson is that you need to have a good relationship with people - what we call the community wave. 

How do you relate with the people in this world, irrespective of the kind of money you have or the many buildings you have in this world? How do you relate with the people? Spiritually, how do you relate with your God? How is God guiding you in this world? That is a key issue that we should pick from the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. He did not concentrate his life on building wealth but building spiritual wealth, community wealth and relationships with people. 

Madam Speaker, we are getting late but I have a lot to speak about. However, I think I will say other things in Omoro. Nevertheless, I have to ask people to read a book I have been quoting. There is a man called Robin Sharma who wrote a book titled, “Who Will Cry When You Die?” 

That book will tell you that the day you were born, people laughed while you cried. The day you die, that is when people will cry for you when you are laughing. Jacob is laughing at us because he has done his part in this world. 

However, the advantage we have in the culture of the Luo and Africans as a whole is that when one dies after they have had children, they are not dead; they are alive. We have hope in the children he has left behind and we know they will one time shine in the country. 

Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, go with the blessing from this country. Let the Almighty God receive you in heaven. We pray all this in the name of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit. Amen.

7.12
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Independent, Kasilo County Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: The session was meant to stop at 6.00 p.m. Yes, there is a motion.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, on behalf of the people of Kasilo County who I represent here and the people of Teso at large, I want to pass my condolences to the family especially to the children, the country and Parliament. 

On the onset, I want to thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank you and Hon. Peter Ogwang, in a special way. Our brother, the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, possibly would have died much earlier. However, it was because of what you and Hon. Peter Ogwang did - you decided to drive to the late’s home, you did not even allow your bodyguards to be with you, and picked and took him to Mulago at that time. I want to thank you and Hon. Peter Ogwang for what you did.

I had known Jacob for quite some time. We met in UPC and married from the same place. The day I lost my wife, I was with Jacob when I received the bad news in 2002. He was the first person to comfort and console me. Forever, I am grateful for what he did. Little did I know a few years after, the same would befall him. 

In Parliament, I remember the debate we had here on Uganda Commercial Bank. This was one of the debates, where the country got to know who Jacob was - his eloquence and smartness. When we served in the Commission with hon. Chris Baryomunsi, there were issues. The role I played with hon. Baryomunsi had to make us move forward. We cannot forget how we were able to move forward. 

I would like to thank the Commission at that time. Whatever Jacob did, he did it to perfection, whether in smartness, in law, debate, dancing and singing, football and boxing; he did it to perfection. How I wish we would learn to do that. 

It reminded me what his son told us the other day at the vigil that he told them, “My children, focus your eyes on what you want to be and you will become that.” At that time, when we were here in the Seventh Parliament, hon. Odonga-Otto and I were in his house when he had just bought that place and the construction was going on. He took us to the balcony and said, “I am praying that one time, I will be addressing the people of Acholi, the Bwola dancers down there and the Chief Justice of this country.” That was his ambition at that time. Maybe, if he had lived, you would even become the Chief Justice. He was always focused on what he wanted to be. 

When it came to humour, you could not beat Jacob, and you all know that in this Parliament. The recent one was when we had issues with hon. Ssemujju and Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Jim Muhwezi. You all know how he handled it. The other one, which I will not go into detail about, was when we had a debate here on Miss Curvy, and the comment he made. That was Jacob. He said this is what a debater should be and that is what makes Parliament. 

I want to thank hon. Ruth Nankabirwa because when it reached the heat of the campaign, we shared ideas to try and bring the two sides together. I want to thank Jacob because when he won, he called me to his office and said, “Elijah, you worked hard for your candidate but we have known each other for a very long time and I want us to work together.” I said, “I have no problem with that. We have known each other for a very long time and so, let us move forward.” “So, can you help me to reach out to people?” That was Jacob. 

That is why even those who were here in the Seventh Parliament – when he boxed Gen. Elly Tumwine in the lobby and we had to come in and separate them – will know that after one week, they reconciled and since that time, we moved together. That was Jacob; if he annoyed or disappointed you, he would reach out to you. That is what we must learn and work together for, irrespective of the party or where we come from. 

Madam Speaker, his colleague, the former Speaker from Dominica, Rt Hon. Alix Boyd, called yesterday. The Secretary-General of CPA and ACP-EU have all made calls. The Speaker of Tanzania called and sent his condolences to you, Madam Speaker. Those are the Parliamentarians for Global Action, where Jacob, hon. Katuntu and I participated in a number of conferences, from Colombia; they are all sending their condolence messages -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Miriam Mukhaye, do not go, you are going to speak. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, with humility, I would like to say that the Rt Hon. Speaker and I used to call each other - those who come from Teso know what it means – He was fond of the word akuwe and that is how we used to refer to each other.

Dear Jacob, we were married in one region and we have lost you. One day, as planned by God, we shall join you. May your soul rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Elijah Okupa. Members, can we have one amendment to the motion and then all of you speak, and we will make this part of the vigil? The amendment I want is from the chairperson of Karamoja. Let us first have that amendment. 

7.19
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nabilatuk): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This afternoon, I proposed an amendment under our Rules of Procedure, rules 59 and 61, in recognition of the life of the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah and the different dimensions that were mentioned here. I proposed that a day be established and be called the Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah Memorial Lecture or Day, where this Parliament on an annual basis can spend time to think through and discuss the values or the different aspects whether it is sports, rules, honesty or leadership.  

I also refer to the fact that this is not new; it has happened before. In Bank of Uganda, for example, there is Joseph Mubiru Memorial Lecture and under the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions, where we have an annual event to remember prosecutor Joan Kagezi who was killed in cold blood. In this context, this is the first sitting Speaker of Parliament to die in the Chair and this is historical. 

At the same time, we remember that this Parliament is totally united. The God that has inspired this Parliament from all the sides of the House to be here dressed up for mourning – that is the kind of unity we want to celebrate on an annual basis. 

Madam Speaker, on that day, we want to recognise the achievements of past speakers since Independence. There are different dimensions that we can remember. Also, the achievements of the speakers that will come after Jacob Oulanyah, and for any individual Member of Parliament that this House considers worth celebrating his or her achievements. 

I moved that the prayers therein under the motion proposed by the Vice-President be amended to include a prayer that Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah Memorial Lecture or Day, be adopted and be celebrated on an annual basis to recognise the achievements of the late Speaker, Jacob Oulanyah, and other speakers and individual Members of this House in the course of delivering service to this country. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The memorial lecture should always be on the 23rd of March, which is the birthday of Jacob Oulanyah. 

MR ACHIA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded by the whole House? 

(Motion seconded.)

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded by hon. Obua, hon. Obiga, Dr Ruth Aceng, hon. Stephen, hon. Veronica, hon. Aber, hon. Okwir, hon. Aogon and the whole House.

We are amending the prayers of Her Excellency to include that we will be celebrating the Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah Memorial Lecture annually on 23rd March. The amendment has been made. 

Now, let us start the debate afresh. Yes, an amendment?
 
7.23
MR BONIFACE OKOT (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also rise under rules 59 and 61 to amend the motion by the Vice-President. In the amendment, I would also like us to include that in recognition of the distinguished service to humanity and Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah’s exceptional mastery of the law, this House implores one of our local universities to confer upon the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah a posthumous honorary doctorate in laws. 

This is because you will notice that the only honorary doctorate that has been conferred upon him is by an American institution, yet much of his works have been within the laws and the legal systems of this country. I believe that we will have crowned him and given him the respect that he deserves. I beg to amend. 

THE SPEAKER: I am not sure whether we have the powers to cause a university to award. We do not legally have those powers. 

MR BONIFACE OKOT: Madam Speaker, I have read through the guidelines that Makerere University provides to award honorary doctorates posthumously. It only requires a member or the community of the university to write to the Vice-Chancellor. 

Here with us, we have alumni of this university and members of the university council who are also part of this House. I believe that – 

THE SPEAKER: You can do that as an alumnus, not the House doing it. Do that privately. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Just for clarity, the amendment that has been moved by a backbench Member does not have a charge on the Consolidated Fund. I know that the person we are celebrating today is one who has been critically following our Rules of Procedure and the Constitution. 

The motion that is being amended was moved by Her Excellency the Vice-President. How I wish that the Vice-President, the mover of the motion to pay tribute, would stand up and agree to the motion, just in case the motion will draw some charge on the Consolidated Fund. 

To be on the safe side, it would be helpful if she stood and accepted the amendment to her motion. That would put us in a good position. It is her motion that is being amended and we would like to hear from her whether she accepts it or not. Then in the future we will be very clear on how to handle such a day that has been proposed. Otherwise, I support the motion. 

THE SPEAKER: What I think Hon. Achia is talking about is where you just come and debate, look at the achievements, the challenges, Rt Hon. Oulanyah’s contributions and also those of the previous Speakers. 

MAJ (RTD) JESSICA ALUPO: Madam Speaker, first of all, I appreciate the whole House for the unity which you have demonstrated in speaking in support of the motion to give honour to our brother, Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah.

There are three proposed amendments of which you have already ruled on one, in concurrence with Members of Parliament, and that is the amendment moved by Hon. Cecilia Ogwal on equipping the Uganda Cancer Institute with the PET machine. I thank the Minister of Health for clarifying to the House that arrangements are already in place to operationalise that machine. 

I would also like to supplement the minister, for the benefit of the whole House, with the information from the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Health, which even has figures, since we do appropriate in this House, and as Members in Cabinet, we can also have these figures in our minds. 

To operationalise the PET machine which Hon. Cecilia Ogwal was talking about, we need Shs 250 billion. So far, Shs 90 billion has been received by the ministry and the additional funding is being provided for, annually. That is from the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Health. 

The minister here said that receiving the machine which Hon. Cecilia Ogwal was talking about alone without the cyclotron in it, would not work. So, the earlier we secure the cyclotron, the better. But currently, the contract is due for signing for this machine that Hon. Cecilia Ogwal raised - the PET. According to the permanent secretary, the bunker to house it was completed two years ago. 

What you said, Madam Speaker - that we need comprehensive information on the progress that Government has made in establishing or equipping Uganda Cancer Institute - may not be sufficiently provided here and now. We need a conversation with the technical people from Uganda Cancer Institute, and also the ministry to have engagement with Parliament, maybe through the Committee on Health or even directly on the Floor of Parliament through a statement by the minister. 

You ruled on that and I would like to support it. Because of the many procedures which are already in place, we may not necessarily need to include this in the motion, as you ruled earlier. 

The second one by Hon. Remigio Achia, just to have a day annually where we can remember our brother, Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, is agreeable to me, Madam Speaker. (Applause) It is a very important day where we can still come together and look at his tracks. In his tracks, we shall be reading peace, unity, smartness and neatness and we continue emulating him. I agree and support that amendment moved by Hon. Achia. 

The third one was moved by Hon. Boniface Okot. With the little institutional memory that I have from the Ministry of Education and Sports, I know that the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act was passed here to guide the universities – both private and public. I, therefore, do not imagine that we may have power to direct or even to send a request to any university to award a posthumous doctorate for our brother. Much as I believe that he deserves it because he was a very intelligent lawyer, we need to study further on that one. 

However, in my little understanding of how universities operate, there are procedures, and they make decisions through the university councils. The issue may require discussion. Otherwise, I am not certain whether we shall succeed, if we fix it in the motion. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Your Excellency the Vice-President. I had already made a ruling on Hon. Okot’s request. Thank you so much for accepting the amendment of Hon. Remigio.

7.34
MR WILSON KAJWENGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I had and still do support the motion. I rise under rules 58 and 61 to move an amendment to the motion to add another prayer that I think is within our means, is right here with us, does not have a charge on the Consolidated Fund and very relevant to the attributes of the fallen giant before us.

We have a room, Rt Hon. Speaker, on the right, as you enter the august House. The room is named the VIP Room. I have seen you, Madam Speaker, and the fallen giant, the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, enter that room and prepare to come and chair this august House. Every time the Speaker of Parliament emerges from that room, you know dignity and honour is coming to the House. Therefore, I beg to move that we rename that VIP room, the Rt. Hon. Jacob Oulanyah VIP Room.

THE SPEAKER: We shall rename in the new chambers and we do not need a motion. That is operational. I can even wake up today and just go and give the name to the office.

MR KAJWENGYE: Having been given a chance, let me, on behalf of the people of Nyabushozi, convey condolences to you, Madam Speaker, the people of Omoro, the President of the Republic of Uganda, my colleagues and the family.

The fallen giant in front of us was a timekeeper, a master of the rules, and he dressed and spoke with fastidious care. There is a lot we can learn from him. If we are going to do good, let us emulate his legacy. Therefore, I would like us to do the following:

We finish those that he had started and left unfinished. We emulate his traits - we do the timekeeping, speak on and legislate following the Uganda we want, and we do research. If we do all these, we shall have honoured him greatly. With those, I wish him to rest in eternal peace. For God and my country.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We are going to put the question. I hope you will be here so that we have the numbers. Members, if you are speaking, you should remain here and be mindful of the Vice-President because she has been here since 8:00 a.m. up to now.

7. 38
MS CLARE MUGUMYA (NRM, Woman Representative Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity to say a word on this day, when we eulogise our fallen Speaker. 

I got to know Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah when he had come to Isingiro to preside over a function where the minister, Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama, was launching his campaign for the general election. As the flag bearer, I was given a chance to say a word and I told Rt Hon. Oulanyah that I had been following his performance in Parliament as a Deputy Speaker and that he was capable of becoming a Speaker of Parliament. He was very happy that time and I told him that if I ever made it to Parliament, I would support him to become the Speaker of Parliament. I am so happy that I did it and it came to pass; he became the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament. However, I am sad that I was not able to enjoy him preside over Parliament for a long time.

After my election to Parliament, I went to his office and he shared with me his candidature for the Speaker of Parliament and the five areas he was going to focus on as a Speaker of Parliament. He told me about the independence of Parliament. He said he wanted to preside over a Parliament that would be free to conduct its business without accepting external influence. He told me about equality and how he was going to preside over –(Member timed out)

7.40
MR DICKSONS KATESHUMBWA (NRM, Sheema Municipality, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Sheema, I add my voice to extend condolences to the family of the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah.

I got to know the late in 2016 for the first time, when I was in this House, seated on the bench for technical officers. We had come to defend tax policy proposals. I remember that sitting was very hostile. Members could not comprehend and accept the proposals. When we left the next day, the late invited us to his chambers and we took him through the proposals one by one. It is at that point I realised that this powerful man was very humble and ready to learn. After accepting, we came back to the House that afternoon and all the measures were adopted.

I realised that we had a nationalist and from that time, I connected with the late. He was one of the first people that called to congratulate me, when I was elected the Chairman of the World Customs Organisation in Brussels. Later on, when I was going to resign to come to Parliament, he was one of the first people I told and he encouraged me. 

The country has lost a great man. We mourn but there are very many things he has done that we should live with, as examples. We can only live his legacy by ensuring that we do - (Member timed out)

7.42
MS MIRIAM MUKHAYE (Independent, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to pay tribute on behalf of the people of Mbale District, Bugisu subregion, who were the in-laws to the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah and also on behalf of the Church of Uganda, where the late was committed as a Christian. 

I pay tribute and appreciate him for standing with the Church of Uganda at a recent meeting that we had with him when we went to visit the Archbishop of the Church of Uganda. The church has a big debt to pay off and the Rt Hon. Speaker contributed Shs 100 million in support of the church activity. 

On behalf of the church as a member, I want to appreciate him for the commitment that he always had and for the love for the work of God. This has helped to pay off part of the debt for the church house. 

However, there is something that he pledged to do while we were in that meeting. He pledged to stand with the church to ensure that the institutions of that church are not left out to rot, especially the schools that have helped so many of us to be where we are. Some of those schools are now not so good and many of us are taking our children to private schools. He had pledged to ensure that those schools are renovated and ensure that they are back on board to help our children to study in a better way – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the mover of the motion wants to leave. She requests to leave at 8.00p.m. She has been here from 8.00 a.m. You cannot continue with the motion when the mover is not here. The whole day that you have had will be wasted if you do not adopt this motion.

7.45
MS HELEN NAKIMULI (NUP, Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my fellow colleagues in condoling with the entire House, you Madam Speaker and the family. On behalf of the people of Kalangala District and the entire Orthodox Church in Uganda, we mourn with all of you.

A lot has been said about the late Rt Hon. Speaker, Jacob Oulanyah. I would also want to add something small. In the 256 quotes of the late Jacob Oulanyah - a colleague said it but I will say it as well – he said, “without attitude change, the fight against corruption is just a show-off”. This Financial Year 2022/2023, we have Shs 8 billion to spend on mindset change and sensitisation. I wonder why we would spend money on patriotism. How do you teach a Ugandan to love Uganda? 

Also, I believe the things that the Rt Hon. Speaker has been clamouring for are the things we should carry on and do. If we do not, like he said in that quote, his eulogy is going to be a show-off as well. I beg to submit. May your soul rest in eternal peace. 

7.48
THE MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I have been around since morning – (Interjections) – yes, I was seated there –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, order.

MS NANKABIRWA:  I just stepped out to give room for other people to come and occupy the space. I received the body –

THE SPEAKER: Move the motion.

MS NANKABIRWA: We have been listening to speech after speech since the departure of our own and everyone wants to speak. The family has been around since morning. Sincerely, I would like to move that the question be put and the day ends there. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded?
 
7.49
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago North County, Agago): Madam Speaker, I rise to second the motion that the question – (Interjections)

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, you gave me the opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: There is a motion on the Floor. Just hold on. I know you are a lover of rules. First listen to the secondment.

MR OKOT: Thank you. I arise to second the motion that the question be put. Having been here since 8.00 a.m. until now, I have been listening through all the tributes Members have been putting across about the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah who is here. I stand to say that all the condolences and resolutions that came on the Floor having received the motion from Her Excellency the Vice-President and seconded by the Leader of Government Business, the Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition, I second the motion that the question be put. I beg to move.

7.50
THE MINISTER FOR INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I know all of us loved our brother and we would want to speak about him. Earlier, Madam Speaker, the honourable members made a request that your office grants what the Rt Hon. Jacob had wanted us to do - have a debate on the Uganda we want. We could agree on when we hold that debate and also eulogise him as we make submissions.

Therefore, I stand to support the motion that to respect the family and enable the children go and have something, we put the question and then, we shall proceed with the vigil. However, when we hold that debate on the Uganda we want, we shall integrate some of these eulogies in our submissions.

THE SPEAKER: In the meeting that we are going to have, we should have an option of where people can get up and speak about their encounter with the former Speaker. We have the whole night. We should be able to speak about the Speaker at the vigil. 

Honourable members, in a situation like this, I am reminded about the famous words of Ralph Waldo: “To laugh often and love much…” - that is what Jacob did – “…to win the respect of intelligent people and the affection of children…” We heard about how much Jacob loved the children and how much Jacob loved everybody, and how much affection he had for the people. “To earn the approbation of honest critics and endure the betrayal of friends; to appreciate beauty.” That is the true example of Jacob. “To find the best in others.” If Jacob ever realised that you are very good or better than him, he would make sure that you become one of his friends. “…To have played, laughed…” with so many people; Jacob was good at that.

The Jacob that is lying there was a very good friend to all of us, a very good brother. He used to call me his twin sister and I promise I will still remain a twin sister, especially to the family. 

Jacob lived his life well; he was a corrupt-free man. That was Jacob. He always laughed and whenever he would laugh, you would see his dimples. Jacob played and loved. He was a father, a brother and a friend to everybody. May Jacob’s soul rest in eternal peace. We will dearly miss him because we loved him. 

I walked the journey with Jacob for the past nine months. I would be in office here. After chairing the House, we would go back and cry in the office. Jacob would say, “I am in pain. I just thank God that He gave me the strength to chair today’s session. I thank my deputy for stepping in.” 

I now put the question that this House pays a glowing tribute to the departed Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda, Rt Hon. Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah, for his distinguished service to this nation with the amendments that were made by Hon. Remigio Achia. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I now direct the Clerk to transmit a copy of the resolutions together with the extract of the Hansard of this motion to the bereaved family. 

I wish to welcome all of you to tomorrow’s function, tonight’s vigil and to the final resting place of our own Jacob. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

The East African  Community Anthem

The National Anthem

(Exit of the late Rt Hon. Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you for being in the House today this long to pay tribute. I adjourn the House to Tuesday, 12 April 2022. 

(The House rose at 8.02 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 12 April 2022 at 2.00 p.m.)

