

Thursday, 6 April 2017

Parliament met at 2.10 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. There was business that remained pending from yesterday and we need to finish all business today so that we can suspend plenary. 

In the event that we finish early, I would like to bring up an item, which is item No. 12 on the business to follow on the Order Paper, and that is the report of the sectoral Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on the increasing number of foreign retail and wholesalers in Uganda. I would like to bring that item forward, if time allows us, so that we discuss that as well. All urgent matters will be raised at the end of the sitting.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2017

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister? Let us go to the next item. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister? Let us go to the next item. 

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is an embarrassing situation where the Government ministers who are supposed to present to this House are not in the House and we are aware that today, there is perhaps no serious business that is making them absent. I would like to seek your guidance on whether it would be possible to suspend this House for about 15 minutes to allow the Executive organise their house and come back.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No; instead, if I had the powers, I would have suspended the ministers but I do not have those powers, so you have survived. Please, let us get these items done.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2017

2.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Appropriation Bill, 2017” be read for the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. I am sure the accompanying certificates are there?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, we had already submitted it to the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, this Bill stands referred to the Committee on the Budget to handle within the framework of the budgeting process.

LAYING OF PAPERS

2.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to lay on the Table the annual report of the Petroleum Fund for the period ended 31 December 2016 in accordance with the Public Finance Management Act, 2015.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, this particular report will be referred to the appropriate committee for handling. Thank you.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE PERFORMANCE OF THE ECONOMY DURING THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2015/2016

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson or any member of the committee, can we proceed with this matter? If you are proceeding, please come and proceed. (Laughter) This House is not ready for explanations today. There is a copy of the report here; please, proceed.

2.17
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is a report of the Committee on National Economy on the performance of the economy during the financial year 2015/2016.

Introduction

Mr Speaker, Article 90(1) of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda mandates Parliament to establish committees necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions. Consequently, rule 166(2)(a) and (c) of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda mandates the Committee on National Economy to examine and monitor the state of the national economy and explore avenues of improving it.

Further, section 11 of the Budget Act, 2001 mandates Parliament to analyse programmes and policies that affect the economy and where necessary recommend alternative approaches to Government.  Pursuant to the above, the committee considered views of various stakeholders and scrutinised various documents on the status of the economy and now begs to report.

Mr Speaker, we have the objectives of the report and have the specific objectives of the committee stated in the report. We also have the methodology and scope, and probably for purposes of not spending too much time, I would like to request that I skip it and Members will look through.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You can proceed to the observations and recommendations.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. On page 16 we have observations and recommendations. 

Real Sector Development

The growth of the economy slowed down to 4.8 per cent, lower than the initial projection of 5 per cent, during the financial year 2015/2016, and below the 7 per cent National Development Plan (NDP) target. The weakening of the shilling, which experienced a 30 per cent depreciation on a year to year basis to June 2016, coupled with sentiments surrounding the general elections, impacted on the economic activity during the year. This was coupled with the slowing global economy and subsequent decline in commodity prices. 

However, fiscal response by Government was not enough to outweigh tightened private liquidity. Uganda being the food basket for the region requires significant growth in the food sector for both food security and export. The fishing industry in Uganda has rebounded to grow at 4.8 per cent in financial year 2015/2016, despite dismal performance in the past. The fishing industry has always faced challenges of enforcement of relevant laws that has led to the closure of a number of fish factories.

Poor performance of the manufacturing subsector is a source of concern, as it is the major source of economic transformation. The poor performance means that productive jobs cannot be generated to increase labour productivity.

Despite the economy growing at 4.8 per cent, economic growth is weakly inclusive with the level of income inequality at 39.5 per cent, where 19.7 per cent Ugandans are extremely poor, unable to afford the basic minimum consumption requirement of a healthy and dignified life. Government should develop the national social protection system to foster a more inclusive socioeconomic transformation for all Ugandans

With the depreciation of the shilling, Government should take this as an opportunity to increase the level of non-oil exports. In this regard, Government should expedite implementation of the export strategy through the provision of appropriate incentives, including tax incentives operating in export zones; acceleration of infrastructure development to facilitate production, transportation, storage, value addition and certification; and removal of non-tariff barriers in the region to increase exports. The high cost of borrowing has affected the trade and industry/manufacturing sectors, which are performing below expectations. These combined slowed down the growth momentum of the economy. 

In order to make the economy competitive, cost of production has to be minimised. It is evident that the cost of credit has remained high compared to investment returns. Cost of energy, as an input into the production process, is prohibitive at US$ 0.24, when compared to Ethiopia at US$ 0.5. Public infrastructure backlog has affected the investment returns of businesses. 

It is evident that the mining industry was heavily affected, growing by a dismal 1.4 per cent in the period under review compared to 20 per cent in the previous financial year, 2014/2015. This notwithstanding, the lifting of the moratorium on the export ban of raw minerals, signals slow foreign direct investment that was registered in the economy of about US$ 512 million. Government should set up transparent credit guarantee schemes for key sectors such as agriculture and manufacturing, among others targeting local entrepreneurs. 

Agriculture rebounded to grow at 3.2 per cent from 2.3 per cent registered in financial year 2014/2015, benefiting from favourable weather conditions. Despite the impact of low commodity prices at the international market, the sector’s performance was better than might have been expected. This is because the average global prices for Uganda’s major export commodities, particularly tea, coffee, maize and fish, were generally lower than in the previous year. This notwithstanding, agriculture support services are on the decline. 

Government should restore public provision of agricultural extension services and water for production technologies to farmers to increase and sustain agricultural productivity. These interventions will go a long way in reducing disease incidence that has become rampant.

While Uganda has registered an average of 6 per cent economic growth rate in the last decade, per capita income is estimated to have grown by only 2.4 per cent over the past five years, which is much lower than the rate of 5.2 per cent achieved in the previous two decades. This implies that the high growth rates that Uganda has enjoyed have not translated into high social-economic indicators. Government should pursue growth strategies that significantly improve the social welfare of its population. 

The savings-investment balance of 5.7 per cent of GDP in financial year 2015/2016 implies that the country has to finance investments from external sources. This tends to worsen the country’s current account balance and exposes the economy to shocks in case of deteriorating external environment. Government should promote domestic savings through reforming the pension sector; and establish credible saving vehicles and finance investments through the development of capital markets that intermediate between savers and investors. 

Fiscal Developments

Performance of the Resource Envelope

Tax revenues were 13 per cent of GDP, a growth of 0.5 per cent of GDP. This is consistent with the medium-term projection. However, this is in spite of lower growth in fuel volumes; reduced profitability of the financial sector as non-performing loans increased and commercial bank deposits reduced; and low sales in the beverage sector. In nominal terms, tax revenues grew by 13 per cent when compared to financial year 2014/2015 levels. Tax to GDP ratio continues to be below 22 per cent of GDP in Kenya, 15 per cent of GDP for Tanzania and 25 per cent of the EAC convergence criteria.

Government should reform the existing tax system through further elimination of tax exemptions and widen the tax base in order to increase the tax to GDP ratio towards the EAC convergence criteria over the medium term. Such reforms include implementation of the simplified presumptive tax regime in urban centres; taxpayer education; expansion of the single customs territory to cover more goods; strengthening the risk based audit process to enhance detection of non-compliance; and decentralising the large taxpayer and medium taxpayer offices, among others.

Grants amounted to Shs 1,146.4 billion, below the programmed levels of Shs 1,295.1 billion, although they are on the increase, averaging 1.2 per cent of GDP in the last three financial years up to financial year 2015/20116. This implies that they are becoming a significant source of revenue for Government as the number of projects increase. This also demonstrates the restoration of donor confidence in Government. However, grants are volatile as they are heavily dependent on conditionalities of the donor. Government should, therefore, strengthen its domestic revenue mobilisation efforts to avoid reliance on foreign aid.

The committee observes a notable poor performance of non- tax revenue, which registered a shortfall of Shs 200.9 billion during the financial year 2015/2016. This was in spite of unexpected dividends from Kinyara Sugar Works. Government should expedite reforms in non-tax revenue areas, including automation of the traffic express penalty scheme. 

Expenditure Performance 

Total spending was below the budgeted levels by 10 per cent or Shs 1,761.93 billion. Despite this, security related spending pressures emerged in the run up to the February elections, which were mostly offset by reductions in capital and poverty alleviating spending. However, the resulting shift from public investment to current spending is less supportive for economic growth and poverty alleviation and this needs to be corrected going forward. The committee recommends that recurrent expenditure needs should be restrained to allow adequate financing of public investment. 

Domestic Arrears

Domestic arrears payments were Shs 118.9 billion below the programmed levels by 50 per cent during the financial year 2015/2016. This was due to the slow validation exercise for payment. 

Decisive action to reconcile and validate the stock of domestic arrears to improve governance and strengthen the budget process should be undertaken. Punitive sanctions against persons who accumulate new arrears should be instituted by Government.  Government should publish reports of unpaid bills contained in Government votes annually, as required by the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. 

Public Investment Performance

While the slow execution of the development projects left space in the budget, it also heightened the risk of re-allocating the balance towards non-wage category. A supplementary of Shs 1 trillion was approved as a result of heightened security measures in the run up of the general elections of February 2016. In addition, the restructuring of Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) also led to cost overruns by 70 per cent of its recurrent budget. 

During the first half of the financial year 2015/2016, the rate of execution of the Karuma Hydro Power Project had reached 54 per cent and the rate for Isimba Hydro Power Plant Project had reached 89 per cent, both well ahead of schedule. However, the quality of work had been questioned and may curtail progress. 

Under the roads sector, execution has been affected by setbacks related to contract management and social safeguards, leading to under execution of the projects during the financial year. The budget process suffers from incomplete projects, which have become perpetual, with continued demands on the budget or even requiring additional funds when poorly implemented. This creates risks of stop-and–go cycles in investment, worsening volatility. 

Deficiency in quality at entry explains the magnitude of problems from implementation delays such as cost escalations, time overruns, contract disputes, abandonment of projects, poor quality of some completed projects and rapid depreciation of Government investment stock. At present, Government investment practice involves ad hoc identification of projects, with project analysis only being done after financing has been provided combined with inefficient management of the implementation and maintenance of public assets.

Inefficiencies in investment could limit the rate of accumulation of capital, curtailing the desired socio-economic transformation. The World Bank estimates that if efficiency of infrastructure investments in Uganda doubled, the economic growth rate would increase by three per cent.

The committee recommends as follows:

1. 	Appropriate project selection and successful implementation of public investment guidelines should be undertaken by Government.

2. 	Government should streamline and strengthen the institutional arrangements for the management of public investment. This should involve standardising the information and documentation needed to guide the identification, formulation, preparation, appraisal, investment decision, approval, execution, operation, monitoring and evaluation of public projects.

3. 	Government should develop a public investment management policy to form a basis for legal and regulatory reforms in management of public projects

4. 	Government should adequately assess the contingent risks associated with the PPP projects to safeguard debt sustainability.

Financing the Budget Deficit

On financing the budget deficit using issuance of debt instruments, the economy faced unfavourable domestic debt market conditions characterised by prohibitive high yields on securities, averaging 17.8 per cent for 91 day Treasury Bills (TBs), 19.6 per cent for 182 days TBs, and 20 per cent for 364 days TBs. This was compounded with the under subscriptions in the face of tight liquidity conditions. 

Despite these conditions, domestic financing was above the programmed levels by 19 per cent. On the contrary, Government borrowed US$ 200 million from the Eastern and Southern African Trade and Development Bank (PTA Bank) at terms better than the domestic market was offering. However, these resources were not used during the financial year as approved by Parliament to finance supplementary expenditures. It is anticipated that these resources will be used during the financial year 2016/2017 and financial year 2017/2018 to finance the budget deficit by replacing the existing domestic financing options. 

Government Net Worth

It is important for Government to determine its net worth especially when Uganda is working towards accessing international financial markets. The decline in Government net operating balance by Shs 290 billion in the financial year 2015/2016 is a signal of a fall in net worth. 

The full magnitude of determining the change in net worth for Government cannot be determined because other factors that could cause this change or Government balance sheet are not published. The changes are recorded in the statement of other economic flows. 

In the absence of other economic flows and Government balance sheet, the committee cannot determine Government net worth accurately and cannot demonstrate how fiscal policy is improving or eroding Government net worth.

Starting with financial year 2016/2017, Government should publish and present to Parliament the statement of other economic flows and Government balance sheet from financial year 2006/2007 to date. 

Overall Fiscal Balance 

The committee observed that the overall fiscal deficit was 4.7 per cent of GDP, lower than had been programmed at 6.9 per cent owing to under spending especially in the development budget component. 

Originally, Government had planned to finance 72 per cent of the fiscal deficit through external borrowing, consistent with Government policy of using external resources to finance large infrastructure projects. However, this did not materialise as only 60 per cent was used from external sources to finance the deficit while the balance was from domestic sources. Government’s decision to resort to the domestic finance market affected the borrowing costs of the private sector, which remain high at 23 per cent.

Government should opt for external sources of financing the deficit over the medium term, preferably concessional. In addition, issuance of domestic debt for fiscal purposes should be capped and approved by Parliament.

Financial Sector Development

Interest Rates 

High inflation episodes during the year resulted into the central bank’s intervention through a rise in the Central Bank Rate (CBR) to peak at 17 per cent in October 2015. These developments had instantaneous raising effects on both the commercial bank lending rates and the interest rates on Government treasury instruments. 

However, the committee notes that the spread between lending rates from commercial banks and the rates paid to depositors is large, at 19 per cent as at June 2016, yet near free interest rate deposits provide 88 per cent of the bank funding according to the Private Sector Foundation Uganda (PSFU). In addition, liabilities of banks and other lending institutions stood at Shs 3 billion in the financial year 2015/2016, meaning that they are not significantly borrowing from the central bank. This casts doubt as to whether the CBR has a huge influence in determining the cost of money in Uganda. Instead, the alternative investment options available to banks like treasury bills and bonds have had huge influence on interest rates. 

Further, the percentage of interest expenses contained in lending rates is about 2.6 per cent as at June 2016. A significant component of interest rates is risk associated with loans losses, measured by non-performing loans, which is about 5.3 per cent according to the Bank of Uganda report of 2015.

However, most banks have good risk management practices and according to the Private Sector Foundation Uganda, this has declined to two per cent as at June 2016.

Based on the above rates, it is estimated that bank costs and return requirements are adequately covered at 11 per cent. This implies that lending interest rates are unnecessarily high, given that their major source of financing is from interest free deposits of their customers. This makes the banking industry very profitable when one considers the return to equity of 13.8 per cent for the financial year 2015/2016. When one considers profits from interest, they have increased to 12 per cent from 11 per cent in the financial year 2014/2015.

The committee recommends that- 

1. 	Regulation of the financial sector should improve to penalise commercial banks that have high ratios resulting from poor risk management. This may require setting a cap on risk management ratios through an amendment of the Bank of Uganda Act.

2. 	The CBR should not remain the indicative rate for determining interest rates because of the loose connection it has with commercial banks’ lending rates. This can also be sighted when the CBR declines and there is no corresponding fall in interest rates. 

3. 	Government should limit treasury bills and bonds issuance to finance the budget, to free domestic resources for private sector activity. In the medium term, the domestic borrowing requirements should be capped by amending the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. 

4. 	The flaws in determining the cost of money deposits despite the competition that the liberalisation policy ushered in, and with the introduction of the Credit Reference Bureau, have not yielded any positive results to private sector borrowers. Government should consider amending the necessary laws to place thresholds on performance parameters that will influence the determination of the real cost of money. 

5. 	In the short run, the tax policy in the banking industry should be revised upward to target profits exceeding certain bands, as the Bank of Uganda stress test indicates that no bank would have capital shortfalls when interest income reduces by 50 per cent.

Lending interest rates averaging 23 per cent have had an effect of crowding out private sector borrowing through limiting access to bank credit. This slowed down to a growth of 4 per cent compared to 25 per cent that was experienced during the financial year 2014/2015. However, costly domestic borrowing did not deter Government from borrowing from the domestic banks, as it borrowed Shs 8.4 billion more than had been budgeted, although less than financial year 2014/2015 levels by Shs 365.13 billion. This also implies that commercial banks preferred to lend Government.

Government should adhere to the domestic borrowing plan to limit its impact on the domestic interest costs that could crowd out private sector borrowing. 

High lending rates have partly contributed to a significant rise in non-performing loans that increased to 8.3 per cent during the financial year 2015/2016, compared to a growth of 4 per cent in the financial year 2014/2015. Government should annually capitalise Uganda Development Bank (UDB) over the medium term to avail longer term funds at lower costs, with grace periods, in support of the private sector, to increase investments in strategic sectors that have longer gestation periods. 

Saving Bank Capital Flows and Credit Market

The committee observes that there has been a decline in credit growth from the financial sector to both Government and the private sector. This in effect has led to the decline in domestic assets of the financial system by 56 per cent in the financial year 2015/2016. Central bank liabilities are on the rise, reaching 0.7 per cent of GDP, which is an increase by 0.5 per cent of GDP. This has resulted from a significant increase (Shs 434 billion) in the non-statutory reserves held in either cash or securities by financial institutions in the central bank.

The committee commends the build-up of reserves of financial institutions in the central bank to mitigate against any shocks in the financial system. However, the growth of bank assets needs to be restored over the medium term to sustain financial resilience over the longer term. 

The liberalisation of the capital account has facilitated significant capital flows, which is causing significant pressure on central bank operations to prevent volatility in the exchange rate. In the financial year 2015/2016, capital outflows by banks amounted to Shs 123 billion, requiring the central bank to draw down its net foreign assets to stabilise the money markets.

The Government should revisit its liberalisation policy of the capital account with a view to provide statutory limits by industry or activity.

Intermediation of the available resources within the banking system is problematic as seen by large margins between savings and lending rates. Financial institutions should establish saving vehicles/products that attract high rates – above inflation rates – to bridge the gap between savings and lending rates.

The committee observes that private sector credit, although declining, is skewed towards the service sector, that is, the trade and construction sectors. These employ less people compared to the agriculture sector, which employs over 65 per cent of the population. In addition, credit to the manufacturing sector declined by 6 per cent by June 2016. This was caused by high interest costs, reducing the productive capacity of manufacturing firms. 

Government should regulate the credit markets to guide more affordable credit to the agriculture sector through the establishment of an agricultural bank. Lines of long-term credit from Uganda Development Bank should be directed to manufacturers of commodities that have backward linkages to local raw materials such as cotton, coffee, tea, maize, minerals and others.

Uganda’s pension system is about 80 years old, serving all public servants through the Public Service Pension Scheme and some private pensioners who contribute to the National Social Security Fund (NSSF) or other voluntary schemes. However, pension coverage is too limited – 10 per cent of working age population – to achieve the primary objective of providing social protection, and the system is still unable to generate many of the potential benefits that could accrue from a well-functioning pension system.

The bulk of Uganda’s expenditure on pensions in the financial year 2015/2016, at Shs 157.7 billion (0.2 per cent of GDP), involved the payment of pensions under the Public Service Pension Scheme. This scheme is proving to be expensive and unsustainable. According to a World Bank study, its entitlements are on average equivalent to three times the per capita wage. This is despite the low coverage of the scheme, with less than two per cent of the population receiving retirement benefits. 

Government should take advantage of the current demographic dividends characterised by a young workforce and a proportionately small number of those of pensionable age to develop a functioning pension system.

Mobile money transactions reached US$ 10 billion in 2015, which is about 38 per cent of the GDP. This success is reshaping Uganda’s banking and telecom sector and enhancing financial inclusion. Given such magnitude, Government should develop a comprehensive legal framework to support the development of the mobile money industry while ensuring financial stability.

Exposure to foreign currency loans in the real estate sector has proved a particular source of vulnerability under the rapid exchange rate depreciation in instances where rent was foreign-currency denominated and paid by tenants who earned shillings. The central bank should develop policy tools that establish a maximum loan-to-value ratio.

Money Market Funds

The funds consist of short-term but high risk investments such as company shares, and they shrunk by Shs 55.1 billion in the financial year 2015/016. The decline in the money market funds was due to a 30 per cent loss in the shilling value and a 14.5 per cent reduction in the Uganda Securities Exchange. 

Further, the decline in the size of the money market was also due to the realignment from equity to bonds, whose yields were more attractive. This was compounded by the rise in the interest rates in the USA by the US Federal Reserve to 0.25 per cent, which meant higher low risk returns for investors who would ideally buy shares in the local companies in Uganda. Hence, this led to a massive liquidation of the funds. 

Also, foreign exchange rates repatriation limitations in Nigeria limited the flow of foreign currency, especially the US dollar, to avoid further depreciation of the Naira that was affected by the low oil prices. Therefore, the inability of foreign investors to withdraw foreign exchange in Nigeria meant that Uganda’s stock market provided a source of financing for most foreign investors who wanted to exit the market.

Agriculture Financing

Government established agricultural credit facility that targets value addition in the agriculture sector, providing a maximum of 12 per cent in interest. In addition, Government removed taxes on agricultural machinery during the financial year 2014/2015 budget. However, these efforts have not resulted in any significant gains to farmers in either a reduced input price or increased lending to agriculture (agricultural lending declined by 43 per cent in the financial year 2015/2016). Instead, those interventions have benefitted banks and importers because the programmes are poorly targeted.

The committee recommends that agricultural interventions should target smallholder farmers to sustain production through the adoption of modern farming methods. Such interventions may include subsidised agricultural credit for production, provision of comprehensive rural infrastructure and establishment of farmer cooperatives. 

External Sector Developments

External Debt 

Strong economic activity has been instrumental in supporting the stable but rising debt to GDP ratio. External debt, both public and private, has risen to 39.6 per cent of GDP in the financial year 2015/2016 from 33.1 per cent previously in financial year 2014/2015. Of this amount, public debt is 21 per cent of GDP, which is within the threshold of 50 per cent of GDP for public debt. However, external debt is on the rise largely due to the weakening fiscal position. 

With the rising external debt, Government should ensure timely and efficient execution of projects financed by debt and that the selected projects promote strong social-economic development of the country. In addition, the committee recommends that all proposed projects should adhere to the Public Debt Management Framework (PDMF) to ensure debt sustainability. 

The committee notes that the implicit average maturity of external long term debt remains high at 92.6 per cent in the financial year 2015/2016, implying that it will take the economy 93 years to repay the existing stock of debt at the current level of amortisation. This also means that the extent to which the economy can borrow to meet the current debt repayments has declined from 33 years in 2008/09, meaning that external borrowing on non-concessional terms will be more sensitive to the country’s ability to repay. 

In order to maintain the current public debt at sustainable levels, Government should develop an export policy to guide public interventions by industry, targeting those that will generate high returns to the economy, to raise the country’s ability to pay debt when it falls due. 

Current Account Balance 

Given that the current account remains in deficit, currently at US$ 1,452 million as of June 2016, Uganda is a net borrower and therefore demand for investment exceeds the savings of the economy. This implies that Uganda needs to borrow to finance extra investment. However, the returns on investment should be higher than the cost of borrowing, to enable the country repay its debt in a sustainable manner. 

For Uganda to remain solvent, Government should generate sufficient current account surpluses to repay what it has borrowed. To do this, borrowing should finance investment that has higher marginal product than the interest rate that the country has to pay on foreign liabilities. 

Remittances 

The committee notes the rise by US$ 113 million during the financial year 2015/2016 in personal transfer receipts from abroad. While remittances remained strong at US$ 1,104 million during the period under review, as a source of financing the economy’s external balance, Government should consider alternative sources, for example through the development of domestic financial markets as remittances are dependent on the external environment, which is volatile.  

Overall Balance of Payments

During the financial year 2015/2016, the overall balance of payments position was a surplus of US$ 95 million, compared to a deficit of US$ 353 million that was recorded in the previous financial year 2014/2015. This resulted in the build-up of external reserve assets, leading to a reserve cover of 4.3 months of future imports of goods and services. While this is welcome, the levels of reserves should increase much faster than external financing needs. 

Trade Balance

The committee observes that while the trade balance improved by 17 per cent to a lower deficit of US$ 1,870 million in financial year 2015/2016, from a deficit of US$ 2,250 million in financial year 2014/2015, it is only temporary since it was driven by a fall in imports. Export performance for traditional commodities remains dismal. 

Coffee exports, for example, have averaged 3.1 million bags in the last 10 years, fetching US$ 351.9 million, in the financial year 2015/2016, a reduction by 12 per cent when compared to the last financial year 2014/2015. While Government has intervened in the provision of coffee seedlings under the Operation Wealth Creation programme, the farmers being targeted need adequate preparation to achieve productivity gains.

On the international market, decaffeinated coffee attracts premium prices. However, in Uganda, there is no policy guideline to distribute decaffeinated coffee seedlings. Cotton exports yielded US$ 24.29 million in the financial year 2015/2016, compared to an average of US$ 47.4 million in the last five years up to the financial year 2014/2015. Of recent, cotton prices have been a disincentive to cotton framers. 

Fish exports were valued at US$ 114.65 million in the financial year 2015/2016, below the last five year average of US$ 127.3 million. Fish stocks in the lakes have been hampered by poor regulation of the industry. As a result, fish for export factories has declined significantly leading to their closure. 

Government should review the Operation Wealth Creation programme to have a component of extension staff charged with guiding farmers in land preparation, planting, harvesting and disease control under the supervision of Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. 

In addition, Government should provide high quality decaffeinated coffee seedlings to farmers to enable processors produce high value coffee for export.  Government should review the cotton Act to provide adequate incentives for farmers and cushion them from price fluctuation through establishment a stabilisation fund.

The committee further recommends that Government reviews the fisheries legal framework to make it prohibitive for any person engaged in illegal fishing practices. In the meantime, Government should restrict human activity in fish breeding areas on all water bodies. This should be done in addition to strict adherence to fishing regulations.

Terms of Trade

The committee further observes that while Uganda’s terms of trade improved by two per cent in the financial year 2015/2016, compared to the previous period of financial year 2014/2015, due to a significant fall in import prices by 15 per cent, the export sector continued to face significant challenges. The export sector in Uganda is largely agricultural based with low value added and constrained by non-implementation of the existing regulatory framework, poor production and marketing infrastructure.

The committee recommends that Government should deliberately promote producer and marketing cooperatives in the agricultural sector to guarantee supply of commodities in the international markets. In addition, Government should fully implement the Free Zones Act. 

Government should support the private sector to diversify Uganda’s export base from agro-based exports to light manufacturing like plastics, whose markets are growing in the region. In addition, Government should develop a policy of value addition along the value chain and support strategic industries like the textile industry.

Exchange Rate Developments 

The depreciation has fed into increases in consumer prices from three per cent in financial year 2014/2015 to 6.6 per cent in financial year 2015/2016, and those of intermediate production of goods for domestic manufacturing raising the cost of private sector businesses. In response to inflationary pressures, Bank of Uganda raised the central bank lending rate, the CBR, peaking at 17 per cent in March 2016, causing commercial banks to raise their interest rates resulting in large risk of crowding out the private sector.

To improve the external position of the country, Government should embark on increasing productivity in productive sectors, especially the agriculture sector in the short to medium term, and unlock the constraints surrounding the extractive industry, to boost export receipts and attract foreign direct investments.

Net International Investment Position (NIIP)

The Uganda net international investment position as at the end of the financial year 2015/2016 was in deficit of US$ 13,605 million, implying that the value of the foreign investments in the country exceeded the value of the country’s investments abroad; hence, the country is a net borrower to the rest of the world. While the country’s assets abroad amounted to US$ 5,593 million, the foreign-owned assets held in Uganda summed up to US$ 19,198 million as at the end of financial year 2015/16.

There was a US$ 810 million increase in the NIIP or an increase in the country’s net foreign wealth compared with the same period in the previous financial year, 2014/15. This is explained by the increase in Government debt by US$ 802 million, acquired for investments in infrastructural development. 

Government should implement projects more efficiently within the scheduled period to realise high social and economic returns to investments, since some of the debt is acquired on non-concessional terms.

Foreign Financing of the Economy 

In an environment where Uganda’s external financing needs are significant and are rising, financing through tapping into international markets could pause significant risks, especially when funding conditions deteriorate. These risks include pressures on external reserves and exchange rates, forcing an immediate fiscal policy adjustment, including public investment cut-backs. 

The demand boost from investment could be reduced, lowering growth expectations, and could further reduce investor’s appetite. To mitigate these risks, Government should balance the mix of external sourcing and domestic resource mobilisation when financing its investment needs, while maintaining macroeconomic stability. 

The trends indicate a lower global demand for Uganda’s exports with a projected increase in imports to increase investments and consumption. This imbalance is creating uncertainty in the country’s export potential. This marked reversal could happen especially if trade partner growth and demand for regional exports is weakened further than currently expected or if investors became more sensitive to domestic vulnerabilities. 

Government should therefore embark on the promotion of both goods and service export volumes, to grow stronger through productivity improvements by investing in energy, health, education, tourism, ICT, governance and agriculture.

Financial Derivatives Market

The financial derivatives market is growing in Uganda, where domestic issuance worth US$ 15.4 million was purchased by foreign corporations/individuals as compared to domestic acquisition worth US$ 12.7 million from foreign companies. Government should closely monitor the developments in this market and ensure proper regulation to avoid huge losses for domestic corporations.

Conclusion

During the financial year under review, the economy slowed down due to a fall in domestic demand. The private sector suffered most as observed in the slowed growth of the manufacturing sector and trade services, which contribute significantly to the overall economic activity in the country.

The central bank’s response to cushion the economy from adverse domestic and external factors was to raise the Central Bank Rate that brought down inflation to 6 per cent at the end of the financial year. This proved costly through the rise in the commercial bank interest rates, undermining private sector credit growth. Eventually, subdued private sector activities slowed the economy. Given these developments, the outlook for the financial year 2016/2017 should target monetary policy, easing to re-activate private sector activities.

The fiscal stimulus that had been envisaged did not materialise, as observed in running a lower budget deficit that had been anticipated. While this lessened borrowing pressures by Government, to avoid crowding out the private sector, lending rates remained prohibitive to spur private sector activity. As a result, the private sector borrowing significantly declined during the period under review, affecting domestic demand in the economy.
 
With a constrained fiscal policy, the current account adjusted to a reduced deficit, with Government limiting imports due to low levels of implementing the investment plan. Resulting from limited imports due to fiscal policy shifts, reserves were boosted to remain at 4.3 months of import cover. However, poor public sector management of development projects has proved costly in generating the social economic returns envisaged in the NDP. 

Moving forward, the committee will pay close attention to these events whenever considering loans to finance various development projects. Mr Speaker, I beg to report. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member. Honourable members, this should be the spirit. If the chairperson and the vice-chairperson are not there, any member of the committee should be able to present the report. (Applause)

Where’s the vice-chairperson? Well, you were not here by the time we called the item. At the time the item was called, only one member of the committee was present and I asked him to present and he has successfully done so. Congratulations, hon. Okello, for doing this. (Applause) This should be the spirit that we should embrace. 

Honourable members, the purpose of this report is to provide us with information while we deal with the issues that we are going to start dealing with. This is for the budget of the previous financial year, 2015/2016. The minister presented the budget for financial year 2016/2017 and also the proposed estimates for financial year 2017/2018 in one of the documents that was brought.

Therefore, this particular report gives an analysis of what we should factor in as we discuss what is going to come in the committees such as the budget committee, the sectoral committees and all the committees. So, when we come to have the debate on the budget and the reports of the committees on the policies and processes of adopting and approving the budget, we will factor in these issues so that they remain alive, as those are the issues that affect our economy.

Therefore, for that reason, we shall have very limited interventions so that the actual discussion will come when all the documents are brought together. We can then use this particular report as a reference paper when we are preparing our issues in the ministerial policy statements, the sector budgets and in the comprehensive budget that will be presented by the budget committee.

That is just a guide on how we will handle this. We will have some short interventions on this particular report and see how it can be utilised in the course of the budget process. I will take the Member for Aswa. Honourable members, why don’t we debate issues?

MS AMONGIN: Mr Speaker, aware of the very wonderful guidance that you have given to this House and fact that the representative of the chairperson of the Committee of National Economy has presented to this House a very important report, which I think is the centre of the day-to-day running of the Government, because the economy of Uganda is key; 

Also aware that you have given wise guidance that this is going to be given limited time, awaiting further reports that are going to be merged with this report so that we could have a harmonised and conclusive debate; I am therefore rising on a procedural issue. 

Aware that the issues that have been raised in this report are key and I would imagine that they would need enough time, wouldn’t it be procedurally right, Mr Speaker, that we defer the debate of this report so that the time when we are debating all the other policy issues, we debate at once so that we do not forget? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. It certainly would have been proper and a good way to go - to take this document and use it as part of the reference when we discuss all the other ministerial policy statements and budget proposals. However, right now we are asking for a short intervention and not a debate as such, so that we can conclude this matter and then we wait. We are going to use two minutes each because we have two Bills to deal with.  

3.23
MR REAGAN OKUMU (Independent, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will do this for 30 minutes; so, those are 15 Members.

MR OKUMU: The nature of our economy also needs to be understood. It is amorphous. Sometimes when you are in a traffic jam, you see the economy live - people carrying human beings, pigs and goats on boda bodas. That is part of the economy; people are struggling to survive.

My concern is about the inequalities. The committee needs to broaden its perspective because it not enough to just think about inequality. Members of Parliament need to look deeply at this inequality - where it is; how many classes do we have in this economy; who is doing what; who is at the most peripheral level of survival. Otherwise, our interventions will remain wrong. Where have we been giving a lot of interventions? Is it to people who continue to benefit most or those at the most peripheral level?

Mr Speaker, I would also like to urge the committee to look at the informal sector of this economy. Sometimes it does not appear in the statistics but it is playing a role. What do we need to do to bring up this informal sector where the bulk of our people are concentrated?

The employment sector remains also broad and wide. Foreign investment is there, right, but what impact do we continue to get from this foreign investment in both positive and negative form? There is the impact of corruption on the economy versus other factors. The committee was only able to raise issues of other governance nature like democracy and others; what about the impact of corruption and interventions we continue to have? This should be our focus even as we look at the next budget broadly.

Security: You said there were some interventions but in what aspects of security? Was it basically in suppression that we put in a lot of resources or we put resources in areas of security in the specific - (Member timed out?)

3.26
MR MUYANJA MBABAALI (NRM, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the acting chairperson of the Committee on National Economy for the good report. I have observed about three things, which I need to comment on. 

There is the issue of mobile money providers. At that time, it had gone up to US$ 10 billion and yet at the same time, these people are giving loans and keeping people’s money but they are not regulated by the central bank. This is a very dangerous situation because the mobile money providers are keeping people’s money and giving loans at interest rates which are very enormous. At one time, it was 11 per cent per week or day, and they are not regulated. It is high time the mobile money providers are regulated by the central bank.

Secondly, there is the issue of domestic arrears. By that time, it came to over Shs 118 billion. The Government does not pay any interest on delayed payments whereas when the Government is doing internal borrowing, they issue treasury bills and they attach interest. It is high time that whenever Government does internal borrowing through non-payment of domestic arrears, they pay interest. I rest my case there.

3.28
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First, I applaud the committee for the good work done. 

Secondly, I will talk about the issue of debts that we incur as a country. Yes, we borrow money externally, but I get afraid when we have a debt that is structured to the extent of paying it after 93 years. We have Muslims here; when burying a Muslim, they will always inquire about their debts. If you have a debt, you cannot be buried. Now, if we are going to pay some of these debts in 93 years, by 93 years’ time we shall all be dead and yet we have Muslims here; what will happen to such people? Therefore, you have got to see what we should do about these debts that we incur. We have a lot of indiscipline; we are undecided on how we should structure our debts and that is why we always get into problems.  

Allow me to go directly to point No. 28 - agricultural financing. The committee reports that Government established the agricultural credit facility that targets value addition in the agriculture sector, providing a maximum of 12 per cent interest. In addition, Government removed taxes on agricultural machinery. Probably, you refer to tractors but what happens to oxen or bulls in Teso? Do they remove taxes? 

The common man also needs to participate in the economy; how have they participated? I think those are the issues. That is why the rich man is getting richer and the poor man poorer. You are talking about a middle income economy, but some people will be in the other section while others remain in section B because of this kind of thing.

Mr Speaker, we have talked about the agricultural bank. When are we putting it in place? Realistically, when we talk about Uganda Development Bank, which we were talking of capitalising, there is only one person already waiting for that money, even if we say it is Shs 50 billion. One rich man from Kampala here is waiting to run away from Kampala with that money. What about the common man from Kumi; how is he going to do business so that we stimulate the economy together? Those are some of the concerns and they are key. We must check on them.

We have not talked about the environment and how we are going to deal with issues that are affecting the climate. Those are core. You can buy the machines but what about if there is no rain, what are we going to do? The committee is silent on this. Can you please intervene? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.32
MR ACHIA REMEGIO (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for a very good report. 

Honourable members, as you can see, our economy is under stress and it is clear from all the figures. If you see it in terms of private sector borrowing, it is going down. It has come down from 30 per cent to about 14 per cent, which means that we are not borrowing to invest. When you look at the trade balance, it is worsening; we are just barely trying our best. In general terms, we are not going to expect a growth of more than 4.8 per cent according to this report, if we go forward.

I think the report would have been enriched, going forward, if it had brought out the impact of what is going on in our region and internationally on our economy. Brexit has a negative impact because we will now have different approaches on how to export our goods to the European Union. Trump’s policy is not favouring us too. What is the Government planning, going forward, in this financial year? What are we going to do to improve and attract people to invest? 

We have to look inwards. What are we going to do to improve growth and where will that growth come from? I think that goes to the budget process; we should be looking at policies from different ministries and different sectors. What are we going to do now that we have been suffering? Kenya is going to elections and we know what happens; the international and capital markets are taking a beating. What are we doing as a country about our economy in order to grow it so that we can stay afloat?

What are we going to do about our fiscal risk? We have borrowed internationally in dollars, we may not collect enough revenue, our shilling is weakening and we have to pay back interest in dollars. It means we have to collect more money and buy dollars expensively. What are we going to do? Our Government should even be thinking very hard –(Member timed out.)

3.35
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also thank the committee for the report. 

I would like to re-echo what my honourable colleague mentioned. We have to critically assess the role of corruption and how it demotivates Ugandans from working. It has become a big disincentive for people who wake up and struggle to work and then they see other people rising faster than them when they do not engage in any productive activities. I think this is very critical. The public debt we are talking about is because of the way we manage our investments and the way we manage these loans that we get. There are a lot of issues of embezzlement and stealing that go on. 

I get worried every time we have loan requests coming here and there is a justification that we have not reached the 50 per cent mark, so we should borrow. It is like trying to drive a car and because it has a speed of 180 km/h, you try to reach the maximum without looking at the roads on which you are driving.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, our planning has a very big problem. We seem to be doing things in an ad hoc manner. We go to a particular area because there has been a request and then we want to refocus our resources immediately, without following what we have put in place in our National Development Plan. For many of the things we do, it is because we are happy that we do them; if we are not happy, then we do not do them. 

I would advise that we look at agriculture critically, assess communities and see what they prefer to do. What we are having now is that seeds and inputs are being forced onto farmers. Even in areas where coffee cannot grow, the coffee inputs are forced onto farmers simply because we want to promote coffee. Even in areas where they cannot grow fruits, for example, we impose it on them. In the end, it is not helpful to farmers and their productivity becomes less. (Member timed out.)

3.36
MS AGNES KUNIHIRA (NRM, Workers’ representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the work well done. 

The committee has raised the issue that Government should strategize to improve on the welfare of its population. This week, somebody from the business community downtown was killed because they were protesting against paying rent in dollars. Government should try to protect those small business community members so that that they do not pay rent in dollars because the dollar rate keeps appreciating.

Another area is the issue of domestic arrears. The report mentions validation and yet people are running out of business and others are losing their jobs. Already, the budget which has been presented is looking at debts of Shs 301 billion yet the debt stands at Shs 2.2 trillion. As he has already guided, I think as we look at the budget, this amount should be increased. (Member timed out)

3.38
MR ISMAEL OROT (NRM, Kanyum County, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The committee has highlighted that agriculture is the major employer of our people of Uganda. However, if our economy is to grow, we would like to see what we used to call agricultural stations where they had mechanised tractors, which would open a lot of land. You would even see, in those days, there would be a scheme to give Members of Parliament tractors, so that they are part of production when on the ground. The economy should look into such issues. 

There are a lot of untapped resources; for example, Uganda Clays opened a production unit on the road towards Mbale, where we now have good quality tiles. We have such resources in Kumi, Ngora and many other areas as you move to the north. Those are the resources that the economy should tap into to increase production. For example, in countries like Egypt, paper is made out of papyrus. However, we see a lot of papyrus on River Mpologoma along the Tirinyi Highway and many other swamps in the country. We end up burning this papyrus and we remain lamenting about poverty all the time.

The economy should tap more of these resources - even in tourism, you hear of rock painting in Nyero but no one here has ever visited the place. There is glacier free water in Lake Bisina. The other time when – (Member timed out.)

3.40
MS NABILAH NAGGAYI (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issues raised in the report are pertinent. However, the national economy is formed by different sectors. Yes, we have seen them touched but my issue is on repatriation.

When we talk of the remittances from Ugandans abroad, we should also be focusing on how much is taken out of the country. Does that balance? The other issue would be the interest rates. On most of these issues, we have so much feedback and it is fortunate that I get this feedback as somebody who represents Kampala. 

A Member has talked about the current crisis in Kampala where shops are closed because of the high cost of rent. The one person killed was because of the high rent. There are other buildings that are also closed today. 

People are struggling in the economy. I do not know what economy we are talking about – the economy that is formed by institutions or by our common people and what they are going through. 

When we talk about arrears, businesses have collapsed. I will not talk about issues that are entailed in our report as the Committee on Trade and Industry because they are more like sister reports. Most of the issues mentioned here would have been better informed through our committee report because we go more into details of the trade sector, interest rates and their effect on common business people. When we talk about –(Member timed out.)

3.34
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa County North, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to look at the issue of agriculture. When we look at other production means and in particular issues to do with industries which are foreign owned. 

These foreigners will continue to leave depending on economic situations in the country. If the situation is still favourable, it means they will still continue. But when there is a problem, they might leave. Us as nationals will be left with agriculture. However, agriculture has come under harsh attack from climate change. This, therefore, means that if we are to be sure with productivity in agricultural sector as a country, I think we need to invest in dams to ensure continuity of water for agricultural production.

We should also look at the issue of agricultural extension workers. We have been implementing the issue of wealth creation although it is not supposed to look into other aspects of agriculture but only agriculture for commercial purpose. 

We must note that this has not been mastered well because the farmers pick what they can pick. Whether these have been handled well or not is not being followed and they are not being guided. The issue of agricultural extension workers must also be taken seriously. 

On the issue of markets, we have a factory for production of juice but there are many farmers who are stranded with their fruits because there is no clear marketing channel laid to connect these farmers to manufacturers. So I –(Member timed out.)

3.45
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Committee on National Economy for giving us this glaring picture.

The situation is bad. I come from the private sector and I have to assure this House that from the private sector point of view, we are doing very badly and especially the Ugandan business community. 

Mr Speaker, as you have rightly ruled that we should urgently address in the coming budget the serious requirements to rejuvenate the economy. These domestic arrears are a thorn. 

I would further like to inform you, Mr Speaker, that what the local business community does when we are supplying Government is that they stake their assets with the banks. 

However, the banks do not wait for the excuses that Government is not paying and what happens is that many of the members of the business community lose their assets and go to the abyss of poverty. The unemployment rate is also sky rocketing. These are not small matters.   

I am not surprised when you look at the economic growth from our peers at the East African level. Kenya is at 5.3 per cent, Rwanda is at 6.6 per cent and Tanzania at 6.5 per cent. I am not surprised with Rwanda being at 6.6 per cent because there is a very serious Government. 

The Rwandan leadership takes business seriously. They do not tolerate incompetence. They do not condone –(Member timed out.)

3.47
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you. Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for a thorough report. I will address myself to one of the sections that says that the contribution of the private sector to the national economy has declined.

I yesterday asked the Prime Minister why the Government has failed to recapitalise Uganda Development Bank (UDB). There is no way in the world that a private sector can develop without access to cheap financing.

Government has spent a lot of money on infrastructure development which I support because it is the economic base of this economy. However, Ugandans are just spectators because all the trillions of shillings that Government is investing into roads and electricity are being taken back by the Chinese. 

Mr Speaker, it is absurd and this situation must be reversed otherwise this is not a private sector led economy but a foreign led economy, in my opinion.

In the next budget, we must make sure that Government actually invests money into UDB. The businesses have closed in town because Ugandans have nowhere to go and borrow money in order to build the economy.

I support the committee and agree that we must do something for the economy of this country if we are to employ Ugandans, develop agriculture and industries. There is no other way to do this other than accessing cheap financing. Thank you.

3.49
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to join my colleagues in thanking the committee for this report.

However, I would like to run quickly to the issue that is on the employee- 65 per cent of Ugandans are in agriculture. Mr Speaker and colleagues, it seems there is a serious mismatch in the agricultural sector. Government is focussing on mass production, which is a good thing but the thing to do is the small holders because that is where the majority of Ugandans who are involved in agriculture are active. 

Therefore, we need clear guidelines and policies because the problem is that most of the farmers in the villages are involved; this sector is called smallholders. Unfortunately, the current situation we are facing in the country in terms of drought and hunger came from this problem. If you critically look at the set up, we are talking about agricultural financing. Where do these people get money from? They cannot borrow; they are left to their petty local agreements in the villages, which are not supported by Government. However, by the time the common man in the village also begins to buy food like somebody living in town, then the situation is alarming.

Therefore, I would like to implore that Government comes up with very clear policies to support the smallholders because this is where the core is and we should call upon the stakeholders to come up with very clear arrangements, especially water for production –(Member timed out.)

3.51
MR GIDEON ONYANGO (Independent, Samia-Bugwe County South, Busia): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We are aware that Agriculture still remains the backbone of our economy but we still face a big challenge with our infrastructural development, especially the roads. There is no way we can have a sound agricultural export, we cannot have connections in most of our communities and this is caused by the poor roads that we have in many parts of the country.

If we are to improve on our economy, we need to consider these issues critically and seriously; even the few projects that are already on regarding the road construction in various parts of this country are being delayed moreover with borrowed money. There are many roads that are yet to be constructed and we are waiting, every financial year, these roads are included in the budget year in and out but nothing is being done about them. 

Government needs to take on this seriously. If we are to improve our economy, these are key issues that we need to consider.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

3.53
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do appreciate the committee for the report but I have three issues to address to the House; One of them is in relation to the cost of credit, we have no choice but to rethink on our credit model and I would like to invite Members here that we will have interest rates decreasing and so, we need to look outside the box.

The Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development is scrutinising the Bill for reforming and liberalising the pension sector. I would like to invite Members to interest themselves in this Bill. Going forward, it is the only solution in the short and medium term that can help to reduce on the interest rates. 

For instance, National Social Security Fund as the biggest mobiliser of savings from workers has most of these monies committed by Government through domestic borrowing and commercial banks. In other words, private individuals are competing with Government; Government selling short-term credit in form of Treasury Bills and bonds and commercial banks too are struggling for the same money. Therefore, we need to liberalise and mobilise more savings from the public to be able to have more money available for borrowing.

Secondly, I have a problem with the way our borrowing externally is structured; the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in 2013 issued a public debt management framework and I am sure the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development every year is supposed to issue a medium term debt management strategy. However, we have observed clearly that we borrow money, which we cannot utilise. 
In other words, our borrowing is impulsive and plans problematic. We need to focus on our external borrowing strategy to rhyme with our intentions; otherwise, we will mortgage this country if we are not careful.

Thirdly, concerning income inequality, I believe we are not following our National Development Plan (NDP). We finalised with National Development Plan 1 and we are yet to comprehensively receive the evaluation of National Development Plan 1 and we are into NDP 11 whose theme is strengthening Uganda’s competencies for sustainable wealth creation and inclusive growth. I get the sense that the planning which is good on paper, is turning out to be white elephants. 

However, I would like to invite colleagues concerning budgets for sectors, to look at these sector budgets and see whether they are bringing out these themes or they are just paper tigers to pass the –(Member timed out.)     

3.57
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have listened carefully and I have concerns on the observation that our country is a food basket for the region. With what is happening, we are not a food basket, supporting this opportunity that we have. Where we are, we have just supported our communities with even borrowed food and yet we have comparative advantage that we should support so that we get more from other parts of the region.

Therefore, I would like to interest all the sectors that we prioritize popularizing this opportunity that we have to produce enough not only for the region but for our country so that the issue concerning the food scarcity is put to rest.

Secondly, the poor performance of the manufacturing subsector; we have emphasised about industrialisation but this has mainly remained on the statements made; we can do better by at least looking at the sub regions in the country. Where we have promised to industrialise these areas, we have to implement it for example, in West Nile we have prioritised the issue of the fruit industry but as my colleague from Yumbe has said, nothing much has been done. 

Under agriculture, I would like to emphasise the issue of the agricultural loan. Mr Speaker, I know and have visited the office in Arua, the 12 per cent is what it stands but the process which a farmer has to follow to get that money is so tedious. This money goes through SACCOs, at the sub county levels and when the SACCOs get this money individuals have to go to the SACCOs –(Member timed out.)

3.59
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for its good report. We are dealing with a very fragile economy that is subject to any form of volatility. Any form of shock affects this economy; we lack the necessary resilience that is needed to drive this economy. And because there is lack of resilience in this economy, there is a growing trend of dollarization of private credit. As we speak now, 44 percent of the private credit is actually in dollars – foreign exchange. 

And this has very serious ramifications particularly in the sense that in the repayment of these loans, the borrowers have to look for foreign exchange to repay the loans. And this only helps to escalate the pressure on the dollar. And therefore our exchange rate continues to depreciate continuously. And as long as the exchange rate continues to depreciate, the instability in the economy continues.

We really need to work on the resilience of the economy by investing very heavily in the productive sector of the economy. Unfortunately the Government has continued to ignore this. There is total lack of coordination even where money has been put; poor management in the productive sector; no coordination for production of exports. And where a country is not export-based, you cannot expect resilience. There are no exports and we continue to lament about this problem and do nothing about it – or very little. We allow people to export our minerals in the form they choose and they take everything. We do not invest in the agriculture that we need to drive our economy forward; we continue to rely on the traditional exports. And in any case, these traditional exports have not been growing either. So the economy is very fragile. (Member timed out.)

4.02
MR DANIEL MUHEIRWE (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for pricking us. However, I think we should not talk about factors affecting the economy without mentioning the counterfeits on the market. Mr Speaker, if you went to Kikuubo today, even when you are buying shoes, they will ask you: “Do you want duplicate or original?” This has caused a lot of losses to the economy and we should find a way of controlling these counterfeits that are affecting the growth of this economy.

Mr Speaker, we have industries but the so-called investors are coming with their own workers. If you went to even Kagadi today, you will find that the person hawking soap today is either an Indian or Chinese. We are talking of having no jobs but these jobs are being taken away by foreigners. If you went to the bank today to see how many ETFs are being conducted – how much money is being transferred to other countries like China and India, it is in volumes of sums. So the economy is actually losing a lot of money which would be saved or even invested here.

The report has talked of the fisheries sector performing poorly. Mr Speaker, what they have showed us is less; when you go to Lake Albert at night, you will see a city which is cosmetic. People are fishing with – (Member timed out.)

4.04
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have about two issues. I thank the committee for the good report, which is a bit detailed. But they did not come out clearly on the very high power tariffs, which has a very direct connection with the way we do business and our competitiveness. And because of the high power tariffs we have had to lose very many factories to our neighbours like Rwanda and Kenya, yet these countries also import power from us. It is ironical that we produce power, export it and we still remain with the highest power tariffs. I wish this committee could also interest itself in finding a solution – together with of course other committees – to these high power tariffs.

The issue of saying that we have more power today than it has hitherto been is false because we have suppressed demand – you want to use an electric cooking stove or a flat iron but because you fear the high bills, you end up using charcoal, hence destroying the environment. I think it is high time we addressed the issue of power tariffs.

On page 20, the committee talks about Karuma and Isimba projects; yes, these projects are flagship projects because they are very important and on schedule. It is only that the issue of quality was raised. Together with my committee we had an opportunity to visit these flagship project and we addressed ourselves to the problem of quality. Yes, there was a problem of quality and every one of you should be interested in this very big project – the biggest this country has ever undertaken. Yet the spillways are completely cracked. We are being told that they have been trying to get experts to fix these ones but – (Member timed out.)

4.06
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to echo the words by my colleague from Fort Portal. Honourable members, the economy is very bad. And very bad indeed if you look at the villages – how many people get two meals a day. Look at the levels of unemployment in this country. So we cannot sit here and talk about how bad the economy – and you cannot live on borrowed money. The Committee on National Economy is there only to approve loans and bring them on the Floor of Parliament.

Now, when we talk of exports, what drives the economy of this country? Agriculture, but how much money have we put in agriculture? Look at the coffee and cotton? The exports are not there. Now, when we talk of roads and the Standard Gauge Railway line – you talk of building a fort in Bukasa; it is going to be a white elephant. What are you going to export?

Our Private Sector Foundation is doing nothing; they cannot produce because of the high cost of material. Mr Speaker, look at the lending rates in the banks – they are very high. So people cannot borrow money. And therefore they cannot produce and yet the exports are on the increase when we do not export at all.  

So the economy of this country is very sick; people are suffering and we cannot even hold the LCI elections because there is no money. And let us face reality; the economy is very bad – we are suffering but we cannot do anything. Let us admit that we have failed. And we spend a lot of money in administration; all the money goes to administration. Look at the money that we are borrowing – the President was even lamenting because the money borrowed is just kept there and it is earning interest – it is not producing anything because borrowed money cannot produce –(Member timed out.)

4.09
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Mr Speaker, when we are talking about the economy, it is the lifeblood. That means the other parts of the body function on the blood. And that is why the consumers are complaining, the producers are complaining – the business community is  complaining because things are not okay. Actually, if it was a human being, then we would talk about him being in intensive care unit as we speak now. And it is going to collapse if we are joking with it. My issue here – I thank the committee for the report but there is a problem on figures that we are using in the country. And I have questioned them, mainly the Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development and Uganda Bureau of Statistics. If we could, then that calls for us as Parliament to come up with a board that would stabilise the economy. That should be a board that would include the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Bank of Uganda, the Uganda Bureau of Statistics, representative on the Parliament of Uganda and the public universities in Uganda. 

This will ensure that we at least come up with figures and analysis that will make us understand that we are running on real figures. If you translate the figures they are talking about into reality in the country, you will realise it is not true. Take an example of the way the co-operate companies are breaking up; it is because there is no profit. 

Of recent many other businesses such as Uchumi and many more have closed down. This is where many of our people are employed, pay the taxes and that is what we get as a country to run the economy. 

When you look at the unemployment rate we are talking about, you look at the interest rate of about 24 per cent that the beverages are supposed to borrow and that load of paying back is impossible, then that means the figures we are talking about –(Member timed out.)

4.11
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The agreement on both sides is that things are not good. The aggregate of what has been said and captured in the report - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Excuse me, hon. Wamanga-Wamai are you a Member of this committee? Then how did you contribute? You know the rules; so you are completely out of order. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, the aggregate of what has been said and what is in the report is on page 3; It reads, “The committee reports that during in financial year 2015/2016, the economy grew by 4.8 per cent lower than 5.1 per cent registered the previous year and below the programed levels of 5.8 per cent, missing the 7 per cent NDP II target.” 

The question that I am asking is didn’t we know that this economy is going down? There have been different efforts and declarations such as plan for modernisation of agriculture, “bonna baggagawale” and now Operation Wealth Creation. 

I remember in this Parliament, Mr Speaker, and you were here while I was still in the media; one of the Members of Parliament then, hon. Norbert Mao, I think quoting a socialist described a mad person as someone who does the same thing over and over but expecting different results. That was captured on the Hansard. 

If you cannot find a solution - you now have a Member of Parliament on the side of the Government saying at least in Rwanda things are done better and his colleagues are cheering on. If we have all the Members of Parliament on the Government side lamenting and making declarations that they cannot manage the economy, then why are they in Government? What are you doing there that you come here to pay testimony and yet, you have failed to plan for the country? What do you want us to tell you? Everybody who has stood has said that things are very bad; so what do you want us to do this side? You did what you did and you are now in charge but you are saying you cannot drive. You sound alarmed. 

Mr Speaker, this country needs to have a genuine conversation on what we can do, not just playing politics and concocting slogans one after another. Even from a micro level, I will tell you from the constituency I represent; you do not need these economic standards and slogans. Every single day, this is what we live; there are more people in sports betting clubs than in banking halls. There are people who trek to town every day because they do not have Shs 500 to board a taxi. You will see them on the road in the morning and in the evening. This is the economy you are running. 

One of my colleagues, hon. Lugoloobi, is a member of the Presidential Advisory Committee on Budget but he is also here saying things are fragile and very bad. I thought by him joining an advisory committee, he would come here to make proposals but he is also complaining like anyone else. 

Just immediately after the elections, someone responsible for creating wealth appointed to lead them, Gen. Salim Saleh, drew a list of business men who want to be bailed out. To him, that is how wealth is created through drawing a list of everybody who wants money including yourself and then going to the Government and asking for the money. That is what he did. That list was drawn by him just in Kampala here. 

Two months ago, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR MACHO: Mr Speaker, is hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju in order to begin telling Parliament stories that he has no evidence of? Is he in order to talk about senior Ugandans, who are not in the House? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have a standard guiding principle that we should spare people who have no right to be heard in this House to respond to certain kinds of allegations, unless we can substantiate them factually. We should, therefore, not bring them into a debate where they cannot respond. 

MR SSEMUJJU: I agree entirely, Mr Speaker. If the Member was only interested in following what takes place in this country by reading newspapers, he would know that actually, I am not saying anything new. If he does not read and I am saying something new, there is nothing I have said that is from my own head. 

I have said hon. Lugoloobi is a member of the advisory committee, maybe I was wrong. I have also said Gen. Salim Saleh is the head of Operation Wealth Creation and I was with him on TV when he was speaking about this list. Of course, I cannot force you to follow what goes on in the country. 

Mr Speaker, you now have nearly 10 million Ugandans that are living on food hand-outs. The Government has raised its hand pleading with World Food Programme because we cannot even feed ourselves. The reason I am bringing in these micro examples is just to emphasise the point that has been made. What decent people do is to accept that I have failed; can you provide solutions?

Time comes when you also have to give way. I remember what President Museveni wrote in one of his books entitled; “What is Africa’s Problem.” He said that the problem was about leaders overstaying in power; he did not mention the economy. At 44 years old when he captured power in the 1986, I was twelve years and four months old. We had a very energetic President but now we have a President who has aged. Look at his immediate helpers from the Vice President and the Prime Minister. They are all candidates for retirement. (Laughter) 

Now, we are here saying that the economy cannot work; you even want to migrate to Rwanda. 

When internally you are in a retreat in Kyankwanzi, in the Presidential Advisory Committee on Budget, kindly, ask the President and a couple of other immediate big bosses who are the Vice President, Prime Minister Deputy and so forth. Tell them, you cannot run a country when you are tired. That is why all his efforts have become slogans; bonna baggaggawale Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture, Operation Wealth Creation.

The President in defiance yesterday said that the officials in Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development are all thieves. This is what we say in our defiance campaign. May be, he did not know that he has joined us.

Mr Speaker, I am saying this in good faith, that let us have a conversation. This is our country and we do not have anywhere to go; we will not go to Rwanda. 

If you fear the cameras and the public, you can quietly come to us and say that the next meeting we shall not go to Kyankwanzi for bull roasting. We shall find a neutral ground and we give you solutions on how you can run the economy. 

Otherwise, you will be lamenting - if someone entered this Parliament, they would be surprised. You will fail to understand which side is Government because there are more cries that side that on our side.  Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.22
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank Members of the Committee on National Economy for the report they have produced, not only to inform Parliament but also the Government on how best we can address the challenges that we are facing in our economy. 

It is not true that the economy is sick. [Hon members: No, No] It is true that there are areas of challenges, which all of us must address.  Mr Speaker, I have identified a number of areas, which Members have raised. I would like to respond to a few of them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, do a few of them; we do not have a lot of time.

MR BAHATI: One is domestic arrears. Our portfolio of domestic arrears stands at Shs 2.1 trillion. Out of this, the domestic debt is close to Shs 500 billion.  Shs 1.1 billion is out of court awards and the rest is close to Shs 700 billion.

Mr Speaker, as you saw yesterday, we have provided Shs 301 billion to reduce the domestic arrears of Shs 500 billion. We hope that in the next financial year, this will at least move a long way in addressing it. 

One of the reasons people are accumulating domestic arrears is the discipline of accounting officers. The Public Finance Management Act, which was approved by this House does not give room for an accounting officer to acquire and commit Government without resources. This is a matter that we are handling to see that accounting officers are disciplined from engaging and committing Government without resources. 


The second is the issue of interest rate. Hon. Matthias Nsubuga made this point that out of what we call the loanable funds that we have now, we have Shs 24 trillion. (Interruption)

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. You have said that the issue of domestic arrears is because the accounting officers - but can you, please, clarify to this House - For example, we are now in the fourth quarter; there are already commitments but money is not yet released and when it is released, the districts and some other agencies which are on the Information Security Management System (ISMS) have unstable network. When they receive the money late, it is remitted on the 15th day of June.

Could you, please, clarify to this House whether taking back the money to the ministry at the end of the financial year by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is not the cause of the domestic arrears. Do you give back that money to the agencies because we have never seen that report in the House? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you could also help us. There was a debate out of this House; that even committed funds are returned to the Consolidated Fund on the deadline date; is that true?

MR BAHATI: Thank you. Mr Speaker, I do not think that the issue of release of funds, for example, in the last quarter is one of the reasons contributing to the huge pile of domestic arrears because more than half of domestic arrears are from court awards. Another Shs 700 billion from salary arrears, which have been brought about by people recruiting midway without planning for them.

On the issue of returns from the districts, there are just a few, which are not on our system. Previously, we would send money to the district but if they do not spend it at the end of the year, they were supposed to return it. However, now almost 60 per cent of the districts are on our system, meaning they spend from the Consolidated Fund. At the end of the financial year, if you have not spent the money, it remains because it has not moved. There are very few districts that receive money through commercial banks. 

The other issue, Mr Speaker, was on the interest rates, on which hon. Nsubuga tried to find the solution. The problem is that we have little loanable money in the economy. For example, we now have close to Shs 24 trillion, out of which Shs 15.5 trillion are for short term of one to three years. 

The long term loans are close to Shs 9 trillion and out of that, NSSF has Shs 7.5 trillion. So, we are all competing for these short term loans, which raises the interest rate. 

If we can mobilise savings, we shall increase money for long term financing. As Government, in the next financial year, we are investing Shs 50 billion in UDB. 

This House approved Shs 76 billion capitalise UDB we hope that in the next three years, we will be able to capitalise UDB and do the reforms. (Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: This is about the previous point – the operation of the single treasury account vis-à-vis the problems with the local governments; the powers of local governments to raise and spend revenue as well as to do virement and reallocations. 

In the current system, it is not only the network but the power to raise money locally to implement service delivery is also a problem. How do you help the local governments to operate as provided for in the Local Government Act? There is a problem in the districts. They cannot raise money themselves, which they can use to implement service delivery in healthcare, education etcetera. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please, wind up.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I have two points as I wind up. The second last point is about our planning system. Colleagues, we approved our National Vision 2040. We approved the National Development Plan, which is broken into five years. We are also having the sectoral plans. 

As we will see in the compliance to the National Development Plans by the National Planning Authority (NPA), we have some issues. However, the real issue about planning is the discipline of execution. We have plans in place but we continue to see that some of the sectors are not really sticking to implementing those plans. This is where Parliament can also play an important role, especially the sectoral plans. 

The other point is about public debts. The chairperson of the committee has said – according to their analysis – that we will take almost 93 years to pay back our debts. Well, they did not factor in the blessings that we are going to have from the oil. In 2020, we will be receiving revenue of $3 billion. We now stand at $8.4 billion. In 2020, we shall start getting close to $3 billion per annum. Therefore, there is no way we can take another over 50 years to pay out our debts. That is not true. However, we are very cautious –(Interruption)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for giving way. Mr Speaker, I am not persuaded by the submission of the honourable minister alluding to the revenues that are going to come from the oil sector, which he says is going to be the saviour of this country given the experience, which we have already had. We got a lot of money from taxes in this sector. 

It was almost Shs 2.4 trillion and we cannot even account for it now. It only ended up in handshakes. (Applause) Therefore, when you say this revenue from oil is going to offset all these domestic and foreign debts that we have, can we really believe you?

MR BAHATI: In the interest of time, that will be a debate for another time. (Laughter) A total of $8.4 billion is our current public debt and we are cautiously borrowing so that we do not put ourselves in trouble. For example, the debt-to-GDP rate now – including the projected Standard Gauge Railway (SGR) – will be 38.6 per cent compared to the threshold of 50 per cent.

Mr Speaker, as I end, I want to reject the assertion of hon. Ruhunda that the NRM Government is not a serious Government. Hon. Ruhunda, this Government is serious. (Applause) In 1986, our revenue collections were just a mere Shs 5.6 billion. As we speak today, we are collecting Shs 12 trillion –(Interjections)- Our GDP was in the negative but as we speak, today, we are at Shs 24 trillion. We had four roads only but today, we have 35 tarmacked roads. This is a serious Government. Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Committee chairperson, you have two minutes.

4.35
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me to thank the honourable members for the input they have had in this report. Let me also thank the minister for his intervention.

I would like to appreciate the honourable members for recognising the fact that the issues raised by the committee in this report are indeed not small but big and credible issues. The committee has taken note of the issues that you would like us to look into. There are quite a number of them and I would like to promise that we have taken note of the issues you have raised and they will enrich our next report.

Quite a number of Members have raised issues on the agriculture sector and the need, probably, to revisit taxes on agricultural implements. There are also issues surrounding agricultural funds. 

Mr Speaker, the committee made a very good recommendation on the issues surrounding the agricultural sector and I would like to invite honourable members to look at page 28 that could probably help in handling the challenges that we have in the agricultural sector.

We have taken note of the input and greatly appreciate it. I promise that the subsequent report we are going to have will capture all these inputs. It is also my hope that the information provided here will be used by all of us in our subsequent deliberations. Mr Speaker, may it please you that this report is adopted. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question that the report of the Committee on National Economy on the Performance of the Economy during the financial year 2015/2016 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation of students of Mbuya College School. They are represented by hon. Michael Kabaziguruka, the MP for Nakawa Division and hon. NabilahSempala, the MP for Kampala. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. (Applause)

MR MPUUGA: Mr Speaker, yesterday, we were supposed to have the Minister of Security here to brief Parliament on the state of our national security. We were promised he would come today. I am seeking your guidance as to whether we should wait for the minister because the situation is not getting any better. 

Over the last 48 hours, a mini-curfew has been imposed on some of our constituents. In Masaka and the neighbourhood, people cannot freely move. When they address the media, security tells people there is no curfew but when it gets dark, they actually implement a curfew. Therefore, we would like to know whether we will have the minister or we advise our people to find their own ways of securing themselves out of this seemingly scary situation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, usually what we put on the Order Paper are statements, which we have received and are ready for uploading and discussion. The information we got is that the minister was preparing something and would come here. As soon as he is here, we will receive the statement. Thank you.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE UGANDA COMMUNICATIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had a lot of debate on this Bill yesterday and on the motion for second reading of the Bill. There were issues that needed to be improved on the text of the Bill but discussion on the principles of the Bill was comprehensive. Can I put the question for the second reading of the Bill and then we can go and see whether the provisions can be adopted or not at committee stage? Can I put the question honourable members? I now put the question that the Bill entitled  “The Uganda Communications (Amendment) Bill, 2016” be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE UGANDA COMMUNICATIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: This is a one clause Bill. Clause 1, committee chairperson.

4.41
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION AND TECHNOLOGY (Mr Maxwell Akora): Thank you, Mr Chairperson. The committee reports the amendment to the Uganda Communication Commission (Amendment) Bill, 2016.

We propose to amend by replacing clause 1 with the following:
    1) Amendment of Act No. 1 of 2013 
Section 93 of the Uganda Communication Act, 2013 is amended by:
    a) In subsection (1), by repealing the words “and with the approval of Parliament.”
    b)  By inserting a new paragraph (3a), immediately after subsection (3), as follows: 
“Parliament may by resolution revoke the regulations or particular provision of the regulations within 30 days from the date the regulations are laid.”

Mr Chairperson, the justification for this amendment is to ensure efficient and effective execution of delegated authority to make regulations by the minister. I submit. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that is the amendment proposed by the committee. Can I put the question to that amendment? I now put the question to the amendment of the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ICT AND COMMUNICATIONS (Ms Aida Nantaba): Mr Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for the resumption of the House to enable the committee of the whole House report. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ICT AND COMMUNICATIONS (Ms Aida Nantaba): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Communications (Amendment) Bill, 2016” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ICT AND COMMUNICATIONS (Ms Aida Nantaba): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE UGANDA COMMUNICATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016

4.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ICT AND COMMUNICATIONS (Ms Aida Nantaba): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Communications (Amendment) Bill, 2016,” be read the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED THE UGANDA COMMUNICATIONS (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2017

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, honourable minister, honourable chairperson, Members of the committee and honourable members for this debate. I think yesterday’s debate was instructive and we have been able to come this far. Next item.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedural point - 

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your kind indulgence. The debate yesterday over the Bill we have just passed was a compromised debate and the amendments so considered are so far tentatively acceptable. However, we discussed yesterday that the minister has never considered establishing a tribunal under this Act and it is problematic.

While the minister has sought these wide-ranging powers, we would like to get commitment from the minister as to when we will have this tribunal in place so as to provide a remedy for people in the media industry to seek justice where ministers are acting with impunity and abusing their powers.

MS NANTABA: Mr Speaker, the Executive Director of Uganda Communication Commission wrote to Judicial Service Commission to have the tribunal constituted and established. However, they have cited the cases of lack of funds and they are waiting. As long as funds are availed to them, they will be able to constitute the tribunal.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who is in charge of the funds?

MS NANTABA: Government has to provide the funds, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it provided for in the budget that we are processing?

MR NANTABA: It is not provided for, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we look in the budget and make sure that this money is provided for in the budget this financial year? We need to appropriate it so that it can work. That is a valid matter. Let us take it like that.  Next item.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LEADERSHIP CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Clerk, is it Bills Committee Stage? Chairperson, would you like to brief us where we were on this matter.

4.48
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oboth): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The last time this Bill came up for second reading, it was at the committee stage and that is when it was adjourned.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which clause were we on? 

MR OBOTH: We were on clause 3, where there was some mismatch and the presiding officer guided that we harmonise.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Has it been harmonised? 

MR OBOTH: Much so, Mr Speaker.

Clause 3

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. We propose to amend clause 3 by immediately after clause 2, inserting the following, “3A Functions of the inspectorate.

In enforcing this code, the inspectorate shall carry out the following functions” and it names them. This other harmonised version is uploaded on our iPads as an addendum for ease of reference to all Members.

The justification is to specifically provide for the functions of the inspectorate in a separate clause with the emphasis to require the inspectorate to refer offences committed under the code for prosecution by the DPP.

The second justification is to provide for the inspectorate to prosecute breaches of the code before the tribunal. 

Mr Chairperson, the Leadership Code (Amendment) Bill we are considering is in relation to creating a tribunal to empower the enforcement of this Act. Therefore, it creates offences and we are removing all the offences that were originally being prosecuted by IGG to be prosecuted by the DPP. All the criminal offences to be prosecuted by the DPP and the breaches like failure to declare, abuse, among others, are to be tried before the tribunal. That is the amendment we are proposing.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Have you read the text of the amendment already? You need to read it in full for the record.

MR OBOTH: “Clause 3A Functions of the inspectorate. In enforcing this code, the inspectorate shall carry out the following functions –

    (a) receive, examine and verify declarations lodged with it under this code;
    (b) investigate or cause an investigation to be conducted into any alleged breach of this code by a leader;
    (c) make a report on any breach of this code and order the matter to the tribunal for adjudication.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable, would you like to read (c) again? Read it again.

MR OBOTH: “(c) make a report of any breach of this code and refer the matter to the tribunal for adjudication.

    (d) prosecute breaches of the code before the tribunal;
    (e) make a report to the Directorate of Public Prosecutions on offences committed under the code;
    (f) recommend awards, disbursements and such payments or rewards as it may consider appropriate in connection with any assistance rendered in the enforcement of this code;
    (g) collaborate with other law enforcement agencies to facilitate the enforcement of this code;
    (h) investigate the actions or omissions of a former leader for breach of this code;
    (i) carry out any other functions prescribed by or under this code.”

I have given the justification to the proposed amendment. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, honourable chairperson. Honourable members, that is the proposed amendment by the committee; insertion of a new clause.

FR LOKODO: Mr Chairperson, we agree with what the committee has proposed. However, we proposed an amendment to paragraph (g) which reads, “Collaborate with other law enforcement agencies to facilitate the enforcement of this code.”

We propose that instead of “law enforcement”, we replace it with “other Government agencies to facilitate the enforcement of the code.” This is because it is not only law enforcement entities that support the IGG in pursuing their duties but there are other agencies of Government like Uganda Revenue Authority, Land Registry, Uganda Registration Service Bureau, National Identification and Registration Authority, among others. These are Government agencies not law enforcement agencies.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Could you now read your amendment as you are proposing it? Read the whole text.

FR LOKODO: The amendment will read, “Collaborate with other Government agencies to facilitate the enforcement of the code.”

MR OBOTH: We do not have much. All enforcement agencies are owned by Government so we will concede to that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, thank you. Can I put the question to this amendment proposed by the minister? I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ANYWARACH: I agree with the chairperson except that his proposed position seems to suggest that as soon as you make your declaration, you have made it in bad faith. Therefore, if there is any issue of mal-declaration, automatically you must be investigated. 

To my understanding, you make the declaration in good faith. There can be errors, mistakes, among other things, which may be revealed in the course of the IGG re-evaluating your declaration. Therefore, there should be a subclause to provide for an interface with suspected mal-declaration leaders. That gives it a human face by indicating that we interfaced with the personality in question. 

Mr Chairperson, my justification is that the IGG, in other jurisdictions, is ombudsman; making recommendations on actions to be taken and prosecution. However, where we choose to give prosecution powers to the IGG, we need not lose that human face that we are supposed to be recommending. Therefore, suspected or potential culprits should be invited in case of mal-declaration.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPESON: Which paragraphs are talking about that and you would like to improve on them?

MR ANYWARACH: In the sub-clause that he was providing on what the IGG does; powers to receive, powers to probably investigate, among others. We are saying that there must be at least a provision on inviting; the IGG shall invite for a fair hearing instead of proceeding to prosecution.

The reason I am struggling is because they have not given us the copies. We are hearing it directly from his mouth and trying to amend. 

MR MUGOYA: Mr Chairperson, I would like to guide and also give information. It appears that my brother has not gone through all the proposals of this amendment but if you go ahead, you will find that we provided a provision within the Bill for the principles of natural justice. Therefore, that provision or your plight is catered for in the subsequent proposals within the Bill.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairperson, that brings it clearer that if there is an intention of the law giver somewhere ahead providing for natural justice, it must also be binding under the clauses where we are putting the functions of the IGG. It must be expressed there so that the two can be read in harmony; that you do not proceed to immediately investigate when there is a provision ahead of inviting the declarants to interface with you over questionable declaration.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable member. This is functions of the Inspectorate. Do you want one of the functions to be to invite declarants? I thought that is inherent in the investigation. Therefore, when they say, how does the IGG do the investigations, the procedure is provided for because these are just functions.

Can I put the question to this amendment as proposed by the chairperson? This is a new clause that they are proposing to insert immediately after clause 2; it is a new clause 3A. Can I put the question to the creation of a new clause 3A? 

I put the question to the amendment as proposed by the chairperson to insert a new clause 3A in the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. We proposed to insert clause 3A and now the amendment of clause 3, we propose to substitute the –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable, let me put the question properly. Can I now put the question that a new clause 3A stands part of the Bill?

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. We make further amendment proposal for clause 3 to amend section 4 of the principal Act by substituting the following: “(4) Declaration of property and liability.
(1) 	A leader shall -
    a) within three months after the commencement of this code; and 
    b) Thereafter every two years, during the month of March, submit to the inspectorate a written declaration of the leader’s property and liability in the prescribed form.

(2) 	A person shall- 
    a) within three months after becoming a leader; and 
    b) Thereafter every two years, during the month of March, submit to the inspectorate a written declaration of his/her property and liability in the prescribed form.

(3)	A leader shall, before the expiration of his/her term of office, declare his/her property and liability if his/her term of office expires six months after his/ her last declaration.

(4)	A leader shall state how he or she acquired or incurred, as the case may be, the property or liability included in the declaration submitted to the inspectorate.

(5)	Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, a leader shall only declare property or liability –
(a) in which he or she has an interest; or 
(b) which is owned by any other person but was with or without consideration, bequeathed, donated, sold, assigned, transferred by the leader having been declared as his or her property in a preceding declaration.
(6)	In this section, a leader shall be taken to have an interest where:
    a) In case of property -
    i) it is matrimonial property;
    ii) it is owned by the leader;
    iii) it is jointly owned by the leader with any other person;
    iv) it is held in trust by the leader for any other person; or
    v) it is contained in a joint account for the benefit of the leader and any other person.
    b) In case of a liability, it was acquired, guaranteed or is payable by the leader on his or her behalf or on behalf of any other person.
(7)	A leader shall ensure that all the information contained in the declaration submitted to the inspectorate is true and correct to the best of his or her knowledge.
(8)	Where possible, a declaration shall be accompanied by proof of ownership of the property contained in the declaration.
(9)	A leader who, without justifiable cause, submits a declaration to the inspectorate any time after the period prescribed under subsections (1) and (2) of this section commits a breach of the code.”

The justification: 
1. 	For clarity and better drafting.
2. 	To expand the provision to require a leader to declare assets and liabilities in which he or she has a joint interest with any other person irrespective of their relation.
3. 	To expand the provision to ensure that the leader declares all property and liabilities in which she or he has interest. And 
4. 	To define interest. 

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that is the proposal.

FR LOKODO: Mr Chairman, we are in consonance with the chairman of the committee. However, we would like to propose an amendment in the two places. The first one is the words “property and liability” used by the committee in the whole section. We propose that it be changed to “Income, assets and liabilities”. 

Mr Chairman, this is because section 4(1) of the principal Act requires that leaders to declare income, assets and liabilities not properties. Moreover, the Leadership Code declaration form, regulations 2016, which we are already using, is headed, “Declaration of income, assets and liabilities form”.

Therefore, proposing the amendment will cause a little bit of change because then, we have to go to all the documents we have and replace “income, assets and liabilities” with “property and liability”, which we think will be cumbersome. For example, when we know that the declaration form we are using reads “Income, assets and liabilities”, if we withdraw this then we have to go back home, rewrite everything and then wait for another period.

Mr Chairman, I would like to say that “property and liability” be replaced with “Income, assets and liabilities” as it is in the law. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You said you had two amendments.

FR LOKODO: Yes. The second one, Mr Chairperson is on paragraph (6)(i). They are proposing “matrimonial property”, a new nomenclature, which does not exist in the law. We therefore suggest that a definition be given for “matrimonial property” and since it is neither in the Bill nor in the law, probably this could be done so that it does not stand out as a strange phraseology or word in the Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Have you done it?

FR LOKODO: We are proposing that - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: If we agree to use the words “matrimonial property” then when we come to the definition section, we will deal with the definition. Is that correct? 

Can we deal with that amendment because this one is to define “matrimonial property” but the other substantial amendment is calling for consistency in the use of language in the particular statute and law? That is what the minister is trying to do here.

MR OBOTH: We have a problem with why the minister is not accepting “property and liabilities” because what we actually do is about property interest and liability. The only fear the minister gave in his justification is about the paperwork but this is the amendment we are doing. If we are amending the whole law, why are you afraid of declaration forms? We are amending so that it is wider. “Asset” is narrow in the actual sense but if your only fear is “property”, you agree that whatever is property is an asset. You are only worrying about the papers you had printed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think the minister has a point because the definition of an “asset” means a thing owned by a person such as property, which has value and can be sold or used to pay a debt. It is defined.

For consistency, honourable member, let us not waste time on this; it is clear. Part one, “Functions of the inspectorate and declaration of income, assets and liabilities”. That is the wording used in the Act so the minister is asking for consistency. 

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Chairperson, when you say an “asset”, in accounting language by principles -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, this is not accounting language. It is defined in this law.

MR KAKOOZA: What I am trying to say is, if you say that you are declaring assets and liabilities, it means that all that is owned by you, which has value, has to be declared. That is what it means and if there are liabilities then they depend on the assets you have. Even if I have a property, it is just an asset to me and it is owned by me. The principles and objectives of the Leadership Code say that you must declare your assets and liabilities.

Therefore, the definition is that I have to declare all the assets that I have and the liabilities. It does not say that where an asset has no income, do not declare it. I do not see the reason why you are now saying that you should diverge from the principle to say that one must declare only those, which have income. It does not make sense. You must go with the objective of the Bill, which is principally that you have to declare your assets and liabilities.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable member. That is why I was saying that we needed to be clear. It is about declaration of income, assets and liabilities. That is what the law is about.

MR OBOTH: Since this is the minister’s Bill and as a committee we had laboured to do research and benchmarked on this, we will concede to the minister’s conservativeness and proceed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that is what is proposed by the minister. In the place of “property and liability”, those phrases should contain the full phrase of “declaration of income, assets and liabilities”. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I now put the question to the amendment proposed by the committee?

MR KAKOOZA: I need clarification from the chairperson on the proposal under (9) where he was saying that when I declare an asset, say land, I must accompany it with a document. I thought it is the work of the IGG to find out whether what I declared is the correct thing. There is a section in (9) which states that I have to accompany my declaration with the relevant documents. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that (8)? Where possible, a declaration shall be accompanied by proof ownership of the property contained in the declaration. 

MR KAKOOZA: Such as bank statements - I thought it is the work of the IGG to find out whether what has been declared is correct, not me to do it?

MR AOGON: There is also a section that is talking about a written declaration but we want you to recall the fact that these days we declare online. Does this cater for everything? Let us think about this and see whether it is well contained.

MR OBOTH: I will start with hon. Kakooza. Subclause (8) says, “Where possible”. This is very instructive; it is not mandatory. It does not create any obligation on you, the person declaring. It will be at your convenience. You are at a café declaring all this, now we do it online but the practice is that you should be able to backup just in case they want to verify. “Where possible” is not redundant; it is there to serve both ways.

Hon. Aogon, even while filling those forms online it can be construed as written or writing.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairperson, this is a serious law and we do not have copies. Procedurally, are we moving rightly? They are not even on the ipad.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is uploaded, honourable. Check and let the IT people help.

Can I put the question to the amendment proposed by the chair and as amended by the minister? I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR OBOTH: We do not have any amendment on 4; we have 4(b).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: This is clause 4 on the Bill.

MR OBOTH: Apparently we do not have an amendment on that, unless the minister -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 4 of the Bill. You intend to insert a new clause.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There is no paragraph (8) in clause 4. It is your Bill, look at it. Honourable minister, your paper does not look like a Bill. Clause 4 is simply section 5 of the principal Act is amended by repealing subsection (2) (b). That is what is in clause 4.

I now put the question that clause 4 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The committee chairperson wanted to insert something after clause 4.

MR OBOTH: We had proposals to insert 4 (b), (c) and (d). Actually, that is how I lost the –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can we deal with 4(a) first?

MR OBOTH: We finished 4(a).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You brought it before clause 2?

MR OBOTH: It was before clause 3. We were supposed to insert that immediately after clause 3 but before clause 4. That is right.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, let us then proceed with 4(b). Have we dealt with 4(a)?

MR OBOTH: We are done with 4(a).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Then let us deal with 4(b). He has not read 4(b). We have adopted 4(a).

MR OBOTH: 4(a) is where you put the amendment. Honourable minister, this is where you proposed the declaration of assets.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson of the committee, that was not 4(a), that was 4. But then again, that was for clause 3 - this numbering. 

MR OBOTH: I think I had a mix up with numbering.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, it was 3A that we adopted so we have not dealt with 4A.

MR OBOTH: With your guidance, we proceed to the proposed insertion of 4A immediately after 3. 4A would be “Declaration of property and liability to accounting officer. 
(1)A public officer –“

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson, are you on 4A?

MR OBOTH: Yes, I am on 4A.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: My document says verification of declaration – 

MR OBOTH: Verification is 4C.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think our documents are - Okay, proceed.

MR OBOTH: I would invite my honourable colleagues to go to the addendum uploaded three days ago and not the report.

We propose to insert 4A immediately after clause 3 to read, “4A. Declaration of property and liability to accounting officer.

    (1) A public officer, to whom section 4 of this code does not apply shall - 
    (a) within three months of commencing work in public service; and 
    (b) thereafter, every two years, - submit to the accounting officer or the head of the ministry, department or agency, a written declaration of his or her property and liability.
    (2) Notwithstanding subsection (1), a public officer shall only declare property and liability in which he or she has an interest.
    (3) In this section, a public officer shall be taken to have had an interest where:
    (a) In case of property:
    (i) it is matrimonial property; or  
    (ii) it is owned by the public officer;
    (iii) it is jointly owned by the public officer with any other person;
    (iv) it is held in trust by the public officer for any other person;
    (v)  it is contained in a joint account for the benefit of the public officer and any other person. 

    (b) In case of a liability, it was acquired, guaranteed or is payable by the public officer on his or her behalf or on behalf of any other person. 

    (4) A public officer making a declaration under this section shall ensure that all the information contained in the declaration to the accounting officer or the head of the ministry, department or agency submitted is true and correct to the best of his or her knowledge. 
    (5) The accounting officer or the head of the ministry, department or agency to whom a declaration is made under subsection (1) shall keep the information contained in the declaration confidential and shall not disclose it to any person. 
    (6) The accounting officer or the head of the ministry, department or agency to whom a declaration is made under subsection (1) shall examine the declaration and if he or she has reason to believe that the public officer is in possession of pecuniary resources or property disproportionate to his or her known sources of income, may make a reference to the inspectorate.
    (7) The accounting officer or the head of the ministry, department or agency shall, prior to making a reference to the inspectorate under subsection (6), require the public officer to account for any matter contained in a declaration submitted to him or her. 
    (8) The inspectorate shall, within 30 days of receipt of the reference in subsection (6), investigate the reference and take any action as authorised by this code. 
    (9) The accounting officer or the head of the ministry, department or agency shall, in taking any decision under this section, comply with the rules of natural justice. 
    (10) A public officer aggrieved by the decision of the accounting officer or the head of the ministry, department or agency may apply to the High Court for redress. 
    (11) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, no action shall be taken against a public officer based on any matter set out in the reference under subsection (6) until it has been adjudicated by the tribunal or as the case may be, as directed by the inspectorate. 
    (12) In this section, accounting officer means a person who is -
    (a) designated or appointed in writing as accounting officer by the Secretary to the Treasury to be responsible for a vote; or
    (b) appointed as accounting officer under an Act of Parliament or under an instrument of appointment made under an Act of Parliament to be responsible for a vote.”

The justification is to require persons employed in the public service to make declarations of their assets and liabilities to the accounting officer or the head of the ministry, department or agency to which they are employed every two calendar years. 

This is important because when they consider the ranks, the current legal regime requires one to declare when he/she is at the principal level but even the lower cadres amass a lot of wealth. Therefore, by the time they start declaring, they would be so wealthy that the law cannot catch them. It is on this basis that we are trying to spread the net as a fight against corruption, not only looking at the top and that is the additional justification.

FR LOKODO: Mr Chairperson, we are in consonance with the chairman of the committee except in clause 4A paragraph (8). We would prefer to add something after this code; the last word of clause 4A paragraph (8) so that it reads, “The inspectorate shall, within 30 days of receipt of the reference in subsection (6), investigate the reference and take any action as authorised by this code or any other law.” This is because the Leadership Code might have been left out and this person can still be caught by another law, for example, the Anti-Corruption Act.

MR OBOTH: We concede to that amendment to include –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I put the question to the amendment proposed by the minister? I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KAKOOZA: Clarification on the declaration of the public officers; spreading the net to all the cadres. I would like to be helped because we are declaring online. If I declare online, I do not get confirmation that I have declared. What happens on the Internet is that I would have submitted the data to IGG but I do not get a receipt, which confirms that I have declared. What happens when I am to prove whether I declared and I have no evidence to show for it? I need to be helped as to whether we can put a provision such that when I declare, I get a hard copy like we have been doing when there is a hard copy.

However, online, the data can disappear and the person I declared to may say that he or she never received my copy. Therefore, where can one get proper confirmation?

FR LOKODO: Mr Chairperson, I would like to allay the fears of the member. One, it is normally advisable that when you send any document anywhere, you leave a copy with you. However, it is common that every time IGG receives the information sent, they send you a response to say, “Dear leader, we have received your declaration and we thank you” for having behaved accordingly.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The Member is saying, suppose that does not come, arising from problems with the –

FR LOKODO: It is automatic and if it does not come instantly then you demand for it.

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Chairperson, to prove a case you must have evidence. You do not simply say that when you are taken somewhere to prove, you must have a copy. That is why they provide a receipt or an acceptance that a copy is provided for. Even if it is still online, for example, when you are applying for a visa to the USA, you pay the money and after paying the money, it automatically gives you a receipt indicating the amount you have paid and even acknowledging. 

However, here after filling, it says, we have received your copy. Suppose somewhere, somehow somebody does not print the data? What happens? There must be a confirmation or a receipt or printout to be given. What is happening online now is they say, we have received your declaration. It does not confirm and acknowledge that what you have declared has been received neither does it give a printout as proof that I have declared. That is my main worry.

MR BYARUGABA: Thank you, honourable, for giving way. Last week, I complied and filled in the relevant forms online and immediately I clicked send, within seconds, I got a confirmation with a token number, which I copied and kept as part and parcel of the confirmation. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, is that a matter for this law or that is something administrative? 

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Chairperson, with the former declaration, they used to give us a hard copy and it was in the law. Whenever, I would submit my copy it is in the law that they must acknowledge. Yes, it is there in the Leadership Code Act.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Has that law been repealed?

MR KAKOOZA: Of course, when they changed the method of declaration, that particular clause of confirmation - You do not print out to get that receipt as an acknowledgement. They just confirm by way of a token. This token given as a code does not confirm or acknowledge that IGG has received your copy.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, I am looking for the relevance of that in this particular provision that we are discussing.

MR OBOTH: This particular provision we are handling is for new recruits into public service. It does not cover the Members of Parliament. The one that covers us is the one that we dealt with previously but concerning this one, the officer within three months after he/she gets employed either as a clerk assistant in Parliament, writes to the Clerk to Parliament declaring what he or she owns. 

The format is that it must be put into writing not even filling a form. We did not want to create a lot of paper work. You just declare after getting the job and this is for the beginners. For those who will come here or go to any Government institution at any senior level, they would have been declaring. Therefore, it does not cover them. This is for junior staff. 

However, to allay my brother’s fear, every person who has declared online, including me, is given a number starting with IG-ODS and then the number. That is the acknowledgement and when you click on it, you get to yourself. That is so unique to your own identity and that is after your submission.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like to have submissions on 4A only. If you would like to make submission on 4A, you are welcome. If you are not, please hold your peace.

MAJ. GEN. ONESMUS KUTEESA: What is already done here covers us all because once you put your fingerprint, anybody will get to know what you own because everything is now computerised. Therefore, hon. Kakooza’s old methods may not work. Please, we have gone digital. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I now put the question to this clause? Honourable members, I put the question that the new proposed clause, as amended, be part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairperson, we have the insertion of 4B: “Prohibition of anticipatory declaration of property and liability. It shall be a breach of this code for a leader to include, in a declaration submitted to the inspectorate, property or liability that” – and there it will be changed accordingly. Where we put “property and liability”, it will be a consequential amendment – “he or she does not own or has not yet acquired or has no interest in at the time he or she makes a declaration under this code.”

The justification is to prohibit a leader from making declaration of property or liability they do not own or they have not acquired at the time of declaration.

Mr Speaker, it is a practice we actually found in Nigeria when we went for benchmarking. Nigerians are known world over and now most people have anticipatory declarations. When they are expecting a deal of $40 million, they declare now so that it will be very difficult for you to catch them, especially that they are usually very lucky that they are not verified at that very time and it is very difficult. 

Therefore, we are trying to be ahead of time so that we provide this here early enough so that anybody who declares property or liability in anticipation - When they know that they are going to default on some matter, they declare liability of Shs 300 million purely to defeat the purpose of the law to fight the corrupt. That is the amendment that we propose.

FR LOKODO: I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Honourable members, I now put the question for the insertion of the new proposed clause 4B by the chair. I put the question that it forms part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)
 
MR OBOTH: Mr Chair, 4C: “Verification of declaration

    (1) The Inspectorate may verify the contents of a declaration submitted by a leader under this code.
    (2) The inspectorate shall, within seven days of making the decision to verify the contents of a declaration under subsection (1) and by notice in writing, inform a leader of the decision, appointing a date on which the verification shall commence.
    (3) The inspectorate may, in verifying the contents of a declaration submitted by a leader - 
(a) 	access any document relating to the asset and liability declared by the leader and in possession of him or her or any other person or institution; 
(b) 	access the physical location of all immovable property declared by a leader; 
(c) 	require the production of any document relating to the asset and liability declared by a leader; 
(d) 	access bank accounts or any other financial records relating to a declaration made by the leader; 
(e) 	do any other act necessary for the enforcement of the code. 

    (4) A leader whose declaration is being verified may, during the verification process, be present personally or be represented by any person of his or her choice.
    (5) The inspectorate shall, within three months of carrying out a verification of the contents of a declaration, submit to the leader a report of the findings of the verification.
    (6) The inspectorate shall, during the verification process, comply with the rules of natural justice.
    (7) Where the verification reveals a breach of the code, the inspectorate shall take any action as authorised by this code.
    (8) The inspectorate shall ensure that the verification process is carried out within a reasonable time, in any case not less than 60 working days from the date of commencement.”

The justification is to set out a procedure to be followed by the inspectorate in verifying declarations made by a leader. 

FR LOKODO: Mr Chairperson, I would like to propose in paragraph (2), the insertion of the word “physically” between the words “to” and “verify” so that paragraph (2) reads, “The inspectorate shall, within seven days of making the decision to physically verify the contents of a declaration under subsection (1) and by notice in writing, inform a leader of the decision, appointing a date on which the verification shall commence.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is there any other way of verifying?

FR LOKODO: We just wanted to be sure that – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, but can you verify it any other way?

FR LOKODO: We thought it was ambiguous if left that way but if you think it is obvious – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, just educate us if there is another way you can verify things without physical verification. If there is another way then we can have the fear but if there is no other way then it is there already. Verification means you –

FR LOKODO: Okay, if you convince me that there is no ambiguity that can be -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is there any ambiguity, honourable members, between physical verification and verification?

MR MUGOYA: Mr Chairperson, verification can be physical or otherwise so it is not relevant in this matter.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But he is saying that there should be physical verification – 

MR MUGOYA: Rendering the services impracticable on the part of the inspectorate.

MR AGABA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think it is true that verification can be other than physical but the import of physical in this does not add value because, for example, the inspectorate may make a call to the bank to ascertain if the money declared is on the account. I do not know whether we call that physical or otherwise. There might be other ways of verifying but the import of the word “physical” into the Bill does not add value. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Therefore, if the property is in London, do you have to physically go there? 

FR LOKODO: That is what we meant. There are situations, for example, in the land registry. There should be no satisfaction with just going to the land registry and getting the land title. We want to go there and physically touch land and see where it is. (Laughter)

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Chair, I can give some information to help the minister. What they call physical verification is the term – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable. I had already picked this Member here.

MR AOGON: Mr Chairperson, I thought maybe we would substitute the word “physical” and say “confirmatory verification” so that we confirm exactly what we think about it because if now we are talking about a bank - 

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think the minister needs to know that the law we are making should be implementable. We should put a provision, which should actually be put in practice.

However when we say, “The inspectorate shall physically”, I think you are making it mandatory that for every declaration, they must physically go there. I think we should leave it to the discretion of the inspectorate to decide which method of verification it is going to use instead of dictating it in the law. I think the minister should drop the word “physical”.

MR KAKOOZA: The intention of the minister is a confirmatory test but physical verification is a term that is used in auditing. What it means is, if you declare that I have 10 coats on paper, I may say I trust what you have declared. However in physical verification, one goes and counts the ten coats. 

Therefore, it should be upon the discretion of the IGG. If she needs to verify the information you have declared, she may make physical verification either on the property or anything. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That would be an option; if they want to physically verify, they have the latitude to do it. 

FR LOKODO: Okay, Mr Chairperson, I concede. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question to the amendment as proposed by the chairperson for the introduction of a new clause, which will be numbered clause 4C. I put the question to that clause. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairperson, we propose to insert 4D; “Request for verification of a leader. A person who-
    a) having obtained a declaration under section 7 of this code; or
    b) has reason to believe that the declaration made by a leader does not reflect the leader’s actual property or liability; or
    c) has information concerning a leader’s property or liability may, by notice in writing, avail such information to the inspectorate and the inspectorate may verify the declaration made by a leader.”

The justification is to allow any person who has reason to believe that a leader’s declaration is not truthful or has information concerning a leader’s property or liability to apply for verification. 

FR LOKODO: I concede. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question to the amendment that a new clause, which will be clause 4D stands part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairperson, the committee proposes that clause 4 be deleted.

The justification is that the proposed amendment is misconceived, having been hinged on a wrong interpretation of the decision in the case of Fox Odoi Oywelowo and James Akampumuza v. the Attorney-General.  In the case of hon. John Ken Lukyamuzi v. the Attorney-General and the Electoral Commission, court held that dismissal and vacation from office are still legal punishments since they were not entirely declared unconstitutional. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. We have an issue with some provisions of the Constitution in these kinds of actions.

FR LOKODO: Mr Chairperson, I concede. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal is that clause 4 actually be deleted from the Bill. I put the question to deletion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4 deleted.

Clause 5

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairperson, we propose that Clause 5 be deleted. 

The justification is that the proposed amendment does not define the criteria for creating offences on one hand and the breaches of the court on the other. Therefore, it will create an ambiguity in the law, which would in turn create confusion.

Secondly, there is no mischief being remedied by the proposed amendment. 

FR LOKODO: We are together, Mr Chairperson. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal is that clause 5 be deleted from the Bill. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5 deleted.

Clause 6

MR OBOTH: For clause 6 of the Bill, we propose to substitute the following: “For section 7 of the principal Act, there is substituted the following: 7. Declaration to be public.
    1) The contents of a declaration under this code shall be treated as public information and shall be accessible by the public in accordance with this section.
    2) A person intending to access a declaration submitted by a leader shall make a written application to inspectorate accompanied by the prescribed fee.
    3) The application in subsection (2) shall contain-
    a) the particulars of the applicant;
    b) the physical address of the applicant;
    c) the name of the leader whose declaration the applicant seeks to access;
    d) a statement that the applicant will not disclose the contents of the declaration to any other person; and 
    e) a list of the property and liability the applicant reasonably believes was not included in the declaration submitted by a leader.
    4) The inspectorate shall only grant access to a declaration submitted under this code on being satisfied that -
    a) accessing the declaration will help in the enforcement of the code or any other law; 
    b) the applicant will not disclose the contents of the declaration to any other person.
    5) The inspectorate shall, within twenty one days of receipt of the application in subsection (2) -
    a) submit a certified copy of declaration to the applicant; or
    b) avail the applicant an opportunity to view the declaration form submitted by the leader; or 
    c) reject the application and communicate the reasons to the applicant. 
    6) The inspectorate shall, within seven days of submitting a certified copy of the declaration to the applicant under subsection (5), inform the leader who made the declaration of the grant.
    7) Where the inspectorate rejects the application or does not grant access to the declaration within the time prescribed under subsection (5), the applicant may apply to a magistrate’s court for redress. 
    8) The inspectorate shall, upon request, grant access to a declaration submitted by a leader to the Director of Public Prosecutions and the Uganda Police Force.
    9) The fees prescribed under subsection (2) shall be prescribed by the minister and shall not exceed 25 currency points.

The justification is: 

i) 	To remove the requirement for the development of a form, subject to which the declarations may be accessed by the public.
ii) 	To ensure that declarations are accessible by the public without hindrance.
iii) 	To ensure that a leader is informed when his or her declaration is accessed.
iv) 	To ensure that declarations are accessed by law enforcement agencies upon request. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, chairperson. 

MR SENGO: Mr Chairman, the chairperson of the committee proposes that the person who seeks to access your declaration should not disclose what he gets there. What remedy do we have to make sure that if he discloses, something will be done? Otherwise, we are just saying that he is not supposed to disclose what he sees there. What if he discloses it? What do you do to him? Do you just leave him to walk away? I thought there should be a clause to tell us the punishment he is given when he discloses. I thank you. 

COL. KULAYIGYE: How do we protect the leader from malicious damage by political opponents? That is number one.

Two, what is the intention of allowing another person to access what I have declared? What do you intend to achieve after all we provide for whistle-blowers protection?  What is the new inclusion now and of what use will it be to the country? Thank you. 

MS CHEKAMONDO: Thank you, Chairperson. I think this is very risky. Given today’s situation where people are taking off people’s land and claiming for whatever they want, leaving this open to the public is another way of ‘slaughtering’ ourselves. 

We shall have more chaos - if somebody knows the details about your property, then they can say anything at any time. 

So, given that situation, I think this clause is not safe for us because I may die today, but tomorrow someone comes - because he knows what I declared - and takes it over yet I may have left very young children. 

Today somebody can come and gives a bribe to get all the details and the information leaks out even to your opponents who can malice you in any way. I am against that. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, is the declaration that we make public? If it is, are we are aware of Article 41 of the Constitution and the Access to Information Act? If we are then let us leave this line of debate. 

If the declarations are public, we have Article 1 of the Constitution that guarantees any member of the public access to any information that is public and we even enacted the Access to Information Act. 

So, there is no way you can now say that we do not want this to be accessed by anybody because there is a law that grants people such permission and the Constitution allows them to access it. 

MR OBOTH: The debate and findings are that actually even the current law provides for access. In fact, this proposal is to prevent abuse; that is why it is saying such a person must indicate where they come from. In case they come from Kween, Kitagwenda or Tororo, you will get to know who that person is. You know that most of these malicious people would not need to disclose themselves. So, in any way this is a very stringent provision that takes care of all our worries. 

FR. LOKODO: Mr Chairman, what the committee has proposed protects the leaders more because if they use the article you just mentioned, then anybody can access any information any time. So, since the committee here has given a provision for one to declare of what they are, what they want and there is even a fee for such request, I mean it is just to make sure that not anybody anyhow can access the information declared by a leader.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are we confortable members? Can we proceed with this now?

MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I now put the question to the amendment proposed in clause 6 by the chairperson of the committee. 

The committee is proposing that clause 6, as it is, be deleted and substitute by what the chairperson of the committee has just read. Can I now put the question to the amendment as proposed by the chairperson? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7

MR OBOTH: Clause 7 of the Bill should be amended as follows: 
    (1) by replacing the headnote with, “Amendment of section 10 of the principal Act.” 
    (2) by deleting sub clauses (1) and (3). 
    (3) by inserting sub clause (2) and (4) immediately after sub clause (5) of the principal Act and renumbering then as follows:” 5 (a) where a leader declares a gift or donation under sub section (1), the gift shall be disposed of in accordance with the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act, 2003. And
(b) 	Where a gift or donation is in the form of money, it shall be deposited in the Consolidate Fund by the authorised person of the institution represented by the leader.” 

The justification is that the proposal to replace Section 10 of the principal Act with the proposals in clause 7 of the Bill, do not add value to the provisions of the principal Act except for the sub clauses (2) and (4). 

FR LOKODO: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. We are in consonance with the committee’s proposal except that we want to add paragraph 5(c) after 5 (b) and to read as follows: “The inspectorate shall issue guidelines on how perishable goods and gifts of live animals are to be dealt with by a leader.” This is to provide for guidelines on how gifts of perishable nature like food stuff and live animals are to be dealt with since such gifts cannot be subjected to the PPDA process. 

MR OBOTH: We concede to that proposed amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question to the amendment as proposed by the minister. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question to the amendment as proposed in clause 7 by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairperson, we propose that clause 8 be deleted. The justification is that the proposed amendment is misconceived, having been hinged on a wrong interpretation of the decision in the case of Fox Odoi Oywelowo and James Akampumuza v. the Attorney-General. 

In the case of hon. John Ken Lukyamuzi v. the Attorney-General and the Electoral Commission, court held that the dismissal and vacation from office are still legal punishments since they are not entirely declared unconstitutional, a similar argument we had before. 

FR LOKODO: I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPEROSN: Honourable members, the question is for deletion of clause 8 from the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, deleted.

Clause 9

MR OBOTH: We propose the following in amending clause 9 by: (1) Inserting the following new sub clauses immediately after sub clause (2) as follows: “(3) A public officer whose personal interests conflict with his official duties shall - (a) declare the personal interests to his superior or other appropriate body and comply with any direction to avoid conflict; and (b) refrain from participating in any deliberations with respect to the matter. 

(4) 	Notwithstanding any direction to the contrary under sub section (3)(a), a public officer shall not award a contract or influence the award of a contract to – 
(a) 	himself or herself; 
(b) 	any person related to him or her by blood or marriage; 
(c) 	a business associate, agent or partner;
(d) 	a company, partnership or other entity or body in which the leader, any person related to him or her by blood or marriage, has an interest. 

(2) 	By renumbering subclause (3) as subclause (5) and redrafting it as follows: (5) In this section, personal interest, in relation to a leader, includes the personal interest of any person related to the leader by blood or marriage, or any agent, business associate or partner of which the leader has knowledge or would have had knowledge if he or she exercised due diligence having regard to all circumstances.”

The justification is to expand the circumstances amounting to conflict of interest, and to decriminalise conflict of interest since it is very difficult to prove it as an offence.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister?

FR LOKODO: I am comfortable, Mr Chairperson, and I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to the amendments proposed in clause 9 by the chairperson of the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 10

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairperson, we propose the deletion of clause 10. The justification is that the proposed amendment is misconceived having been hinged on the wrong interpretation of the decision in the case of Fox Odoi-Oywelowo and James Akampumuza v. Attorney-General and in the case of -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The reasons are similar as in clause 9.

MR OBOTH: The reasons are similar to the ones I have said before.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister?

FR LOKODO: I concede, Mr Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to the deletion of clause 10 from the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, deleted.

Clause 11

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, we propose that clause 11 be amended by deleting paragraph (c). The justification is that the provision is ambiguous since the words used to wit: “high-handed, outrageous, infamous, indecent, disgraceful conduct or other conduct prejudicial” are incapable of an exact definition.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, these must have been your real words. (Laughter)

FR LOKODO: I concede, Mr Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is for the deletion of paragraph (c) from clause 11.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairperson, we propose that clause 12 be amended by substitution the following:
Section 17 of the principal Act is amended by:

    (a) substituting subsection (2) with the following:

“(2)	A former leader shall not use or divulge to any person or body, entity, or association, information that is not available to the public concerning a programme or policy of Government or a public body or department with which he or she had a direct or substantial relationship during the period of 10 years immediately prior to ceasing to be a leader.”

(b) 	By inserting immediately after subsection (2) the following: “(3) A former leader who contravenes subsections (1) or (2) commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 25 currency points or imprisonment for a period not exceeding one year, or both.”

“(4) Where a former leader has obtained any monetary benefit from the disclosure, court may, in addition to the penalty prescribed under subsection (3), order that benefit to be forfeited to Government.”

The justification is that this is for clarity and better drafting and to prescribe a penalty for the breach of the provision as well as to expand the provision to include any person, body, entity or association.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What are you doing with what is proposed in the Bill? Do you mean what is in clause 12 should be removed and substituted with what you have presented?

MR OBOTH: That is right.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the amendment is clear. Do you have any concern, honourable minister?

FR LOKODO: I concede, Mr Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question to the amendment as proposed by the chairperson of the committee in clause 12 of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 13

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 13 by:
    (a) Inserting a new paragraph immediately after paragraph (a) as follows: 
    (b) Inserting immediately after subsection (2) the following – 

“(2a) The Inspectorate shall upon completion of an investigation and being satisfied with the circumstances set out under subsection (2)(a) and (b), inform a leader that a complaint has been made against him or her. 
“(b) by substituting for paragraph (d) as follows - (d) by inserting immediately after sub-section (4) the following – “(4a) A leader shall, within 30 days of receipt of the notification under sub-section (2)(a), respond in writing to the complaints made against him or her.”

The justification is that this is in recognition of the rules of natural justice to avail a leader against whom a complaint is lodged, the right to respond to such complaint. Secondly, it is to prescribe the time within which the leader is to respond as well as the form the leader’s responses shall take.

FR LOKODO: I concede, Mr Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that is the amendment proposed by the committee and conceded to by the minister. I now put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 14

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairperson, we propose to substitute clause 14 with the following: “For section 19 of the principal Act, there is substituted the following: 
    19 Report of the Inspectorate.
(1) 	Upon completion of an investigation under section 18, the Inspectorate shall - 
    (a) in case of findings disclosing an act or omission constituting a breach of this code, make a report and refer the matter to the tribunal for adjudication; 
    (b) in case of findings disclosing no act or omission constituting a breach of this code, make a report to the complainant or any other person as the Inspectorate deems fit;
    (c) in case of findings disclosing an act or omission constituting an offence under this code or any other law, make a report to the Directorate of Public Prosecutions.

(2)	The report of the Inspectorate under subsection (1), shall set out the following:
    (a) The nature of the breach or offence which the leader has been found to have committed.
    (b) The circumstances of the breach or offence.
    (c) A brief summary of the evidence received during the investigation of the breach or offence. And
    (d)  The findings.

(3)	The Inspectorate shall, within seven days of completing investigations but before submitting a report to the tribunal under subsection (1), avail the report to the leader against whom it is made and all such persons as the Inspectorate deems fit.

(4)	Notwithstanding subsection (1), where the investigation in section 18 relates to a seating President, the Inspectorate shall only comply with subsection (1) (a) or (c) in accordance with Article 98 (4) and (5) of the Constitution.”
 
The justification is for consistency and better drafting; to put in place a timeline for complying with the Act; to ensure that the report of the Inspectorate is availed to the leader  before it is sent to the tribunal; to comply with Article 98 (4) and (5) of the Constitution which prohibits criminal or civil proceedings from being instituted against a seating President; and to prescribe what happens when the Inspectorate makes a finding disclosing an act or omission constituting an offence under the code or any other law.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that is clear.

FR LOKODO: Mr Chairperson, I have three amendments to propose in this clause. The first is that in paragraph (1)(b), we are proposing to replace the words “make a report to” with the word “inform” so that the paragraph reads thus: ”In case of findings disclosing no act or omission constituting a breach of this Code, inform the complainant or any other person as the Inspectorate deems fit.” This is because the Inspectorate of Government is required to inform, but not to make a report to the complainant.

Secondly – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can we handle this first? Is it acceptable, honourable members?

MR OBOTH: The debate was that whatever the Inspectorate finds is a report. If you put the word “inform” it can be done maybe through a phone yet that will not go in line with the prescribed format that we are trying to look at. 

If you say, they should just inform, someone can call such a leader when they are in the plenary and you may think he/she is just a voter yet they will be informing you that such a thing is happening. Yes, they would have satisfied this but it is not proper. So, we were comfortable with the word “reporting” or the words “send a report” of the findings because that is not trial by ambush – you are going to definitely disclose all this report to that person –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Such that there is a record of it? Yes, honourable minister.

FR LOKODO: I think it is because of the word “report” it would look like the IGG would be responding to a low-level officer with pressure. However, if “reporting” here means “informing” then I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What was the next one? Honourable minister, you had more amendments.   

FR LOKODO: The second one is in sub clause (3) – we would like to redraft it to read thus: “The Inspectorate shall, within seven days of submitting a report to the tribunal, avail the report to the leader against whom it is made and all such persons as the Inspectorate deems fit.”

The justification is that if the Inspectorate is to avail a report to the leader before submitting to the tribunal, the leader may most likely rush to court and secure an injunction restraining the IGG from submitting the report to the tribunal. 

The procedure should be as in filing suit in that after the IGG files a report to the tribunal, the subject leader is notified and given specified time to defend himself or herself in court. 

MR OBOTH: First of all, the minister’s understanding of the tribunal is that they will still have it. But the tribunal in this code is supposed to be independent. So, I do not know why submitting a report to the tribunal first – whatever, you submit to the tribunal is actually a complaint already but we are saying you give the same stuff also to the person being complained against or the person affected by the report. 
Anyway, if it is very hard for you, it is a matter that we can probably trade off.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But what the minister is saying is that you had proposed that before submitting to the tribunal, the Inspectorate should give the complainant. But he is saying, “No, we submit to the tribunal and give a copy to the complainant.” 

MR OBOTH: I think we can concede to that although that will be like an ordinary suit – it will be like the service of court documents.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment in paragraph (3) as proposed by the minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR LOKODO: I am now on paragraph (4). In this paragraph we propose to delete the word “only” occurring in the third line so that it reads thus: ”Notwithstanding section (1), where the investigation in section 18, relates to a seating President, the Inspectorate shall comply with Article 98 (4) and (5) of the Constitution.” This is just for clarity. 

MR OBOTH: I think that makes the minister comfortable. Since he is a minister, we concede. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is there no better reason, hon. Oboth? (Laughter)

MR OBOTH: No, it was just for emphasis. But if he is comfortable with it, we still mean the same thing technically.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to the amendment for the deletion of the word “only” appearing in paragraph.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 15

MR OBOTH: We propose for the amendment of clause 15 as follows:
“In 19A, by redrafting sub clause (2) as follows:
(2) The Tribunal shall consist of a chairperson, the deputy chairperson and three other members, one third of whom shall be female.”

Justification is that it is - 
    (i) for better drafting and clarity;
    (ii) to provide for the deputy chairperson; and
    (iii) to make the provision gender sensitive or compliant.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, would like to say something?

FR LOKODO: Mr Chairperson, we are proposing to substitute the words “one third” with the words “at least two.” This is because there is danger of dividing those five by two-thirds and you will get two and half women, which is not possible. Preferably we could say that “at least two of whom must be female.” In fact, it would read as follows: “The tribunal shall consist of a chairperson, the deputy chairperson and three other members, at least who of whom shall be female.” It should not be two-thirds.

MR OBOTH: We have no objection to that. That raises the threshold even better.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I put the question to the proposal made by the minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairperson, we still propose to amend this clause by inserting, immediately after 19A the following new clause: “19B Functions of the tribunal. In enforcing this code, the tribunal shall, in addition to any other functions under this code, carry out the following functions: 

    (a) receive, examine and adjudicate any breach of the code referred to it by the Inspectorate;
    (b) make a report on any matter referred to it by the Inspectorate and submit it to the authorised person and inspectorate; and
    (c) make recommendations to the authorised person on disciplinary action to be taken against the leader.”

The justification is to provide for the functions of the tribunal.

FR LOKODO: In paragraph clause 19 B, we propose to replace the word “report” with the word “decision” so that it reads thus: “Make a decision on a matter referred to it by the Inspectorate and submit it to the authorised person and the inspectorate.” This is because the tribunal only has the powers to adjudicate and should only make a decision and not just a report.

MR OBOTH: We love his innovation, we concede to that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, I now put the question to the amendment as proposed by the minister to that clause.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19 B, as amended, agreed to.

MR OBOTH: In clause 19C we propose its deletion.  The justification is that it would be consequential amendment since clause 19C was merged with clause 19B and also given the fact that all members of the tribunal will be appointed on the advice of one body - the Judicial Service Commission.

FR LOKODO: I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is to delete clause 19C.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 19 C, deleted.

MR OBOTH: In clause 19D we propose an amendment by redrafting sub clause (1) as follows:
“(1) 	A person shall qualify to be appointed a member of the tribunal if he or she - 
(a) 	is of a high moral character and proven integrity; 
(b) 	has not been convicted of any offence;
(c) 	is of a sound mind; 
(d) 	has not been declared bankrupt;
(e) 	is a citizen of Uganda; and
(f) 	possesses considerable experience and demonstrated competence in the conduct of public affairs.”

(2) 	By redrafting sub clause (2) as follows: “(2)A member of the tribunal other than the chairperson and the deputy chairperson shall - 
    (a) be a holder of a degree granted by a university in Uganda or outside Uganda, that is recognised by Uganda National Council for Higher Education;
    (b) possess 10 years work experience.” 

(3)	by deleting sub clause (3).

The justification is to ensure that members possess the required experience and are competent in conducting public affairs.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are there more justifications?

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Chairperson, my concern is about the 10 years work experience. How about if we use the phrase, “not less than 10 years?” We do not need to be specific on the number of years somebody should have in order to qualify.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The honourable member is concerned that somebody who has 11 years might not qualify.

MR TWESIGYE: Mr Chairperson, I would like to seek clarification from the chairperson of the committee whether they are defining, in this context of the law, the word “university.” This is important someone might acquire a qualification in an institution that is not a university per say.

MR OBOTH: First of all, I must acknowledge that that one from hon. Okello was a good one. To define a university, we felt that it was a mandate outside our committee and we believe that we have the National Council of Higher Education. The reference to NCHE settles the matter. Any university degree as recognised by NCHE would be sufficient. For the Legal Committee to define a university, that would be too much.

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much. The clarification I would like to get is, in subclause (1)(b), which says that a person shall be appointed when he has never been convicted of any offence. I was looking at this provision - because there are some minor offences and should not be cause for somebody not to be appointed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: A conviction for like a traffic offence? 

MS KARUNGI: If I could give an example, somebody may be driving and parks badly and the car is towed by the traffic. When you go to court, you have no evidence and you get convicted. I definitely know that it is strict liability but here we are using the phrase, “convicted of any offences” I don’t know which offences are to be considered here.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I would like to ask the chairperson about the difficulty in qualifying the experience. I thought that by us putting as one of the qualifications that one has to possess “considerable experience” might create confusion to the appointing authority. What is this “considerable experience”? Why can’t we leave it as “experience in the conduct of public affairs”?

MR AOGON: Mr Chairperson, while we were handling the Bill on insurance and still talking on issues of the tribunal, there was a proper exchange amongst the legal minds here and particularly on qualifications - we said these should be people who are most competent to handle issues and therefore we cannot just leave it in space for any person to decide because if it is the House that decides, we should decide.

Mr Chairperson, while we debated the Bill on insurance we insisted on having members who are certified and belonging to specific bodies. For instance, if one is an accountant, they must be certified public accountants of Uganda. If one is a lawyer, they should not be just a lawyer but a registered advocate. Why not do the same thing for these tribunals so that we are standard in nature? Thank you.

MR OBOTH: Well I will start with what hon. Bahati said. That it is good innovation that we just use the phrase “considerable experience” but we thought we would give it weight. Anyway, I will have no problem conceding to - I can get some help but let me first dispose of Kumi. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is the issue a Kumi issue? (Laughter) 

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairperson you are very helpful. In this tribunal, whatever is called a tribunal – and when you prescribed specific qualifications or not, the debate was whether we should make a judge or somebody capable of being a judge - we all found out that it would not be necessary. Therefore, we left it to the appointing authority to decide and that applies to the other members as well.

Mr Chairperson, this reminds me that I jumped a page we should have satisfied. I jumped a clause that we were supposed to handle and with your permission I could go back to it. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Which one? 

MR OBOTH: That is clause 19B on the appointment of members of the tribunal. With your indulgence, I could ask that we dispose of that before I come to 19 on page 18 - appointment of members of the tribunal and that would help me sort out hon. Bahati’s concerns.

The paragraph, which was supposed to come before the (d) in 19B - by substituting for clause 19B the following: 

“19B - Appointment of members of the tribunal:

    (1) The chairperson, the deputy chairperson and other members of the tribunal shall be appointed by the President, acting on the advice of the Judicial Service Commission with the approval of Parliament;
    (2) A person is not qualified to be appointed chairperson or deputy chairperson unless he or she is qualified to be appointed a judge of the high court; and
    (3) The deputy chairperson shall preside over meetings of the tribunal in the absence of the chairperson.”

The justification is to provide for the deputy chairperson; require that all members of the tribunal are appointed on the advice of one body, the Judicial Service Commission and for clarity and better drafting. 
Mr Chairman, I had skipped these erroneously.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that is an amendment to clause 19B - because they inserted another sub clause 19B so he had skipped it. Can I put the question to this amendment in 19B?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19 B, as amended, agreed to.

MR OBOTH: Now we go to 19D on page 19 because we had finished 19C and this is where we are having issues of – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, in 19D we talked about a person not having been convicted of any offence. Those are the kinds of people we think are of high moral character and proven integrity. If you have been convicted of any offence, then you do not have a place here. It is about the person who has not been convicted of any offence but we will be glad to get your views if there are some offences, which are okay.

MR KAMUSIIME: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I suggest that we qualify this point to probably a criminal offence because they are so many offences including driving while you have taken something. (Laughter) That can be an offence. So, I suggest that we can qualify it to a criminal offence or something but let us be specific.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We will take it that you are concerned about the general public. Honourable members, the usual phrasing of this is about offences of moral turpitude and those definitions could relate it to - can somebody remember those words?

MR AGABA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. We were trying to consult because there was an omission in stating paragraph (b). It should be “has not been convicted of a criminal offence.” It was specifically a criminal offence. I think that qualifies it. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There are some statutory offences that may not be criminal but are more dangerous than some criminal offences. There is phraseology that we always use for these kinds of things, moral turpitude, all those - can somebody recall it?

MR AGABA: Mr Chairperson, I have just been reminded by the chairman of the committee that the phrase should be: “a person should not have been convicted of any offence involving moral turpitude.” 

MR MUGOYA: Mr Chairperson, we normally qualify it and move a step further to say, “Which does not involve imprisonment for six months.” If you look at for example, the Parliamentary Elections Act, there is that provision and other laws thereunder including the Local Government Act. Let us phrase it in that manner.

MR SILWANY: Another clarification I would like to make is about the time lag within which the offence was committed. We need to specify the period because does this mean that once a person has ever been convicted, until they die, they cannot qualify? I think we need qualify it more by specifying the period. It could be for a period of 7 or 15 years. I think we need to qualify that to enable us pass it not in that form.

MR BAHATI: But Mr Chairperson, I see us labouring a lot on this issue of somebody who has not been convicted of any offence. In my limited knowledge of law this means that one has been tried and sentenced. For sure, out of the Shs 20 million adult Ugandans if we fail to get four citizens who qualify for these, then Uganda has a problem. We can leave it there - I think we shall have people who have never been convicted of any offence. 

MR KATOTO: Mr Chairperson, for sure someone who has been convicted, most times he is like these bulls which are castrated - they tend to go back to where they were originally. So I think we should leave it like that because as the minister has said we can’t fail to get clean people in Uganda to take up those positions.

FR LOKODO: Indeed, Mr Chairperson, what we are looking for here is excellence. We are looking for a high level of integrity in a person. Our problem is only how to put it but I would still go for the one who has not been convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable, would you come up with the qualification for the Inspector General of Government in the Constitution? Would you like to borrow from that? 
It says thus: “A person shall not be eligible for appointment as Inspector General of Government or Deputy Inspector General of Government unless that person is a citizen of Uganda, is a person of high moral character and proven integrity, possesses considerable experience and demonstrated competence and is of high calibre in the conduct of public affairs…” 

You know those generic things. This is for Inspector General of Government and you might want to think along those lines to ensure you are not creating new situations which are not reasonable in the circumstances because if the IGG has these things in the Constitution then the tribunal could as well borrow from them. I don’t know. It’s your Bill, not mine.

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairperson, we shall take with humility the guidance you have provided so that we adopt the same, but the message we wanted to bring out, as a committee, was that we needed people beyond reproach and hon. Bahati agreed with me that there are such people. However, since it might be difficult to harmonise, let us adopt the qualifications as in the Constitution for the IGG and the Deputy IGG. Most obliged.

FR LOKODO: Mr Chairman, I concede to that because at least we have the background where we are coming from. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But somebody has to now propose the amendment. The chair cannot propose.

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairperson, the Article in the Constitution that you were reading is 223(5) and we would adopt the same to replace 19D (1) to read thus: “A person shall not be eligible for appointment as a member of the tribunal unless that person:

    a) Is a citizen of Uganda;
    b) Is a person of high moral character and proven integrity; and 
    c) Possesses considerable experience and demonstrated competence and is of high calibre in the conduct of public affairs. So I propose.

FR LOKODO: I concede, Mr Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I now put the question to the amendment proposed in sub clause (1).

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do you have more amendments to this?

MR OBOTH: The phrase to be used in 19D -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No there were two parts of that. There was the part of the person should possess 10-years work experience or possess at least - 

MR OBOTH: Yes and we had got that proposal from – anyway, the phrase to be used there is, “considerable experience” and that would replace 10 years and it could read as follows: “Possess considerable work experience” so that we are not into the timeframe because even earlier we had adopted the one in Article 223 although we were not talking about the time frame or the number of years. Considerably, it would now be upon the -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, is that sufficient? 

MS AMEEDE: Mr Chairperson, issues of experience are very crucial in institutional building. I would rather insist that we maintain the phrase, “possesses 10-years work experience in a public office.” We just need to set a minimum. 

MR OBOTH: If we want 10 years, we can go with “possess at least 10-years work experience.” That should be the minimum but not the maximum. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can we put that in the Bill? I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 19E

MR OBOTH: In 19E we propose to redraft sub clause (1) as follows:
(1) 	A member of the tribunal shall hold office for five years and shall be legible for reappointment for one more term only;
(2) 	By redrafting sub clause (ii) as follows, “A member of the tribunal shall be appointed on full time basis”
(3) 	By inserting immediately after sub clause 2 the following, “The appointment of the new member of the tribunal or the reappointment of the current member of the tribunal shall be made at least three months before the expiry of the current term of a member of the tribunal or within three months from the date on which the judicial service notifies the President of the existence of a vacancy on the tribunal.”  

The justification is to, (i) enhance the security of tenure of the members of the tribunal; (ii) to require that the tribunal operates on full-time basis; (iii) to ensure institutional memory; and (iv) to ensure continuity of the tribunal.   

FR LOKODO: We are together and I concede.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you. I am not comfortable with the proposal of three months because of the category of people involved and the commission that will participate in the replacement.

Therefore, I propose we make it six instead of three months. This will enable us to manage all the processes for replacement and avoid any vacuum.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Chair, I appreciate the proposal moved by the chairperson. The one thing that is not clear to me is how we are going to sustain institutional memory. 

I do not know whether your proposal of three months was meant for institutional memory and whether the three months are actually adequate.

Anyhow, I propose that we vary the appointments. Supposing the members are five and all of them are appointed at once, it would mean they will exit at once. How shall we maintain the idea of institutional memory?

MR OBOTH: I will begin with hon. Jesca Ababiku’s concern. She is quite generous with the six months. We were trying to be consistent with what is happening in other bodies and agencies like the Electoral Commission. It is part of the legislation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Article 60 (4).

MR OBOTH: Article 60 (4) indicates - that is the spirit – that at least three months before the end of the term and it should not go beyond that. 

On institutional memory, Article 60 (4) – if the appointment of a member of the Commission is being renewed, the renewal shall be done at least three months before the expiry of the first term. This is what we are talking about – it gives you prior knowledge of what is going on.

Institutional memory is not that we want to make anybody permanent. It would just not be good to appoint new people all the time because you would lose. You have seen what happens in Parliament – I do not want to say much on that. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You want to contribute on this particular issue? Isn’t it resolved, honourable members? Can I now put the question?

MR LUBOGO: It is on the clause but different sub clause that talks about the full time basis of members of the tribunal. 

We have some tribunals in this country and a classic example being the Tax Appeals Tribunal. Tribunals are set up not to do full time office work. I am wondering why this tribunal should have full time office work. Why are we departing from the practice of the other tribunals? Would it not suffice that we pass that this tribunal sits as and when issues arise for settlement? Thank you.

MR OBOTH: The quick answer is that this is to enhance security of tenure of the members of the tribunal. But off the cuff, we should bear in mind the kind of work these people are going to do. When you make them part time, you are making them vulnerable because they will be depending on allowances. 

If we are serious that we want to fight corruption, we should have people who are paid permanently to do that job and can live a life that is above reproach. Yes, the examples of the tax tribunal are good but this is about corruption and it was the position of the committee to make them full time employees. 

MR AOGON: The other observation I was trying to make is on the issue of getting a member for another term after a first term. I have often seen organisations write to say they can only renew a person’s contract based on their performance but we are silent about that in this law. Why?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have picked what is in the Constitution and it is working. Let us not over crowd it.

MR MUGOYA: In addition to what our committee chairperson said, we have had breaches under the Code immediately after the decision in hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi’s case and all these breaches have not been handled by any competent tribunal or court in this country. Therefore, there is a lot of work load under the Inspectorate and that is why we are proposing this tribunal to operate on full time basis.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Can we take a decision on this matter now? Are we okay?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question to the amendment as proposed by the committee chairperson and as amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OBOTH: In 19F, we propose an amendment by redrafting sub clause (ii) as follows: 

(2) “A person appointed as a member of the tribunal shall resign his or her office if he or she is serving in an office listed under the second and third schedule to this Code.”   
(3) Inserting immediately after sub clause (2) the following: 

“Notwithstanding subsection (2), the appointment of a Judge as a member of the tribunal shall not affect his or her tenure of office as a Judge, or his or her rank, title, status, precedence, salary and allowances or other rights or privileges as the holder of the office of a Judge of the Courts of Judicature and for all purposes, his or her service as a member of the tribunal shall be taken to have been service as holder of the office of such a Judge.”

The justification is to enlarge the list of persons who have to resign their offices on appointment as members of the tribunal; and to ensure that the terms of service of a Judge appointed to the tribunal are not affected by that appointment as guaranteed under Article 128 (7) of the Constitution. 

MR BAHATI: I wish to get some clarification from the committee chairperson. Are you suggesting that in the unlikely event I am appointed a Judge – (Laughter) - I can still serve on the tribunal on a full time basis and again I remain a Judge?

MR OBOTH: Well, I thought that you set the question and gave the answer. It is very unlikely, but you never know, these days, people take extra lessons. The purpose is to ensure that the terms of service of a Judge appointed to the tribunal are not affected by that appointment. You cannot reduce the salary; it will be person to holder, if it comes to the tribunal and they are paying less money, he or she has to come with his/her previous salary scale.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: However, would that not require him/her to resign?

MR OBOTH: He/she does not have to resign.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is not clear from what you are saying.

MR OBOTH: Let me revisit this: “A person appointed as a member of the tribunal, not chairperson or deputy shall resign-”. This is for members and it is silent on chairperson or deputy chairperson. When we were drafting this, we had a Judge and you saw the qualifications needed for that; somebody who can be a Judge of the High Court. When a judge is asked to come and serve on the tribunal – for example, the judge serving in the Electoral Commission, did he resign? He did not resign, but concerning this, we are talking about a member.

When you are appointed to the commission as a member –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In other words, do you mean that a Judge cannot be a member?

MR OBOTH: A Judge can only be a chairperson or deputy chairperson, not a member.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Why?

MR OBOTH: This is because he is either chairperson or deputy chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, but he is a human being, citizen and has high moral integrity. Why would you say that a judge cannot be appointed a member?

MR OBOTH: Let me seek for help because the institutional memory is failing me.

MR AGABA: Mr Chairperson, thank you very much. I think that it is better that we are clear from the start. Out of the five members of the tribunal, two will be judges because the amendment we have just passed to Clause 19 (e) requires the chairperson to be at the level of a High Court Judge and that requires a 10 years’ experience. 

Therefore, if the chairperson is at the level of the High Court Judge, then the vice chairperson who will always stand in for the chairperson will also be at the same level because it should be the vice chairperson who has the capacity to be a chairperson.

However, promotion of judges is based on the length of service in the profession and many of them who have diverted from the profession to politics lose that time even when they go back to the legal profession. 

Therefore, the provision is for the sake that the time the judge serves in the tribunal is counted as his time in service of the profession. They leave the office of the judge and come to serve as chairperson or member of the tribunal, but that length of time they serve in the tribunal is counted as their accumulated time of service in the profession because it will be useful for their promotion. I hope this makes it a little clearer. 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Chairperson, do you find any problem having a judge for instance, appointed as a member not necessarily as chair or vice chair, but as a member. Is there any problem?

MR AKAMBA: Thank you, Chairperson. In the event that a judge accepts the appointment to the tribunal as a member, then he has to resign. This is because the amendment states that “A member shall resign”. There is a specific provision for the chair and deputy chair.
Mr Chairperson, it is very unlikely that a judge will settle for less than chairperson or deputy chairperson of the tribunal.

MR ABALA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I would like to thank you and the team. However, I am getting more disturbed because at this point, we are looking at the chairperson and vice chairperson being like God. 

However, my view is that, we settle the standards and the rest can be handled because when we leave it at that, we are making the tribunal to be exceptional among all the tribunals in this country - and that worries me.

Tomorrow we will have the same scenario here and that will become another problem. We might set a precedence which might be difficult to sort out. Thank you.

MR DULU: One of the reasons for making these people full time as it was given is because of the workload they have and the backlog. However, there are seven days in a week and we have five working days; if that is one of the reasons why we make these people full timers, when do they get the extra time for doing this workload we are talking about? This is contradictory because the judges have to work and do normal duties and again we also require him/her on this tribunal, how can they reconcile the two? Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairperson and chair of the committee, I think we can be smarter by leaving the tribunal as a tribunal. We are saying whoever qualifies to be appointed is the person who is qualified to be a judge. You cannot say that they must be got from the judiciary, but we have to separate the two. The issue of payment of salary is different from the qualifications among others.

However, if the tribunal is full-time then somebody must be serving this institution on a full-time basis and he/she cannot serve in two areas like being in the judiciary and the tribunal. I think this is not smart.

MR OBOTH: I will accept to be smarter. What we were referring to if we had looked at the second and third schedules; the listed people here include: Political leaders and President among others, ”A person appointed as a member of the tribunal shall resign his or her office if he/she is serving in an office listed under the second or third schedule to this code”. The third schedule is here and we are not amending it; it lists the President, Vice President, Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Parliament, Chairperson and vice chairperson of the National council under the movement. 

The others include political party leaders, Prime Minister and Deputy Prime Minister, National Political Commissioner, Attorney-General, Ministers and Ministers of State like hon. Bahati and deputy ministers and Members of Parliament. Part B, specified officers, Judges of the High Court of judicature, President and Vice President of the Industrial Court and Magistrates. So we can be smarter and adopt the position as advanced by hon. Bahati; That if we would like to open it up, we were looking at resources and somebody on secondment would come, but we can open it up and we have other persons qualified to be judges.

Therefore hon. Bahati would be smarter and make the proposal as a person that would make us go back; we have to go back to – because a judge would not allow to be demoted under Article 128(7). And that is the constitutional provision we were referring to – that “The salary, allowances, privileges and retirement benefits and other conditions of service of a judicial officer or other person exercising judicial power shall not be varied to his or her disadvantage.”

So if we want to make that, it would be perfect. But we have to go back to the qualifications of chairperson and deputy chairperson so that it can be a consequential amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So where are we now? (Laughter)

MR OBOTH: Well, hon. Bahati has taken us back to paragraph (c) 19(b): Appointments of Members of the Tribunal – “The chairperson, deputy chairperson and the other members of the tribunal shall be appointed by the President, acting on the advice of the Judicial Service Commission and with approval of Parliament.” 

“(2) A person is not qualified to be appointed chairperson or deputy chairperson unless he or she is qualified to be appointed a judge of the high court” – by the way it is the same.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is what it is; that is why I am asking where we are.

MR OBOTH: You are right, Mr Chair. Hon. Bahati was smart enough to re-state what was there. I think he was following closely. (Laughter)

So we can proceed with this, which is okay – that if you are appointed as a member of the tribunal and you are a judge and you accept to do so, you have to resign.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, is that how we would like to proceed now? [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”] Okay, but just as information: The current IGG is a judge and is by secondment. So do we want to change that? The person who has been sent to head the Electoral Commission is a judge. Do we want to change that? Maybe the proviso takes care of that – because when they finish their term, they go back to the bench.

MR MUGOYA: Mr Chair, I was giving information basing on my experience as a former judicial officer – there is what we call “continuation of the service”. I was even once deployed in the disarmament exercise in Karamoja but as a judicial officer, so what happens? Even the period you are serving in other government agencies are counted as if you were still in the judicial department. So there is nothing that changes; you remain as such.

MR BAHATI: But the formulation of this – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, they are saying the requirement for resigning is for members; the debate came because suppose a judge becomes a member, would you want the judge to resign when he is serving a government institution?

MR OBOTH: Mr Chair, this was an exception we were trying to create – that in the event that a judge is made a member, then he will not have to resign; this was an exception if you look at where we were. (g) Paragraph two: Notwithstanding sub-section (2), which requires all those specified officers to resign, the appointment of a judge as a member of the tribunal shall not affect his or her tenure of office as a judge or his or her rank, title, status, precedence…

We are alive to Article 128(7) but if the debate is to remove that – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Then that is clear; if it is a judge, they will continue in their service as judges but they will be members. Other public officers – 

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, why would you only favour the judges; how about other public officers, if they can be seconded? 

MR OBOTH: That is because the Constitution says so in Article 128. And this Act cannot be seen to violate the provisions of the Constitution. If anybody has a particular –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You see, honourable members – 

MR OBOTH: This is because it is likely, given the budget constraints of the government – we are alive to that. It is likely that they can pick one judge, for example as given by the Chairperson; we have a DPP who is a judge; IGG who is a judge; in the Electoral Commission. Should they cease to be in the tribunal, they can actually go back.

And we have had –(Interjections)– local government; all that is covered. If you are a Member of Parliament and you accept to be in the tribunal, the Constitution does not protect you; it says that you leave. It is the way you start earning your money there as a tribunal member.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, once somebody is appointed a judge, he is a judge. The removal of a judge has procedures in the Constitution. And there is no provision in the Constitution that says once that judge is appointed as something else he loses the office of being a judge. It is not one of the reasons for ceasing to be a judge. Look at the Constitution; it is listed.

Just like a Member of Parliament, we had that argument when they appointed somebody to be a minister and some people were saying: “He must lose his seat as a Member of Parliament.” We said: “But go to the Constitution and see how a member loses a seat.” Certainly, appointment as a minister is not one of them.

A judge being appointed as something else is not one of the reasons that disqualify somebody from being a judge. So a judge is protected while the rest of us are only –(Laughter)

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, you are better than I in drafting; would it be necessary then to state it here? Would it be necessary that one of the things that will not disqualify one from being a Member of Parliament if one is appointed a minister; do we have to reinstate it in the law?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, when you have a provision that says: “On appointment as a member of the tribunal, you resign.” When you have that direct provision, then you have to put a rider that protects already protected persons.

MR SSENGO KALULE: Mr Chairman, suppose you took a civil servant and you said that this is going to be a permanent job – that you do not exceed two terms. So you remove a man from his job, he goes to the tribunal; he serves for two terms which are only 10 years. And then he has already resigned there, so do you just throw him to the countryside? What do you do with him? He should be protected because it is not his fault that he went to serve on the tribunal. Suppose he was appointed at the age of 25, by the age of 35, he has to cease being a member of the tribunal. Then do you just leave him like that or do you allow him to go back to his former employment? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson, we need to find a solution to these issues.

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairperson, all that is covered under the second and third schedule, including giving examples of those who cannot retain their jobs as long as they are appointed. They could be Commissioner of Prisons, Resident District Commissioners (RDCs), Deputy Assistants, Chief Administrative Officers (CAO) or even Deputy Chief Administrative Officers. 

However, in the unlikely event - these people who are appointed to this tribunal on the advice of the Judicial Service Commission would be looking at the age of 55; we would not mind taking it up because he is left with a few years and he can do 10 years. These are practical things that we are talking about. It is not about finding a young man who is the CAO in Pader or Omoro and then he is appointed. However, if he is appointed, we are not going to be coerced to accept him. Instead, you will make a choice; we should not labour on this because this is all covered under the Act. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, let us proceed. Can we proceed? I would like us to proceed, honourable. This matter has been discussed for a while. Let us proceed. Let us take a decision on the amendment as proposed by the chairperson of the committee in clause 15 specific paragraph is 19 (f). Two amendments have been proposed in sub clauses (2) and (3). I put the question to those. Is there any amendment to them? There is no amendment. I therefore put the question to those amendments proposed by the chairperson. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OBOTH: Paragraph 19H is amended as follows:
    1) In sub clause (2) by inserting a new paragraph (f) immediately after paragraph (e) as follows: f) Breach of any provisions of this code
2) 	In sub-clause (5) by inserting immediately after the word “removed” appearing in the last line the words “from office.”
 3) 	In sub-clause (7), by substituting for the word “chairperson” appearing in the first and last line the word “deputy chairperson.”
4) 	By redrafting sub clause (8) as follows:

A suspension under subsection 6 shall cease to have effect if the President upon recommendation of the committee not to remove the member from office leaves the suspension by written notification to the tribunal.

The justification is:
    1)  To include among the grounds for removal of a member of the tribunal, breach of any provisions of the court. 
    2) For better drafting.

FR LOKODO: We are together. I concede. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that amendment.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OBOTH: 19I should be amended by inserting immediately after sub clause (2) the following:

    3) A member of the tribunal who fails to disclose any interest in a matter before the tribunal and participates in the proceedings of the tribunal commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 150 currency points or to imprisonment for a time not exceeding three years. 

The justification is to prescribe a punishment for non-disclosure of interest by a member or chairperson of the tribunal. 

FR LOKODO: No objection. I concede. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OBOTH: 19L should be amended 
1) 	By substituting for a head note the following; 
	“Quorum of the Tribunal”:
    2) By redrafting sub clause (1) as follows: (1) “The quorum of the tribunal shall be three members.”

    3) By deleting sub clauses 2, 3 and 4. 

The justification is:
    i)  For clarity and better drafting
    ii) Sub clauses 2, 3 and 4 are redundant. 

FR LOKODO: I concede, Mr Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that amendment

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OBOTH: 19M should be amended by deleting the words “the minister responsible for Public Service” appearing in the third line.
The justification is to require that only the minister responsible for finance is consulted. 

FR LOKODO: I concede. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OBOTH: In 19N, we propose to delete sub clause (1)(b). 

The justification is that all revenue collected by a public body is required to be deposited in the consolidated fund in accordance with Section 29 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015.

FR LOKODO: No problem. I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that amendment

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OBOTH: In 19P, we propose it to be amended by replacing the word “it is” appearing in the third line with the words “the tribunals.” The justification is for better drafting. 

FR LOKODO: It is okay. I concede. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that amendment

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OBOTH: 19Q is redrafted as follows: jurisdiction of the tribunal; the tribunal shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine all it breaches referred to it by the inspectorate under section 19 of this code. 
The justification is that it will be contrary to Articles 120, 126, 128 and 129 of the Constitution for the tribunal to exercise jurisdiction over criminal matters. Secondly, it is for better drafting. 

FR LOKODO: I concede, chairperson. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that amendment

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OBOTH: 19R is amended in sub-clause (1) by inserting a new paragraph (d) immediately after paragraph (c) as follows:

“d) May make any order which it deems appropriate to give effect to its orders.” The justification is to enhance the powers of the tribunal.

FR LOKODO: Mr Chairman, I would like to refer to the Bill. We are proposing that in sub clause 19R the word “interrogations” be replaced with the word “interrogatory” so that the sub clause reads: 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Which paragraph? 

FR LOKODO: Paragraph 19R (3) and it reads: “While the tribunal considers it desirable for the purposes of avoiding expense or delay or for any other justifiable reason, it may receive evidence by affidavit and administer interrogatories and require the persons to whom interrogatories are administered to make full and true reply to the interrogatories - instead of interrogations. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, you agree to the earlier amendment proposed by the chairman.

FR LOKODO: Yes, I am okay with it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairman, do you agree to the amendment of the minister? 

MR OBOTH: Yes, we do concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question to the amendment first by the chairman of the committee.

(Question put an agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question to the amendment proposed by the minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OBOTH: 19U be amended by substituting the following: 

    1. The tribunal shall as soon as practical after the hearing has been completed make a decision in writing and state the reasons for the decision.

    2. The tribunal shall within 7 days of making a decision in sub section (i) avail it to the inspectorate; the leader against whom the proceedings were instituted and any other person as the tribunal deems fit.

Justification is to require the decision of the tribunal to be in writing; to require a decision of the tribunal to be availed to the leader of the inspectorate and any other person as the tribunal deems fit. 

FR LOKODO: Mr Chairman, up to paragraph 1 and 2 we are together. However, we are proposing insertion of (3) to read as follows: “Where the tribunal finds a leader guilty of contravening any of the provisions of this code, it shall impose upon that leader any of the punishments specified in section 35”. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairman, do you agree to this amendment.

MR OBOTH: A good return deserves another, we concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment proposed by the minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question to the amendment proposed by the chairman.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OBOTH: We are proposing that 19 (v) be amended by substituting for sub clause (I) with the following: 

    1. A party who is aggrieved by the decision of the tribunal may within 30 days after being notified of the decision in section 19U appeal that decision to the high court.

Justification is for clarity and better drafting and parts of the provisions were redundant.

FR LOKODO: We are okay with that, Mr Chairman. We concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OBOTH: Clause 18 amendment of clause 16, we propose to substitute clause 16 with the following -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, I need to put the question to clause 15.

MR OBOTH: Most obliged, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that clause 15 as amended stands part of the Bill.

Question put and agreed to.

(Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 16

MR OBOTH: Amendment of clause 16; for section 20 of the principal Act to be substituted with the following: action on decision of the tribunal.

    (1) The Registrar of the tribunal shall inform the authorised person in writing, of the decision of the tribunal within thirty days after the date of the decision. 

    (2) The authorised person shall, within thirty days of receipt of the decision under subsection (1), take action as directed by the Tribunal. 

    (3) The authorised person shall report to the Tribunal in writing within fourteen days after the expiration of the thirty days referred to in subsection (2) of the action taken by him or her. 

    (4) Notwithstanding subsection (2), where the grounds or procedure for the dismissal or removal from office of a leader is prescribed under the Constitution, the decision of the tribunal to the authorised person shall be a recommendation to the authorised person to exercise such disciplinary action as prescribed under the Constitution.

    (5) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, where a leader is dismissed or removed from office for misbehaviour or misconduct under any law, a breach of this Code shall constitute misbehaviour or misconduct under that law.  

    (6) Where any disciplinary action is recommended by the tribunal, the authorised person shall ensure that the disciplinary action is carried out in accordance with the procedure prescribed in the law under which such a leader is disciplined. 

    (7) A person who is dismissed, removed from office, or convicted for breach of this Code as a result of the decision of the tribunal, shall not hold any other public office whether appointive or elective for a period of five years from the date of dismissal, removal from office or conviction.”  

Justification

    1. To bring the provision in line with the decision in the case of Fox Odoi-Oywelowo’s Case and Eng. Thomas Mulondo’s Case.  

    2. To allow the authorised person to comply with the procedure prescribed under the law that applies to that leader. 

FR LOKODO: It is fine, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to the amendment proposed in clause 16.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 17 

MR OBOTH: We propose to amend clause 17 in paragraph (a) by inserting the words “of the tribunal” immediately after the word “decision” appearing in the fifth line. The justification is for clarity and better drafting. 

FR LOKODO: I concede, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment proposed in clause 17.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 17, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21, agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23

MR OBOTH: We propose to amend clause 23 by substituting paragraph (b) and inserting immediately after subsection (6) the following new subsections:

(6a)	In the case of a chairperson or member of the contracts committee of a district or district land board, the authorised person shall be the District Council Chairperson.

(6b)	In the case of a chairperson or a member of the tribunal and any other person appointed by the President, the authorised person shall be the President.”
   
Justification is for clarity. 

FR LOKODO: I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERON: Honourable members, I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 24, agreed to.

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26

MR OBOTH: For clause 26, there is substituted the following -

“Section 34 of the principal Act is amended by deleting subsection (2).” This is because the report of the Inspectorate is no longer final and therefore cannot be appealed against. The protection extended to such reports under section 34(2) is no longer necessary.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister?

FR LOKODO: I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal is to delete subclause (2) in section 34.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 26, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 27

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairperson, we propose that clause 27 be deleted. The justification is that the proposed amendment is misconceived having been hinged on a wrong interpretation of the decision in the case of Fox Odoi-Oywelowo and James Akampumuza Vs Attorney-General. In the case of hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi Vs Attorney-General and the Electoral Commission, court held that dismissal and vacation from office are still legal punishments since they were not entirely declared unconstitutional.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Minister?

FR LOKODO: I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 27 be deleted from the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 27, deleted.

Clause 28

MR OBOTH: For clause 28, there is substituted the following-

28. “Transitional provision.

    (1) Notwithstanding the amendment by this Act, all things lawfully done by the Inspectorate immediately before the commencement of this Act, decisions made or directions given by the Inspectorate shall so far as are consistent with this Act continue in force and effect after the commencement of this Act. 

    (2) The Inspectorate shall continue any action or investigation commenced and not concluded at the commencement of this Act as if the action or investigation had been initiated under this Act. 

This is to cater for investigations commenced, but not completed before the amendment of this code. Secondly, it is for continuality.

FR LOKODO: I agree, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister “continue to investigate as if it had been initiated under this Act” – this is the same Act. We are not repealing it. Therefore, how can we say “as if it had been initiated under this Act”? It was initiated under this Act.

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, after this amendment, it could be possible for anybody to come up and challenge earlier proceedings. This is just for purposes of emphasis under this amended Act. However, it was initiated under this Act and it should be seen to continue.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Mr Chairman, if you stop “at this Act”, it will be sufficient – “The Inspectorate shall continue any action or investigation commenced and not concluded at the commencement of this Act.”

MR OBOTH: Most obliged, Mr Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister?

FR LOKODO: I, too, concede, Mr Chairman. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 28, as amended, agreed to.

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, we have a proposal to insert a new clause 28A as follows -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Before clause 29.

MR OBOTH: Before clause 29. 
 
“28A. Repeal of section 9 of the Anti-Corruption Act, 2009
Section 9 of the Anti-Corruption Act, 2009 is repealed.

The justification is that this decriminalises conflict of interest and secondly it would be a consequential amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Minister?

FR LOKODO: Mr Chairman, we did a lot of harmonisation and so, I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to the insertion of a new clause immediately after clause 28 and that it stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause 28A, agreed to.

Clause 29

MR OBOTH: We propose that clause 29 be amended:
    (a) In paragraph (b),  by substituting for subparagraph (iii), the following:

“(iii) by substituting for paragraph 22 the following:
22. All officers of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces of or above the rank of major and officers in charge of the payroll.”

    (b) Immediately after subparagraph (iv), insert a new sub paragraph to read as follows:

“Substitute for paragraph 25, the following-

25. Inspector General of Police, Deputy Inspector General of Police and an officer of or above the rank of Assistant Superintendent of Police”

    (c) Immediately after subparagraph (vii), insert a new sub paragraph to read as follows:

“Substitute for paragraph 39, the following- 
39. Accountant, internal auditor and procurement officer in a Government department or parastatal, constitutional commissions and all other statutory bodies set up by an Act of Parliament”

This is to be consistent with section 2 of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces Act, 2005 which considers an officer at or above the rank of major to be a senior officer while a captain is a junior officer. 

Secondly, this is to ensure that it is consistent with section 2 of the Police Act 303 which considers an officer of or above the rank of Assistant Superintendent of Police to be a senior officer while an inspector of Police to be a junior officer. 

Thirdly, this is to include some of the major persons in government departments and parastatals who manage and control government processes and decision-making. Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

MR BAHATI: I wanted to crosscheck with the committee chairperson about the Uganda Prisons Service. If we are expanding the net, don’t they have a rank which can be considered?

MR OBOTH: Particularly for this, we are concerned about the UPDF which was not covered well. If you look at the principal Act, it is not well defined.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In other words, are you saying the ones for Prisons are covered?

MR OBOTH: Yes, it is covered because the Commissioner-General and the ranks there are covered.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister?

FR LOKODO: We are together, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question to those amendments proposed by the chairperson of the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 29, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 30, agreed to.

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Definition of matrimonial -

FR LOKODO: Mr Chairperson, I had forgotten one important clause. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us deal with this one because they have already called it and then, we shall go to the forgotten one.

FR LOKODO: Okay.

MR OBOTH: We propose that clause 1 be amended as follows:
    (1) Immediately before paragraph (a), insert the following:
    (2) “Gift” means anything of value or benefit given to a leader directly or indirectly, gratuitously or solicited in his/her official capacity at a public or ceremonial occasion.

“Property” includes money, income, assets of every kind whether corporeal or incorporeal, moveable or immoveable, tangible or intangible and legal documents or instruments evidencing title or interest in such assets.

“Public office” means an office in the public service.
“Public officer” means a person holding or acting in any public office.
“Public service” means service in a civil capacity of the Government or of a local government.
The justification is to define the words that are numerously used in the Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: And they are not defined anywhere else?

MR OBOTH: And they are not defined anywhere in the Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: On property, there was the initial definition and we have made some changes to in the text of the Bill where we have brought back the initial - where there are incomes, assets and liabilities.

MR OBOTH: With that reminder, Mr Chairperson, since we adopted to use assets and asset is defined in the principal Act, I beg to delete the proposal on defining property. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal for the definition of “property” is withdrawn because it is sufficiently defined in the principal Act as it is now. Honourable minister, you had a proposal on the definition?

FR LOKODO: I had a proposal on definitions – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I deal with the proposals from the chairperson of the committee. I put the question to those amendments.

(Question put and agreed to.)

FR LOKODO: Mr Chairperson, the committee introduced a new nomenclature - matrimonial property but it was not provided for in the definitions. I would like to offer a proposal on matrimonial property.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that part of the definition?

FR LOKODO: The property to which each spouse should be entitled – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, please, start afresh. Matrimonial property means -

FR LOKODO: Matrimonial property means property to which each spouse should be entitled and which they jointly contribute to – (Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is this word defined in any other law – matrimonial property – or in the Land Act.

MR AKAMBA: Mr Chairperson, it is defined in the Land Act.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  That is what I thought. Can we borrow the definition from the Land Act? Is the Land Act here? Which year was it? Do you have the definition?

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much. I think the common definition for the matrimonial property is property owned or obtained by either one or both married spouses before or during marriages and sometimes it is called matrimonial asset.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Where is this definition from?

MS KARUNGI: Mr Chairperson, this definition is from the family related laws.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is not in the definition section. 

MR MUGOYA: I hope this will be of great use to this august House. It says matrimonial property in Uganda has not yet been clearly defined either by statutory law or case law. However, courts have provided a starting point for determination of what constitutes matrimonial property. In the case of Mwanga Vs Kintu of 1997, High Court Divorce (HCD), before Justice Bossa, noted that matrimonial property to which each spouse should be entitled is that property which the parties choose to call a home and which they jointly contribute to –(Interruption)

MR BAHATI:  Mr Chairperson, in another case of Ayuku & Lekuru, case number 001 of 2015, matrimonial property is defined as the property to which each spouse should be entitled and which they jointly contribute to. It was the high court. 

 MR AKAMBA: The Land Act as amended, section 38 (a) (4) except that it uses family land as opposed to family property - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are talking about matrimonial property. It is the word we are defining not any other word.

MR AKAMBA:  Mr Chairperson, they actually define family land - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, this one is “matrimonial property”. Those are the words used in this Bill.

MS KARUNGI: Mr Chairperson, I think my definition is stronger because there are sources - as a woman you marry someone when you have never had any source of income, and thus, the man provides in all. Are you going to tell me I have no share because I have not contributed financially, yet I have produced for you six handsome boys (Laughter) and they are may be in the university and when people look at them, they simply get amazed.

If you talk about contributing which both of you have done in different ways – Mr Chairperson, I think that at the point we are at in Uganda, it may not be fair to all the parties. It should therefore be the property which maybe one has, and the other has not contributed to; that property acquired before marriage. One has a right to have a share. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this definition is for the purposes of the Leadership Code, declaration of income, assets and liabilities, not for ownership purposes. (Laughter)

MR AOGON: Mr Chairperson, you know that this specific word is so critical that we need to give it time. It is even better for us to defer it and we let it be properly researched and then we come back later to work on it. It has a big bearing when you talk about it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, we just need to go back and delete it from the Bill. We cannot use something that you cannot define in the law. People will start calling it anything. Chairperson, can you lead us to where it was misused? Was it in your amendments? It is on page four of your report; clause 6 (a)(i)

MR OBOTH: “In this section, a leader shall be taken to have an interest in where (a) in case of property, it is matrimonial property” and it gives all others. There has been some attempts by our legal secretariat – (Interjections)- we may listen to this before we move it - it means that it is property that is owned through and or by reason of spouses having been married to each other and it includes, all the composite property which the couples refer to as their matrimonial home, where they live and stay, bring up children and quite often earn a living by working on the land on which the home is.

In other jurisdictions - make a quick search in Google; it is defined where there is matrimonial Property Act and since it may not be very clear and most people do not have the equivalent of –the problem is that matrimonial is more matrimonial than what we have.(Laughter). I would therefore seek that we make the withdrawal of that word until the jurisdiction of this country gets to a level – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It will actually be taken care of by three – what is proposed in (iii)

MR OBOTH: What is proposed is, “it is jointly owned by the leader with any other person.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, that person can be a spouse.

MR OBOTH: That person can be a spouse. We were afraid that – you know the current law does not cover that. I beg to move that we remove it since we are finding a difficulty in interpreting it, and this is where the law grows with society. Our society is not there yet, but I think that we will get there. The minister does not need to labour to define it. I beg that we get that clause amended accordingly to remove 6(a) under the declaration of property – that is under the amendment clause 3, “declaration of property and liability”. We are amending the principal Act, Section 4.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, clause 3 of the Bill has been completely substituted by what we decided on as Committee of the whole House, arising from the proposal from the Chairperson. In what we had adopted in subclause 6, paragraph (a)(i) , the words “it is matrimonial property”. The proposal now is to delete it from the record.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I put the question to clause 1 as amended?

MS KARUNGI: I seek your indulgence, Mr Chairperson. I am looking at it from the perspective of when our leaders hide the property under the matrimonial arrangement – okay, hiding the property among the family members and we have no way of getting them even when it is seen clearly that the property is therein hidden –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, it is taken care of as long as the leader has any interest in it. In the matrimonial home, you are tracing the interest of the leader and not any other interest. This is now taken care of in subclause (iii), “it is jointly owned by the leader with any other person” and that other person can be anyone. Okay? Can I now put the question to the amendment in clause 1?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Title

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the title of the Bill remains as the title to the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to).

Title agreed to.

FR LOKODO: Mr Chairperson, I forgot one amendment I should have proposed to the committee’s report. This is clause 4(a), paragraph 8. We propose to insert immediately –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We already handled it honourable minister.

FR LOKODO: Give me one minute.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We do not have one minute. Concerning paragraph 8, we adopted yours “or any other law”, it was adopted.

FR LOKODO: It is 4(c).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is it capital C?

FR LOKODO: No it is 4 (c) in the sub clause 8, we want to substitute the words “60 working days” appearing in the third line with the words “six months” so that the sub clause reads: “The inspectorate shall ensure that the verification process is carried out within a reasonable time; in any case not later than six months from the date of commencement”.

We think the timeframe of 60 working days within which the IGG should complete the verification process is unreasonable.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Therefore, is two months too short?

FR LOKODO: It is too short. We have given them six months.

MR OBOTH: Well we can concede to his proposed, how many months? But this cannot go on forever. You know the anxiety that it creates on a leader. The verification must be done quickly so that the leader is at peace. Six months is like a whole year.

FR LOKODO: Mr Chairperson, the fact is the declarations are so many and the human resources in the IGG are so limited so to expect that they will manage this in barely two months is being pretentious. That is why we are saying six months would be a good period of time.

MR OBOTH: We concede quickly.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I put the question to this amendment from 60 days or two months to six months. I put the question to that amendment proposed by the minister?

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINSITER OF STATE FOR ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Fr Simon Lokodo): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House report. I put the question to that motion?

 (Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

8.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Fr Simon Lokodo): Mr Speaker I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Leadership Code (Amendment) Bill, 2016” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

2.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Fr Simon Lokodo): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for the adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion?

(Question put and agreed to.)
Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE LEADERSHIP CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016

2.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Fr Simon Lokodo): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Leadership Code (Amendment) Bill, 2016” be read the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that “The Leadership Code (Amendment) Bill, 2016” be read the third time and do pass. I put the question to that motion?

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED: “THE LEADERSHIP CODE (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2017”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Congratulations honourable minister, chairman and honourable members because this is one of those Bills that are not very easy to handle at committee stage because the amendments are many and complicated. However, you have done it, so congratulations. (Applause) On a good note, we have been able to finish all work that was on the order paper today and it will be a good time to now do what I must do to enable the budget process continue.

Honourable members, it is now late so what we are going to do is to suspend plenary to enable the sectoral committees to handle business. Work of standing committees is also suspended. Exception will be given to those who will indicate, in writing, reasons why that particular standing committee must have a meeting. And that will be handled on a case by case basis through authorisation from the Speaker.

Otherwise, all work of standing committees is suspended as well but if there is work that must be done then write to the Speaker and seek authority so that you can be given that leave to do those two three meetings and then come back and deal with the work of the sectoral committee.

The Ministry for East African Affairs has organised a strategic meeting to discuss matters of mainstreaming the original integration agenda in Government schedule to take place on 10 April 2017, at Nile Hotel Jinja. Specifically, the following are invited; 

    1. All members of the committee on East African Affairs
    2. Chairpersons of sectoral committees
    3. Chairpersons of standing committees on Public Accounts, Budget, National Economy, Science and Technology, Local Government Accounts and the vice chairperson of the Budget committee.

Therefore the above categories of members have my permission to participate in this particular meeting on the 10 April 2017. Any other leave will be granted to other standing committees who show cause that there is something very urgent that they must handle and then the Speaker will exercise the discretion to allow that happen.

This House is now –(A Member rose_)- we will not be able to handle anything else honourable member. It is coming to 8.30 p.m.  The House is adjourned sine die.

(The House rose at 8.28 p.m. and adjourned sine die.) 
