Thursday, 5 August 2010

Parliament met at 11.11 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s meeting where we shall continue to receive responses from the government. But in the meantime, hon. Members, it should be right that I inform you of the death of the former President of this country, Mr Godfrey Lukongwa Binaisa, who died this morning. And as you recall, this House enacted a law that deals with handling former Presidents who have died. So, I trust that the state is going to engage with the family and we shall be informed about the details. But for now, I think I would want to request that we stand up for one minute of silence in his honour. 

(The Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ON THE DELAY OF PAYMENT OF SALARIES TO CIVIL SERVANTS

11.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (MICRO-FINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, on behalf of the Ministry of Finance, I would like to sincerely apologise to civil servants and Members of Parliament for the delay of payment of their July salary.  As I explained this week on Tuesday, there was a slight delay as usual. As you recall, every close of the financial year, we experience slight delays in payment of salary and even this financial year, the July salary fell in that category. There are systems which were supposed to be updated in the Central Bank and also in the Ministry of Public Service. And I promised last Tuesday that within three days, salary would be paid. I would like to confirm that I have been informed that salary is being paid. I would like to apologise for the inconveniences caused by the delay of the payment of salary.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, yesterday we were receiving responses from the Executive. I now invite the Minister for Gender, followed by the Minister for Works.

11.15
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Gabriel Opio): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The areas which were touched were about employment and I am going to respond in two categories: External employment and internal employment. As a government, we would like to tap outside labour markets where we can have our people employed; and so far the areas we have tapped are in the area of security agencies. Madam Speaker, we have licensed, as a government, 17 private security agencies: 

1. 	Askar Security Services Limited
2. 	Two Niles Public Relations Agency Limited
3. 	Dreshak Enterprises Limited
4. 	The Gideon’s Men Ltd
5. 	Watertight Services Ltd
6. 	Labour Link Ltd
7. 	FHTO Ltd
8. 	International Security Systems (U) Ltd
9. 	Middle East International Ltd
10. 	Job Supply (U) Ltd
11.	CMS Services (U) Ltd
12. 	Tight Security Ltd
13. 	Razor Sharp Logistics Ltd
14. 	Normandy Company Uganda Ltd
15. 	Detail Protection Services Limited
16. 	Sepher Employment Agency Limited and,
17. 	SGA Manpower Limited

Madam Speaker, the placement currently is as follows:
•	Askar has our people in Iraq and so far we have 957 male and 24 female, giving us a total of 981;
•	Dreshak has, in Iraq, 5,284 male and 232 female, giving us a total of 5,516 people. In Afghanistan, Dreshak has a number that is still small – we have 18 persons, all male;
•	The Gideon’s Men have, in Iraq, 1,831 male and 56 female, giving us a total of 1,887 people;
•	Then Tow Niles – Juba, 26 male and 17 female, giving a total of 43 and they have also our people in Saudi Arabia, 64 male and no female, giving a total of 64; 
•	In United Arab Emirates we have 259 male and five women, giving a total of 264;
•	Watertight Services has 847 male in Iraq and 25 female, giving a total of 872;
•	Lexco Company, in the United Arab Emirates, has 43 male with no female;
•	In Afghanistan, FHTO has 107 male with no female;
•	 Detail Protection has 177 male in Iraq, with no female, while Middle East has 15 male in United Arab Emirates with no female. This gives us a total of 9,987.

So, these are companies we have on our database. There are some who maybe- Ugandans may be moving out of the country and not actually under this company. So, what we have requested the embassies and the consuls is to get these people report to them so that when there is a problem, we - our embassies and as a Government - will look after their interests.

MR WADRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We wish to thank the hon. Minister for Gender, Labour and Social Development for giving us this information about export of manpower from Uganda, as it were. I have appreciated the manner in which you are formalising the service sector in terms of labour provision and you have further gone ahead to tell us that when these people are taken out, you are in touch with our consuls, high commissioners and embassies so that they are able to get in touch.

But you will also agree with me that sometime back, it took the whole of this Parliament to intervene in the deplorable conditions under which our men and women were being mistreated outside this country. Have you, as a ministry – now that you have rationalised the export of this labour force – also taken trouble, together with these firms that are responsible for this recruitment, to look at conditions of service so that when our men and women are mistreated out there somebody should be held responsible for immediate action rather than for us to begin getting things through telephone calls or international media. We need to protect our people who are sent out to work, well knowing that we do not have enough in the country; they are still Ugandans; we need to provide for their welfare. (Interruption)

PROF. OGENG-LATIGO: Have you put such mechanisms in place so that when these people go there, they know very well that in case of any mistreatment, their home country is likely to come to their assistance? Is it there?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But Members, let the Minister answer. We had a debate on this matter. He is responding to the issues which were raised then. Please respond.

MR OPIO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I respect the questions asked by the Leader of the Opposition. We have got mechanisms for following up our people who have been taken outside the country through these licensed companies. The problem we have had are people who go out without going through the system; it is when they have problems that they go to our embassies. 

I will give you an example of Southern Sudan. Some of our people go there but because of lack of national identity, they carry an LC I chairman’s letter. When they go to the embassy, it becomes very difficult for the embassy to identify whether they are part – but we generally accept whoever is outside and is claiming to be a Ugandan. We try to save him or her before we go into the details.

The problem has also been the middle people. Those who have companies, for instance in Iraq, they have counterpart companies in Uganda; each wants to have a commission. Those companies in the United States tend to get more commissions and try to give less to our people. By the time I went to the ministry, the salary had come down from US$ 1,000 to US$ 600. That is why we are still around US$ 500 to US$ 600. They wanted to come back and say, “We want to reduce because we have got manpower from Sierra Leone who can accept US$ 250.” It was good that I discussed this matter because they were threatening us that if we do not accept the lower figure; they were going to bring all those people to Uganda immediately. They were working on our emotions thinking that we would be threatened and say, “What do we do with 10,000 people with guns?” I got the answer and told them, “We are ready to absorb them.”  They have never come back. You can see the tricks. They wanted us to accept the reduction because they knew we were on the weak side at that time. They had already analysed and said, “Government will not allow to bring these soldiers immediately.”  But when we responded and said, “We are ready to absorb them,” they have never come back.

So, there is the issue of supply and demand. There are many of these people from other countries and they would like to take them at cheaper rates than us; but we are prepared to talk to them on behalf of our people. We cannot allow them to reduce the rate to US$ 250 when they are getting several thousands from the Iraq Government.

Also, we have de-registered some of these companies. We have de-registered Migral Opportunities Limited; we have de-registered Uganda Veterans Development Limited. You know about that. Then we have de-registered Labour Export Services Limited. Some of these companies were sending our girls as house girls and made them comfort women for these people. We could not accept that. That issue was raised on the Floor. We investigated and because of that, we de-registered the company, which was sending our girls not to be there as house girls, but for other reasons.

The problem is difficult because of our indiscipline; people leave with no trace back here. It is only when they have problems that we have to take on the problem. We should sensitise our people that for the sake of knowing where they are; even if they do not go using these companies; they should always get in contact with our ministry’s external unit so that we know where they have gone and we can liaise with our people in the embassies.

Several times, we have sent our Minister of State for Labour. He has been in Saudi Arabia, he was supposed to go to Iraq, but they could not give him access to Iraq. He has been in Saudi Arabia, the Emirates and Mauritius to meet these people. I also travelled to Saudi Arabia to meet our Ugandans who are there. So, we have been making these efforts. The way forward is to shift from deploying only security guards to highly-skilled personnel to countries like Canada and Mauritius. My state minister has been in Canada and is working on the type of people they want. They would like to advertise so that they can get these highly-skilled jobs.  We need to re-orient the trend for our training to suit the demands of the foreign labour market because we have more or less trained for security, but we have not re-oriented our people to go in for skilled work.

Employment in Uganda

Madam Speaker, people who are entering our labour market are about 400,000 per annum and Government has employed about 251,000 and the private sector about 250,000. You can see that the demand from the private sector and the government cannot match with our people who are entering the labour market. 

So, what is the government doing? Government has provided non-formal training. As we speak now, in the various districts which have got technical institutes and what we call community polytechnics, we have a policy of training for non-formal employment. They train for three months; after that, we have programmes to provide them with entrepreneurial skills. From there, we would like apprenticeship.

What is lacking now, which we are going to emphasise, is not only to train someone to give him or her skills and then say, “You are ready for start-up capital.” It is not working. Someone might have been trained, but he or she is not really equipped for the type of job they would like to start. We are now thinking of - and it is within our plan even in this budget – identifying some companies and jua kali areas where to attach some of these students who have already got skills, including entrepreneurial skills; to be under apprenticeship for about six months so that if they are satisfied that they can do what they have been attached to, then they are ready for start-up capital. Otherwise, you give training and the following day this person is in your office. 

One time I was the minister who handed over certificates to these people who had trained. The following day at home, I found someone looking for a job. What did that person provide, a certificate, which I had handed him the previous day? You could see that that person although trained to be an entrepreneur did not have that drive to become an entrepreneur. He still wanted to get a job. Therefore, we need to emphasise apprenticeship as a way of introducing our skilled people to jobs. 

In this year’s budget, we have over Shs 4 billion for this type of formal training and hopefully, we are going to work with the Ministry of Finance to establish some of the financial institutions where these people can borrow money and use it after they have been introduced to jobs.

Prospects are also here now. As you read in the newspapers, Government is recruiting about 5,000 special constable cadres in the Police. Also, in the Ministry of Education and Sports, we have advertised 4,000 jobs for secondary school teachers and bursars because some of the schools have been running without bursars. 

Also, IT with my friend and colleague hon. Aggrey Awori, he has areas in which he is going to train people, although they are anxious to be paid before they have even finished the apprenticeship. Hopefully, they will learn to stay so that they can get some skills.

Madam Speaker, these are my responses to the issues relating to employment. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Minister of Works. 

STATEMENT

11.31
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr John Nasasira): I thank you, Madam Speaker. A number of issues were raised by the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament and I will respond to them as follows. 

First, was on the railways. He expressed concern that the development of the railways is slow and we need to move fast. I do agree with him that the railways are important, but their development now is not quite slow because we are tackling all the lines. 

As Parliament will recall, we suspended the operations of the Tororo-Pakwach line and also the Kampala-Kasese line. The suspension of Kampala-Kasese was because the line was too old, but we have already engaged consultants and we are finalising the feasibility study and design, so as to prepare for the construction of a new line. 

On the Kampala-Malaba line, the detailed design is going on. We have also engaged a consultant to join with our Kenyan counterparts to design for a standard gauge. So, we hope that in the medium term, the development of a standard gauge will start together with our Kenyan counterparts. 

Madam Speaker, I think you even heard a statement from His Excellency the President that the government is prepared to train our Army to be part and parcel of developing our railways, to reduce on the costs of development and to reduce on the repayments of financing from outside. We are also in discussions with the Kenyans on other countries that have shown interest in the Public Private Partnership projects. 

With respect to the Tororo-Pakwach line, under the trade and transport facilitation loan which was approved by this House, a study was carried out to improve the existing line and also to design for a standard gauge. That study has been completed and we are moving to the next stage. 

Two years ago, we signed an MoU with the Government of Sudan to develop the Gulu-Nimule line. As I speak, we have prepared joint documents and we are looking around for money to develop that line. 

The concession which has not performed well for the last two years has now been restructured. The new shareholders are going to capitalise the investment and management to improve their efficiency and on this; we are working together with our Kenyan counterparts. So, Madam Speaker, these are all the efforts that the government is putting in place to see that we develop our railways. 

On the Southern route, we are in discussions with Tanzania. About four months ago, I was here with a delegation to see how Uganda and Tanzania can develop a dedicated port at Tanga and a line to come to Musoma and then to Kampala. 

At the ports, the project of developing, improving and expanding Portbell is ongoing, and also the repairing of the wagon ferries – Kaawa and Pamba. One of them has started and the other will start soon. So, yes, our railway at the moment is silent on the Northern route and the Southern route, but efforts have been put in place to see that we revitalise it. 

There was also concern about potholes in Kampala. As I have said before, our efforts to take Kampala roads were resisted by Kampala City Council. They insisted that they would continue working on the roads. We wanted to continue with what we had done with the roads that we had improved during CHOGM, but they wanted to maintain their roads. So, from July 2008, we withdrew our supervision and maintenance of the roads that we had taken over for a year in preparation of CHOGM, and Kampala City Council has been in charge. 

But recently, I think they realised that the problem is big and they have been in discussions with us and we are signing an MoU with them to take over some of the roads in the centre of Kampala and we hope that in this financial year, we will start working together with them. But as of now, Kampala City Council is still in charge and they are trying to do their best within their means. I know the situation is not yet good and the outcry is big, but KCC is trying their best.

As for the upcountry roads, I am sure those who travel can see that we are either working on most of our corridors or they are complete. Madam Speaker, I want to repeat my statement that as far as the national tarmac roads are concerned, our target is that we shall have no potholes on any of these roads by the end of 2012. It is a commitment I made three years ago and I am sure we will achieve that. There is no corridor now where we are not working and some are finished. We have also started on the major roads - upgrading them to tarmac - and I think I will avail more details on this in the debates of my ministry’s policy statement and the budget. 

There was also concern raised on the utilisation of funds. Yes, we are concerned that UNRA was not able to utilise the funds to capacity last financial year. The problems were about three. The first problem was that even where they tendered, the procurement law at the moment does not help UNRA or even the ministry itself in terms of solving or quickly finalising the procurement process. You can start a project, tender it out, do the evaluation and when you have awarded a contract in the law, you are supposed to pin the award for 10 days at the notice board. 

Any competitor is free to write and ask for an administrative review. The administrative review is done by the accounting officer, in this case the Executive Director of UNRA. After that, if he is not satisfied, he is supposed to appeal to PPDA for another review. That review will go on until PPDA pronounces itself, but that does not stop another competitor from asking for a review. 

Cabinet is concerned and we are looking at the necessary amendments in the law to make the procurement more efficient. However, this is not the only process of appeals on procurement; I have a project which took one year because even when the PPDA was reviewing or looking at the appeal by one of the contractors, another one went to the IGG. The IGG then halted the process and we were saying we thought one road should be enough to deal with the procurement. The IGG halted the process and studied the case; eventually he agreed with UNRA’s evaluation. Then later, the PPDA also agreed with UNRA’s evaluation, but although they came to one conclusion, it had taken us almost a year to come to that conclusion and that is one of the reasons for this poor absorption. 

The second problem is that many roads were still under the design and so forth, but they are now ready. 

The third is that we are trying to attract more big and competent consultants who do our designs, because sometimes the designs also have problems; just like the case we had on the Northern Bypass where the designing consultant – we are building the capacity in UNRA to check the designs and also try to attract more consultants for better designs. We get delays on inadequate designs. So, when you combine the three, we had these delays, but UNRA has been addressing the issue of designs. The government is now addressing the procurement law and we shall come here with proposals for Parliament’s consideration and approval. 

Finally, UNRA itself is trying to attract more companies to come because the problem in Uganda is that we have a few companies that compete for this work, and we are looking at the next financial year; in fact the absorption by the end of this financial year will be far higher than even the money we have because there are so many projects that are ready for construction now and others are starting. As you realise, recently we tendered for tarmacking nine roads at the same time, which has never happened in this country.  So, we are hoping that the absorption issue will be solved.

The fourth was the issue of the roads the Central Government took over from the districts. There was a big backlog, so we have worked it out, we will tackle it in two ways. Some roads have already been tendered out, but we have also now registered all possible contractors in the country and discussed financing with PPDA to allow unit rates. In a month or so, UNRA is going to deploy every contractor on all these roads using unit rates which would have been approved by UNRA, and I think this backlog should be sorted out in a couple of months.

There was some concern about road safety. It is still a problem but we have the measures and one of the requests was that we expeditiously finalise the establishment of the National Road Safety Authority which I agree with and which we are working on expeditiously. 

Those are the responses with respect to the statement by the Leader of the Opposition and I am looking forward to giving more details about this sector when we come to discuss the policy statement. I thank you.

MR OKOT-OGONG: Madam Speaker, I appreciate what Government is doing on our national roads and I would like to thank the minister. But I would like to implore our minister to be proactive. You do not need a consultant to tell you that this road is narrow. When you drive along the road from Kampala to Karuma-Kafu, it is very narrow. So, hon. Minister, do you still need a consultant to tell you that the road is narrow? Why are you constructing narrow roads when you know that there are so many vehicles moving on those roads? That is why you have so many accidents on that road. At night you can barely drive. When light beams on the other side you get problems. 

So, hon. Minister, why are you still constructing narrow roads of six metres and you do not give any provision for other road users? No walkways, no what; we are all on this narrow road of six metres and yet you are an Engineer and now you are telling us you are going to hire other people to tell you to construct big roads. Hon. Minister, I want to implore you, please work.

Secondly, you know that there are people now constructing buildings in the road reserves and you are blind on that. People are constructing and when you want to widen the road, you want to pay them compensation. Why don’t you act now to avoid compensation of those people who are constructing on the road reserves?  The Dokolo road highway is fantastic, but now people are constructing in the road reserves. Why don’t you now mark the road properly, inform the people and even be on radios? Tell people not to build in the road reserves -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Members, you know the minister was responding to the issues raised here and now you are bringing new issues. When will you finish?

MR OKOT-OGONG: I wanted clarification on that. Then lastly - he is my brother; he works very hard and I appreciate his work, but roads in our countryside are actually very bad. When you come to my constituency, you can barely drive on some roads. So, hon. Minister, take charge. We are going for elections. We do not want to lose elections because of bad roads. The Movement has done a lot and we are going to win, but bad roads may reduce our percentage. Please work very hard so that we get more than 70 percent in the elections. (Mr Sebuliba Mutumba rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, what clarification? Hon. Members, we had a debate on the State of the Nation Address. He is responding to the issues that were raised. Now you want another debate - No, wait for the policy statement. We are going to start on it anyway later in the day - on what he has said? No. No, but you made your contribution to the State of the Nation Address. No, you should have been chosen. Minister, answer those. Okay, just one and then the minister answers and we go to Public Service.

MR ANGIRO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wanted to hear from the honourable minister about the community roads. Last financial year we were told Shs 10 million was given to each sub-county - I think per month - but Lira did not receive and it is a concern. 

And then adding to the road size, I think after the Soroti - Lira Road construction, there is going to be a very serious difference between that road and the Lira - Karuma Road construction. The road which was previously constructed in the 60s has been narrow and I wonder whether you have taken note of that. Not to mention, I do not know if they have been given specific time to construct that road because today you come and find big potholes here; tomorrow they fill it with murram and then you come and it is off. It is destroying so many vehicles.

And maybe you will need to clarify sometime using these FM radio stations. In Lira we have six FM radio stations. They are always up on the neck of the Members of Parliament because of these bad roads and because of some of these trunk roads like the one from Apac to Oyam to Lira which was expected to reach Otuke. I do not know how it was really considered, but I think that part of Lira to Otuke should be taken into consideration by the Central Government.

And the question of -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no. Please. You contributed to the State of the Nation Address. 

MR ANGIRO: Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you are smuggling now. Minister, please answer; we need to go to Public Service.

MR NASASIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My brother and friend, hon. Felix Okot, of course we do not need a consultant to see whether the road is narrow or not; anybody with eyes can see that. But I think you have to realise how the country is developing. It is not that we want the six-metre road. It is what we can afford at the moment. But we are now moving to another stage where for future constructions, all major roads will be a minimum of seven metres wide and two metres shoulder tarmacked. That is 11. Now, even where we have the six metres, and that includes actually Dokolo-Lira, there are tarmacked shoulders of 1½ metres and 1½ metres which provide for riding  bicycles and so forth. So, the tarmacked width of the road on the six-metre road is actually nine and the seven-metre.

If you see our policy statement, we are now designing all the roads getting out of Kampala to Bombo to Mpigi to Jinja. We will move to a stage of four-lane roads and in the later years to come, when we are quite old, we might be able to see the six-lane roads - hopefully in our old age. So, we are aware and that does not need a consultant.  

Now, constructing on the road reserves; what we have done through UNRA is that all road reserves are marked and this is the first time that it has happened. On all the major corridors, the road reserve boundaries are marked. And I want to appeal to the local authorities, ourselves, we, honourable Members of Parliament, to join us in fighting these encroachments because there should be no building, be it in a town council or a trading centre, without the approval of the local authorities. How does the building get approved with local authorities?

If you saw the bypass, UNRA is fighting everyday. They now have to hire people to keep breaking up things. People are dumping, building. So it is -(Interjections)- even Dokolo? When we finish this road we shall mark it. So, I want to appeal for support from everybody to help us fight the encroachers, but we are doing our best.

Roads in the countryside; I have explained. We have worked out a strategy where we are moving in and of course hon. Okot Ogong, I will be one of the last people to want NRM to lose any vote in Uganda. So, we are trying to make sure that our votes are not taken by the Opposition because we need them -[Ms Aciro: “They are already gone.”]- Wapi.

Now, Lira never got; I have to find out, but I am sure the CAO can also explain why.

Then Lira-Kamudini; we have not narrowed it. We are repairing the existing one. The exercise that is ongoing between Kamudini and Lira is a rehabilitation of that road. We are just rehabilitating what is existing, repairing potholes and eventually they will seal it. It is a temporary measure until we come for full reconstruction.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Before I call the Minister of Public Service, I want you to join me in welcoming the teachers and pupils of Eden School Kampala in Nakawa Division represented by hon. Ruhindi. They are so many; I do not know which side they are on. Where is Eden School? Stand up. You are welcome. (Applause) You can see they are waving to their Member of Parliament. There is another group, but I will be informing you where they come from.

11.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca B. Mbaguta Sezi): Madam Speaker, there were two questions asked to which we are going to respond. The first one is about what criteria was used for selecting hard-to-reach areas.

The hard-to-reach areas; this is a framework for helping local governments in particular to attract and retain adequate numbers of staff that are capable and skilled. The criterion that was used was the high vacancy rates in some districts and those vacancy rates have run for more than 12 months unfilled.

The second criteria was the remoteness of the area where the schools, health facilities and other public institutions where generally, the social amenities such as safe water, schools and health facilities are not available because of that remoteness. 

The third criteria that was used was to look at the road network, electricity and housing available and that was also put in where there is low or inadequate infrastructure in the area. Because of the road infrastructure, the area and the public officers working there find it cumbersome; the system of transport is extremely cumbersome and sometimes risky. So, generally, access to facilities was a major factor that was considered; identifying the hard-to-reach areas and where there has been insurgency and insecurity, those areas were also put into consideration. 

The public officers are not in a position to freely move in those areas and, therefore, their mobility is reduced and eventually it becomes very costly and very difficult to attract public officers in those areas.

I want to also say that, before the framework was developed, we consulted widely the Ministry of Local Government, Ministry of Education and Sports, and Ministry of Health, and also the specific local governments were requested to make submissions.
This framework will continue for at least one financial year and it will be open for review as areas become remote; they are insecure and there is poor road infrastructure and other facilities; other local governments will come on board.

I would like to indicate the designated hard-to-reach areas that have started on the first implementation. They are 24 of them. The first one is Kotido, Abim, Kaabong, Moroto, Nakapiripirit, Pader, Kitgum, Amuru, Gulu, Adjumani, Nwoya, Mukono specifically for Koome Island, Kalangala, Bundibugyo, Kisoro, Kanungu, Bukwo, Buvuma, Lamwo, Namayingo, Napak, Ntoroko, Mayuge specifically for Malonge Island, and Bugiri specifically for Sigulu Island.

In the initial implementation this financial year, areas that are urban have been excluded because of their accessibility and we have focused on the rural-based areas of these particular districts and areas that have been identified.

Madam Speaker, I would like now to move to the second question. The second question was, why didn’t all the teachers get the automatic increase in salaries? The salary increases for public officers have been effected during July 2010 and according to the Budget Speech, the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development informed the House that a 30 percent salary increase has been provided for enhanced salaries for primary school teachers and the lower cadre staff in the security forces and health workers. 

In addition, for those who are in hard-to-reach areas, they will get a 30 percent hard-to-reach allowance added to their salaries and it will be paid through the payroll. So, accordingly, the primary school teachers have been awarded a 30 percent salary increase and the secondary school teachers have been awarded a 5 percent increase like other public officers not covered by the statement of the Minister of Finance. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Members join me - we have several children again. We have pupils and teachers of Victor Nursery/Primary School. I do not know where they are sitting. They are not yet here? Okay. We also have pupils and teachers of Kirinya Primary School. Where are they? Yes, they are represented by hon. Sam Njuba. You are welcome.

Now, let me invite the Minister of Finance and then the Prime Minister - the Minister of ICT, were there issues on ICT?

PROF NSIBAMBI: Yes, he has one small issue to respond to.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, the Minister of ICT.

MR AWORI: I can wait for the —

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the Leader of Government Business has directed you to answer.

12.00
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Aggrey Awori): Thank you Madam Speaker for offering me this opportunity not only to endorse His Excellency the President’s statement to the nation, but also to correct a few impressions created by my honourable colleague, the Leader of the Opposition.

Obviously, I note with deep regret that there is a serious deficit in his information regarding technology and especially so with ICT. My honourable colleague, I think was making this speech in the wrong place. He was talking about Kenya and Rwanda rather than Uganda, but in the end he said, having observed that in Rwanda, what is Uganda doing about this or that?  With due respect to the countries which were mentioned, His Excellency the President said, why do you want to measure me against –(Interjection)- not midgets, but those who have not achieved much.

In terms of education, we have a comprehensive programme in the education of ICT. For example, at secondary school level, we have a programme of installing an ICT lab in every secondary school. We have more than 3,000 secondary schools in this country, but to date my ministry has installed 382 and we have a balance of 188 which we are in the process of wiring.

Madam Speaker, I take this opportunity to inform my honourable colleagues - some of them have been asking me, you made a declaration here one time that you are going to invite us, Members of Parliament, to inaugurate science labs. Indeed I am keeping my word. To date, 188 Members of Parliament have inaugurated science labs in secondary schools in their respective constituencies’. We still have about 200 to go and I can assure you that before the end of the calendar year, we will have completed the exercise.

Procurement procedures have been a bit slow in conformity with PPDA procurement law. Madam Speaker, at a higher level, tertiary, hon. Opio put it – we have a serious programme to encourage ICT in this country. Seven private universities including three public ones have got faculties of ICT. At the moment, we are putting out in all the combined faculties, a minimum of 1,000 students or graduates with ICT qualifications.

At the lower diploma level, we also have an ICT school at Nakawa, which graduates a minimum of 100 graduates per annum with diplomas in ICT and IT. To encourage these young graduates, we have mounted what they call an internship programme whereby we prepare them for the private sector. As I speak now, we are training 192 recent graduates of ICT and IT who will be placed in various sectors in Public Service and the private sector.

For instance, a month ago, we were able to put 121 of our interns at the disposal of the Electoral Commission to facilitate registration of voters. One could say, definitely, that is a focused programme; we know what to do with our students. We are also about to employ them in what we call outsourcing of business, BPO, and we are setting up an ICT BPO incubator in Kampala to train our young people in the use of computers or IT for the business sector.

Madam Speaker, the whole idea about this internship and setting up this BPO is to reverse what we call kyeyo. We want these young people to work here for companies abroad which need data processing. On average, this kind of job would collect about US$ 10 to US$ 15 per day, but if we can bring it here, if they can earn US$ 5 per hour or per day, that would be at least a starting point. 

As I said, our tertiary institutions are also charning out a number of graduates in IT and ICT. Makerere currently has got a programme for 17 PhD candidates in IT and ICT, and we are cooperating with them. They are helping us in a number of sectors, one of which is developing infrastructure, which will be available for both e-government and security. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to inform my honourable colleague, the Leader of the Opposition, that comparing us with Kenya or Rwanda is not fair. We would like to be compared with much more developed countries. Take, for instance, in terms of infrastructure, we already have 1,780kms of national backbone infrastructure while Rwanda has about 870. And when we complete all the phases, we will have the longest infrastructure system in East Africa by the year 2012. So, Madam Speaker, for the honourable colleague to come here and start comparing us with that kind of situation is not fair to His Excellency the President’s proposal for ICT development in this country. 

My honourable colleague was totally oblivious of regulatory organs we have put in place. Not long ago this august House passed a Bill establishing NITA. (Interruption) 

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I would like to thank the honourable minister for ICT for giving way. He has just alluded to the fact that it was very unfair for the Leader of the Opposition to compare Uganda with Rwanda or Kenya. 

First of all, I would like to remind you that we are in a regional bloc, the East African Community, and I think the Rt Hon. Leader of the Opposition was only being very fair for us to at least draw lessons or compare ourselves with the most immediate neighbour. It would be very unfair for us to imagine that we can match the standard of the UK or the Netherlands or US. You are saying that the Leader of the Opposition should have compared us with developed countries.  I think you are the one who is rather unfair to Uganda’s cause. We need to at least cope with the regional developments within rather than imagining that we are comparable to the US and other developed economies.  

MR AWORI: I thank my honourable colleague for his correction. I do take into consideration the element of geography; they are our neighbours; I cannot deny that, but at the same time, it does not necessarily mean we always have to compare ourselves with our neighbours. I can speak as a former athlete; even if I was the best in East Africa, I would have liked to compare myself with the fastest hurdler in the US, UK and other places. But I could say that I can do 100 meters in so many seconds because nobody in Kenya or Rwanda can do, but that would not be fair. 

Coming back to established organs or regulatory organs, we have NITA. NITA is in charge of establishing standards of IT in this country. Again here, I come back to the geography, we compare favourably with Rwanda which has got RITA instead of NITA. They started before us, but they were here the other day and they saw how advanced we are and they acknowledged it. 

I must say that in terms of liberalisation of communications, Uganda probably is the leading country in this region. We have more TV stations in this country than all the neighbours combined. Virtually every district in this country now has a radio station. Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC) Radio and TV cover a considerable part of this country although there are pockets of darkness and deafness here and there. 

Madam Speaker, I would also like to address the issue of telephone penetration. At the moment, we have 8 million Ugandans who have access to a mobile telephone. I cannot say 8 million own, but 8 million have access; maybe two or three share a telephone.

The question of setting up IT villages or centres.

It is indeed true that we are just starting; we have not developed one yet. But we have in the making one in Jinja and one in Namanve, whose investor has yet to come up with equipment, but has been allocated space. 

As I said before, we are in the process of making sure, in terms of education, that every secondary school and eventually primary school will have an ICT laboratory as a way of preparing the general public of this country for computer use and literacy.  

A more detailed statement on the plans and achievements of ICT in this country will be announced at the appropriate time when we are debating policy statements. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Minister. I would like honourable members to join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of Victor Nursery School who are in the gallery. They are represented by hon. Mabikke. You are welcome. (Applause) Can I now invite the Minister of Finance to respond.

12.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICROFINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I would like to begin by thanking Members  who have appreciated the State of the Nation Address by His Excellency the President. I also want to thank the Leader of the Opposition for his response. 

I would have concentrated on the issues raised under the economy and national transformation, but allow me comment on some of the issues raised in the document presented by the Leader of the Opposition regarding petroleum. 

I was privileged to be one of the facilitators of the workshop which was organised for the Greater North Parliamentary Forum on oil and gas, and which took place in Entebbe Imperial Resort Hotel. In that forum, I presented a paper on the updates on the new regulatory framework for managing oil and gas revenue. And the issues which came up on the Floor regarding petroleum are the issues, which I highlighted in this paper and which I would like to lay on table for Members of Parliament to read. 

In that forum, some Members of Parliament requested that we organise a workshop for the entire Parliament to interact and synergise with them regarding the development of petroleum, and I would like to support that. 

In this paper, we have the proposed regulatory framework under this sector, the assessment, the administration of revenue collection, the oil revenue intergovernmental physical transfers, establishment of a petroleum fund, the non-oil revenue tax, the physical rules for managing oil reserves and the oversight and control responsibilities, transparency and accountability, the role of Bank of Uganda and lastly, the role of the Ministry of Finance. I beg to lay this paper on Table. 

There were issues that were raised under the economy and I would like to use the issues raised by the Opposition on the figures on the national economy, particularly on the economic growth. I wish to point out that the numbers the President refers to in his State of the Nation Address were right and not misleading. He said that the economy grew by 8.4 percent on average over the last five years. And last year, the economy grew by 5.8 percent, lower than the previous years. These numbers are different from those the Opposition alleges. 

The main difference between these numbers is that the numbers presented by the Opposition are in nominal terms whereas the President’s numbers are in real terms. And GDP in nominal terms includes the change in prices, which is inflation. While the GDP, in real terms, which the President used, excludes price changes, which is the internationally accepted procedure, because this measures the change in real output. This is also the procedure for assessing economic transformation.  

But the Leader of the Opposition had a point when he pointed out in his statement; we identified an error in the President’s speech. And when I checked in the background to the budget, page 60, the figure which the Leader of the Opposition contested on the net URA collection of the outturn of 2007/08 was misrepresented in the final speech of the President. The figure we gave in the background to the budget and even in the original speech of the President was 3,161.40 as outturn of 2007/08 instead 1,361 of what appeared in the President’s speech.  

So, I concur with the Leader of the Opposition on this figure. And I would like to draw the attention of the Members to the correct figure we gave you in the background to the budget and which is also entailed in the Budget Speech. So, these are the few issues which came out. And this disoriented the calculations which made the Leader of the Opposition think that the figures which we gave the President were absolutely wrong. It is not true; it was a typing error, just as we have a typing error in his own presentation because he talked about the debt tax relief instead of talking about - on page 17 of his presentation. I think he meant in the first paragraph on page 17 - let me read it so that we can follow. “We also do not agree with the President that the impediment to progress in the country has been lack of funds. No, it is not true. For, in the years that our tax revenues were low, up to 75 percent of our development budget was funded by donor grants, low interest loans and even huge tax relief...” No, it is not tax relief; I think he meant “debt relief.” So, I have brought out this to indicate that sometimes we get typing errors when we do not intend it.

The other issues have been responded to by relevant ministries. We had a response from Works and Agriculture even on Prosperity- For-All. So, I thought that I should not waste the time of Members repeating the answers that have been given by the relevant line ministries.

I was directed by the Prime Minister to also throw light on the concern raised by the Leader of the Opposition regarding corruption. On the same page 17, paragraph two, the Leader of the Opposition insinuated, “Hon. Members, the impediments instead have been the corrupt nature of this Government, its reckless use of funds including dipping its hands in the Consolidated Fund account without Parliamentary approval, the failure to build institutions and to let state organs implement development programmes objectively and without undue interference”. This is a very big allegation. 

To fight corruption, we are all aware that we need concerted effort and when you say that the entire Government including Members of Parliament, the Judiciary and Executive is engaged in corruption as a plan, I think it misleads. We are all Government and Government is comprised of three organs which have to work together to fight this monster. 

I appreciate the efforts made by this arm of Government - Parliament through our committees. I also appreciate the efforts by the Executive, which has made sure that there are legal frameworks and efforts like establishing budget monitoring units in the Ministry of Finance, as well as efforts by the Prime Minister who heads the coordination and monitoring committee, which sits almost every week. We have discovered a lot of scam and we are dealing with it.

So, the impression, which was created here, is misleading. I do not remember any time when Government used or got money from the Consolidated Fund without using the provisions of the law, which we put in place. I am not aware. We have always followed the laws and provisions when we are getting money from the Consolidated Fund.

I was touched by this allegation and I would like to say that all of us are working hard to make sure that we fight corruption from the lowest level possible; village, local government and even the Central Government. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

12.24
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I have a written statement, which is being circulated for purposes of internalisation. I rise to support the motion moved by hon. Denis Hamson Obua and seconded by hon. Rose Namayanja and hon. Pherry Kabanda in respect to the debate on the State of the Nation Address delivered by His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, President of the Republic of Uganda, to this august House on 2 June 2010.

My colleagues, the honourable ministers have responded to most of the issues which were raised by Members of Parliament. I wish to deal with a few issues. 

Peace and security

Following the barbaric terrorist actions at Kyadondo Rugby Grounds and at the Ethiopian Village Restaurant, Kabalagala in which over 76 people died and over 40 were injured, Government has taken security measures to forestall a recurrence of the problem. 

In addition to other measures, I have requested the Third Deputy Premier and Minister of Internal Affairs, to submit a paper to Cabinet to cause all proprietors of public premises such as churches, mosques, supermarkets, open markets, taxi parks, bus parks, hotels, lodges, bars, educational institutions and managers of public events and night clubs, to install security systems for access control. These include metal detectors, walk-through doors, sniffer dogs, surveillance cameras and alarms.

I have also requested him to convene with the leaders of these institutions and give them guidelines on this matter and seek their input.

I am glad to note that the Opposition supports Government’s position of deploying the UPDF in Somalia as part of the AMISOM peace keeping force. We thank the Government of Burundi for deploying their troops in Somalia, and also Djibouti and Guinea for pledging troops for the mission.

During the successful AU summit, which was held in Uganda from 25th to 27th July 2010, His Excellency the President urged other African countries to send their troops to Somalia.

Let me now deal with elections slated for 2011. 

On pages 4, 5, 6 of his reply, the honourable Leader of the Opposition discusses elections slated for 2011. In particular, he states that Ugandans are singularly preoccupied with whether those elections will be held in a free and peaceful environment and whether we will uphold democracy and stability.

He further remarks, “We have also consistently welcomed the President’s assurances on democracy while urging him to walk the talk. Take the question of the Electoral Commission, for instance. We had enough time to resolve the issue of its composition to bring assurances to our electoral processes, but he did not, even with the Supreme Court declarations on their conduct of 2006 elections.”

Madam Speaker, the recent move for electoral reforms with regard to the amendment of the electoral laws has been carried out with the participation of the relevant stakeholders. It is on record that several electoral laws have been amended to bring them in conformity with the multiparty dispensation and to address implementation challenges. The bulk of these amendments were Government responses to the court judgments in the election petitions. 

The IPC reforms were submitted to the Attorney-General in May 2009. The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs studied and took into account the reforms proposed in the IPC report. Some of the reforms were adopted and incorporated in the Bills brought to Parliament. Those that were not adopted were sent by IPOD to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, which considered them while processing the Bills. Additionally, the IPOD proposed reforms were presented to Parliament during plenary while debating the Bills. 

Let me also add that when there was a stalemate, the Speaker recommended that we should form a committee consisting of Government and the Opposition, I was requested to chair that committee. We made concessions to the Opposition and they also conceded some ground to us. When we came back here, the proceedings went on well. 

Several of the proposals were accepted and incorporated into the Bills. The existence of the IPOD and the willingness of the Government to work with it is a clear manifestation of existence of democracy in Uganda, which has been developed and nurtured by this Government.

The following Bills proposing electoral reforms have now been passed by Parliament and some have already been assented to by His Excellency the President: The Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2009; The Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2009; The Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill, 2009; The Political Parties and Organisations (Amendment) Bill, 2009; The National Youth Council (Amendment) Bill, 2008; The National Women’s Council (Amendment) Bill, 2008; and The Local Governments (Amendment) Bill, 2009.
 
The passage of the bulk of the electoral law reform Bills by Parliament and existence of other legislative and administrative electoral measures greatly contribute to the credibility of the electoral process.

Parliament will debate the code of conduct for political parties and organisations. The Shadow Attorney-General sought to introduce a constitutional amendment Bill seeking among others to:

a)	Amend Article 60(1) so that the power of appointing members of the Electoral Commission are taken away from the President and given to an impartial Judicial Commission to increase the Electoral Commission’s independence. 

b)	Urgently replace Presidential term limits in the Constitution under Article 105(2).

c)	Remove Army officers from Parliament because they had failed to remain non-partisan in our multiparty Parliament as envisaged in Article 208(1) and (2) of the Constitution. 

Under paragraph a) above one should know that the power of appointing members of the Electoral Commission is not vested
solely in the hands of the President. The exercise of the said power is shared between the Executive and Parliament. Government’s position is that with this arrangement, appointment of an independent commission is assured and that indeed the current Commission was appointed in full compliance with the law.

Under paragraph b) and c) above, Government argued that the reasons that led to the removal of term limits in Article 105(2) of the Constitution and the inclusion of the Army in Parliament are still valid.

The Shadow Attorney-General’s motion was put to vote and it was not successful. We debated it and listened to each other. Certainly, therefore, the present Government has risen to the challenge on assurances on democracy and walked the talk. 

The Opposition’s contribution in this regard has been very useful and will always be very welcome. Let me add that we do not practice the tyranny of the majority. We have the majority but listen to you and make compromises, thus enhancing democracy. 

Operations of the Electoral Commission 

Article 60 of the Constitution establishes the Electoral Commission and gives it the exclusive duty to conduct regular, free and fair elections and referenda in Uganda. It also guarantees its independence from the direct control of any person or authority in Article 62. The Constitutional Court recently upheld the independence of the commission in constitutional petition No.2 of 2006 and No.1 of 2006 Kabagambe Asol and others Vs Electoral Commission and another. The court found that there was substantial compliance with the provisions of the law and noted that there was an improvement in the conduct of elections. The court also observed that principals contained in the law were substantially complied with by the Electoral Commission and further noted improvements in the conduct of elections quoted in the final report of the EU electoral observation mission.

The court held that irregularities did not affect the results of the elections in a substantial manner. 

The Voters’ Register and Related Matters

I believe that the introduction of the biometric system in the registration of voters will greatly enhance the credibility of the voters’ register.

On the figure of 15 million voters supposedly registered by the Electoral Commission that is alleged to be obviously inconsistent with the demographic realities of the country, and I am quoting them, I advise that the matter can best be handled at the time of display of voters’ register where all stakeholders will have an opportunity to point out any irregularities and seek necessary remedial action.

In addition, the Electoral Commission has also initiated and implemented the following electoral reforms and measures:

a)	Organised the proper packing of ballot papers indicating the quantity and serial numbers of ballot papers at each polling station;
b)	Abolition of enclosed polling booths;
c)	Counting and announcing of votes shortly after the closure of the polls and each individual polling station;
d)	Use of a single transparent ballot box at every polling station;
e)	Use of tamper-evident envelopes for sealing and retrieval of election results from polling stations
f)	Computerised tallying of election results;
g)	Use of software that rejects any inflated votes above the number of registered voters per polling station –(Interjections)– I am sorry, but let me also read what is on page 9 and these include:

i)	Holding of consultative meetings, seminars or workshops with Stakeholders including  political parties, political organisations  and candidates;

ii)	 Integration of voter education into the school and functional adult literacy curricular;

iii)	Training of a special unit in the Police force to handle electoral matters;

iv) 	The introduction of a single voters’ register;

iv)	Display of lists of recruited temporary election officials for verification by the public and political parties;

v)	Training of political  parties/organisations and candidates’ agents together with electoral officials;

vi)	Display of lists of voters’ particulars recommended for deletion from the voters’ register;

vii)	 Provision of serialised declaration of results forms for each polling station;

viii)	Organised and proper packing of ballot papers indicating the quantity and serial numbers of ballot papers at each polling station and I think I was reading point (j) on page 10 about computerised election results and the use of software that rejects any inflated votes above the number of registered voters per polling station.

I call upon this House and all stakeholders to co-operate with the Electoral Commission in the execution of its duties.

Position of the Supreme Court on General Elections

Madam Speaker, the pronouncement of the courts and most especially the Supreme Court should not be quoted out of context in relation to the conduct of elections and their management by the Electoral Commission. The findings in the Supreme Court presidential election petitions since 2001 concluded that irregularities did not affect the results of the elections in a substantial manner and that the elections reflected the will of the people of Uganda, and the petitions were accordingly dismissed. 

Need for dialogue

The Leader of the Opposition makes reference to the need for dialogue, particularly on the appointment of the Electoral Commission.  However, we may all recall that the National Consultative Forum provided for under the Political Parties and Organisations Act, 2005 could not be operationalised because there was no provision for its chairperson.  

With the enactment of the Political Parties and Organisations (Amendment No.2) Act, 2010, provision has been made for its chairperson and vice chairperson;

“20(a) Chairperson or Vice Chairperson of the National Consultative Forum: The National Consultative Forum shall have a chairperson who shall be a person nominated from members of the National Consultative Forum by the majority party in Parliament. 
(1)	The National Consultative Forum shall have a vice chairperson who shall be a person nominated from members of the National Consultative Forum by the majority Opposition party in Parliament.

(2)	The chairperson and vice chairperson shall be persons who are members of a political party or organisation and members of the National Consultative Forum.

(3)	The chairperson and vice chairperson shall hold office for five years.”

Other provisions in the amendment relate to the removal of members of the Forum.  Therefore, with the operationalisation of the Forum, the needed dialogue will be more formal, more legitimate and more meaningful, and providing better grounds of reference.

Walk-outs from proceedings of Parliament or its committees

The Leader of the Opposition makes reference to two Opposition Members who walked out of the Committee on Appointments while considering nominees for the Electoral Commission.  This was unfortunate.  But we should all be reminded that walk-outs of the proceedings of Parliament or its committees do not in themselves invalidate those proceedings or decisions reached thereat.

On Page 4, Hon Prof. Latigo wrote, “The Red Pepper newspaper, that is ordinarily notorious for sex expose and scandalous reporting, had a field day with mass photographs of NRM leaders from the Vice President downwards, enjoying their sleep in Parliament in the presence of Diplomats and distinguished Ugandans as the President delivered his address.

Hon. Members, if ours leaders can sleep in full public glare, how much sleeping are they doing in the private of their offices? Should Ugandans then be surprised that Government’s promises in this country are hardly fulfilled in time and as planned, and that officials have free hands stealing public funds under their watch?”

However, I would like to say that during long addresses or speeches, as human beings, we have lapses, but we grasp the critical issues and handle them effectively.  Who has never had lapses in their lives? I repeat; who has never had lapses in their lives? Therefore, it is very unfair to taunt Government when there are some human lapses. Let those who have never had any such lapses in their lives cast the first stone. Can anybody cast the stone? None! And I would have said more, but I do not intend to lugubrious this legislature. (Laughter)

Peace and Security in Northern Uganda and Karamoja regions

Since the restoration of peace and security in Northern Uganda and Karamoja regions, Government has taken steps to provide the basic social services to sustain security in the regions. This has been done through interventions under the following programmes:

a)	Peace, Recovery and Development Plan (PRDP)
Government secured Shs 100 billion in the budget of the Financial Year 2009/10 for the implementation of the PRDP in Northern Uganda. The following achievements were registered by 30 June 2010:

i)	Opened 1,000 Kilometres of roads across Northern Uganda,
ii)	Constructed 722 classrooms, 
iii)	Constructed 275 teachers’ houses, 
iv)	Constructed 203 health workers’ houses,
v)	Rehabilitated 160 boreholes,
vi)	Constructed 36 Out-Patient Department wards and maternity units, 
vii)	Constructed 29 shallow wells,
viii)	Rehabilitated 54 classrooms, 
ix)	The procurement of the ferry on Lake Bisina has been completed and the delivery will be done in three months,
x)	The procurement of the Bukungu Ferry on Lake Kyoga will be completed within the Financial Year 2010/11,
xi)	Under the Justice Law and Order sector, Government has built and rehabilitated three Magisterial Courts,
xii)	31 judicial officers (including five judges, six Chief Magistrates, and 20 Grade One Magistrates) have been posted to Northern Uganda; and
xiii)	Under the Police enhancement programme, 10 Police posts have been constructed in Northern Uganda.

b)	Resettlement Programme

i)	Government has procured and distributed 60 hydraform brick-making machines to 37 districts in Northern Uganda
ii)	We have trained 300 youths in the use of the hydraform technology
iii)	Built 20 houses and a health centre using the hydraform technology in Kweyo, Ongako sub-county in Gulu District
iv)	Built 20 houses and health centres using the hydraform technology in Kangole village, Wera sub-county in Amuria District
v)	Built a health centre and four medical staff houses using the hydraform technology in Apaa village, Pabbo sub-county in Amuru District
vi)	We are constructing 54 houses using the hydraform technology for the traditional leaders of Acholi
vii)	Distributed ironsheets to 1,200 former IDPs
viii)	Procured and distributed 29 tractors
ix)	Opened up 8,000 acres of land to support returning IDPs to start productive agriculture
x)	Procured 350 oxploughs, 700 oxen and 350 heifers for the people of Lango

c)	Karamoja Integrated Disarmament and Development Programme (KIDDP)

To curb the proliferation of illegal guns in the Karamoja region, Government has promoted alternative means of livelihood to the militant youths (Karachunas) by engaging them in self-sustaining activities such as:
i)	Growing of aloe vera
ii)	Collecting Gum Arabica
iii)	Training of youths in using the Hydraform technology

The Karamoja Food Security Action Plan was launched. Some of the activities implemented under this programme include:

i)	Opening of 2,400 acres of land for the farmers of Karamoja,
ii)	Provision of 11 tractors to help the farmers to open up the land, harrow and plant crops,
iii)	Distributed 235,000 hand hoes, and
iv)	Initiated the construction of parish dams in the region.

Under the disarmament programme: 
i)	We recovered 3,200 illegal guns,
ii)	Government held four joint cross-border meetings under the REDCOM framework to harmonise the management of cattle rustlers across the border points with Kenya, Uganda, Somalia and Southern Sudan,
iii)	Constructed 16 Anti-theft Stock Units (ASTU) and
iv)	Recruited and deployed 1,400 Police personnel.

d)	NUSAF II

Government has received a loan facility of US$ 100 million for the implementation of livelihood programmes in Northern Uganda. His Excellency the President launched the project and the implementation has started. 

e)	Other Interventions

NUREP

Under the European Union supported US$ 20 million programme:
i)	Rehabilitated 15 roads under the post-floods programme
ii)	Rehabilitated 12 health centres
iii)	Drilled 20 boreholes
iv)	Supported 42 peace and reconciliation initiatives
v)	Supported 6 psycho-social centres for the former IDPs and
vi)	Supported 39 local governments to improve their capacity through provision of training and logistics.

Conclusion

In conclusion, Madam Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, we appreciate the oversight role of Parliament and the issues which have been raised by honourable Members of Parliament from the Opposition and from the NRM.  When carrying out the oversight role, avoid being personal and I should add, petty. Do not be personal, do not be petty. Do not fight secondary wars.
Government is determined to provide social services of good quality, ensure security for its people, and provide an enabling environment for economic, political and social development.

However, we lack adequate resources to realise all our goals and that is why we are focusing attention on energy, roads and transport, agriculture, education and health sectors and Northern Uganda rehabilitation, an area which was devastated by the Kony insurgency. We must work together to achieve these goals. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to support the motion. (Applause) 

The Minister of Energy came late and he has apologised – so, we are entirely in your hands. I thank you. (Members rose_) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Members, you were not here during the general debate, the Prime Minister would have responded to the issues raised in the debate – you can follow him, he is available because I find it difficult for the Minister of Energy to speak after the Prime Minister has ended the debate. 

Hon. Members, I want to thank the movers and seconders of the motion, the Leader of the Opposition for his response and the contributions from the Floor of the House that in my view enriched policy consideration. 

I now put the question that thanks of Parliament be recorded for the clear and precise exposition of Government policy contained in the State of the Nation Address by H.E. the President on 2nd June, 2010. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion carried.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in the afternoon, we shall receive the response of the Shadow Minister for Finance to the Budget and then do some other business. I suspend the House until 2.30 p.m.

(House was suspended at 1.02 p.m.)

(On resumption at 2.52 p.m., the Deputy Speaker Presiding.)

RESPONSE TO THE BUDGET SPEECH BY THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

2.52
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Charles Oduman): Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Members. It is my honour to present to Ugandans, the Opposition response to the government budget proposals for Financial Year 2010/2011. This response will be structured as follows:

Section A, the introduction; B, the context of this budget response; C, the five-year contract between the NRM Government and the people of Uganda; D, the state of the economy and Government’s conduct of affairs in Financial Year 2009/2010; E, an appraisal of Government proposals for financial year 2010/2011; our proposals for 2010/2011 and beyond, and G, the conclusion.

The introduction

On the 10th June 2010, the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Syda N.M. Bbumba, presented the government budget proposals for financial year 2010/2011. Our humble duty now is to inform you and Ugandans that the budget was nothing more than an election statement whose sole purpose was to divert public attention from scrutinizing Government performance. It evaded the hard truths; masked the ugly face of misery afflicting Ugandans; avoided proper and full accountability on fundamentals of the economy, and chose to throw coins at the face of vulnerable Ugandans hoping that by the time they notice the hot air, the elections would be over.

Parliament has the mandate to scrutinise Government and monitor the effect of their choices and actions on development, and it is the responsibility of the Opposition to lead this scrutiny and demand for accountability. Parliament must, therefore, ensure that there is a balance between revenue, expenditure and borrowing; that the debt levels and debt interest costs are reasonable; that the cost of recurrent spending is not deferred and placed onto the shoulders of future generations; and that there is adequate provision for spending on priority areas.

The 2007 Debt Strategy was intended to reduce Uganda’s indebtedness, but Government continues to mortgage the future generation undeterred. Four years ago, Uganda benefited from huge debt write-offs that saw our external debt level fall to US$ 1.1 billion, but this figure has now gone back to US$ 4.1 billion in record time, effectively reversing the declining trend of our domestic debt. 

A budget is a key device for converting obligations, promises and policies into concrete and integrated plans indicating actions to be taken, results expected to be achieved, costs to be incurred, and who will pay how much of the costs. It connects Government’s aspirations with its analyses of affordability. Unlike a private sector budget, a government budget plays a dual role - as a tool for ensuring meaningful economic growth and for redistribution of incomes and wealth.

A national budget should be:

•	An effective tool for planning, coordination, control, evaluation, reporting and review; 
•	A planning tool showing a plan of action for the next financial year, specifying the government’s long-term and short-term objectives and quantified targets, thus identifying priorities.
•	A control tool, which Parliament effectively utilises to relate performance and achievements of Government to the objectives and policies laid down by it;
•	An accountability tool with Parliament providing critical checks and balances, and;
•	An economic tool, which helps to provide social services and goods to enhance the welfare of citizens.

Our view is that the second consecutive attempt by the Minister for Finance to craft an effective budget for the above purposes has been her second consecutive failure. The Opposition expected that the 2010/11 budget would prioritise Government spending to deal with the biting poverty, but like the previous budgets, it also turned out to be a ritual of false promises and unfulfilled pledges. As usual, it did not show whether public spending under the NRM Government for the last four years has been used to foster equitable distribution of resources among regions and groups of people.

This year’s budget statement can pass as the new NRM party election manifesto as evidenced by statements like, “Over the next four years, Government will establish a secondary school in every sub-county and a vocational training college in every district.” And, “Government will make arrangements for the provision of rice hullers, maize mills and other processing units in every sub-county for value addition.” 

The Minister could afford mentioning “NRM” 14 times and “poverty” only once in passing, to show that the NRM party and regime survival was the core focus of the government budget, rather than the accountability for Prosperity-For-All as promised four years ago. That day, the citizens went home empty handed, with poverty and unemployment hovering over their heads, and with no hope left that this Government will ever notice their suffering.  

Over the last four years, the NRM Government continued to treat our treasury as if it were a private campaign fund. It spent colossal sums of money at will, through Bank of Uganda and Government parastatals without recourse to Parliament. As a result, the Consolidated Fund Account has been mercilessly overdrawn to a deficit of Shs 3.78 trillion as at 30 June 2009, while reserves stand at a negative Shs 6.7 billion. This shows that Government is nearly insolvent, but continues to bring supplementary budgets with no known source of funding. Supplementary budgets have not only undermined the credibility of the budgeting process, but also slowed down sectoral growth and performance on planned activities approved by Parliament. 

Whereas prudence dictates that all legislators get the opportunity to consult their constituents about the content of supplementary estimates to seek their approval, the estimates are always brought in a hurry and mostly used to conceal the bloated public administration expenditure. For the last four years, for example, State House supplementary budgets exceeded 30 percent of the appropriated budgetary allocations.
 
Vast sums of money have been spent on international errands to beg for grants, rescheduling of loans and courting investors. While this yielded some dividends as there was a massive debt relief from multilateral organisations, its impact is not visible in poverty reduction levels. As Government’s appetite to borrow increases, allegedly to improve national service delivery, so does poverty, unemployment and drug shortages in hospitals. 

At present, Government’s net financial worth is in red to the tune of negative Shs 3.78 trillion and poverty levels have worsened. In fact, Government does not know the exact extent of poverty in Uganda today. That is why they continue to use the 2005/2006 estimates of 31 percent as the latest official statistics on poverty levels. However, recent estimates have variously put the number of people below the national poverty level at 35 percent and 37.7 percent while our leaders continue to hide behind the estimates of 2005/2006. In order to promote accountability and transparency, we expected Government to table a clear account of the impact of PAF funds from the debt relief of Shs 5.5 billion. 

Uganda’s borrowing is rising faster than economic growth in the face of weak export earnings. Government continues to borrow allegedly to improve national service delivery, yet national welfare is deteriorating. It is this overdrive and wasteful spending that has run down our treasury from the positive surplus of Shs 5.14 trillion inherited on the Consolidated Fund Account in June 2006. The Auditor-General’s warning about breakdown in financial management in Government has also been ignored. 

We suspect the NRM Government to be seriously engaged in printing money disguising it as issue of new currency notes with enhanced features since this was not one of the major problems affecting citizens. In a sane government, the Minister for Finance should have been arraigned before the courts of law and charged with criminal neglect of our Consolidated Fund Account as Ugandans continue to sink in abject poverty. 

For the last four years, the Opposition has cautioned Government to restrain from spending on non priority areas and diversify the economic base by spending more on agriculture. We reminded the NRM leaders that although the economy has been growing, our expectant mothers still sleep on the floors of our referral hospitals due to shortage of space and beds. The minimum wage remains unacceptably low and unemployment and underemployment are on the increase. 

We gave well-intentioned proposals to direct planning and move the country forward. This government deliberately ignored our advice and proposals and continues to follow the path that has led our people to the miseries they now experience. We believe successful people are those who make and admit mistakes rather than fail to confront their failures. We advise the NRM leaders to acknowledge where they have fallen short and implement budgets in the interest of the people. 

The context of this budget response

In response to the financial year 2009/2010 Budget Statement, the Opposition took time off to analyse Government’s performance in the last eight years with specific emphasis on the previous three years under the NRM since 2006, and showed you the following: 

i)	That there was lack of budget focus over the many years, making Government lose direction and the war on poverty. 
ii) 	Corruption had eaten up the meagre resources and denied service delivery the much deserved financing. 
iii) 	The various sectors of the economy had dwindled, including the key sectors of agriculture, health and education.
iv) 	Government had failed to deliver on its assurances. 

Across the various sectors of the economy, we showed you what our government would do to drastically reduce the number of people below the poverty line to less than two million; reduce the dependence on foreign funding and deal with a skewed income and wealth disparities. We demonstrated to you how we could raise over Shs 3.4 trillion by simply fixing our priorities and eliminating wasteful spending and greed. This was an attempt to advise Government to take responsibility for its mistakes and restructure its thinking. It was also intended to give the current minister a clean bill from the past era before her and draw a clear line from where she would be held personally responsible for her stewardship over national resources. 

During the implementation of the 2009/2010 budget, the Opposition continued to offer their well-intentioned advice to help streamline Government programmes and set priorities for service delivery. We further issued follow-up reports and recommendations in response to various Government statements and parliamentary committee reports. However, to our dismay, our advice was largely ignored, showing that the NRM leaders only think about themselves and do not consider views made in the interest of the people. 

The only way to move this country from the current poverty trap is to keep focus on the agriculture sector. This is why we have maintained the theme of our response as “Improving household incomes of the poor through increased expenditure on agriculture.” However, as we enter the fifth year and the last year of the NRM regime, the Opposition is convinced that it will be a disservice on our part if we limit this response to the analysis of the 2010/2011 budget proposals without evaluating the performance of the NRM Government against its promises and pledges on the economy as outlined in its contracts with Ugandans; that is the 2006 NRM Party election manifesto. 

The NRM manifesto is the main, if not the only, performance measure that was adopted by majority of Ugandans in 2006. It is the major policy document in which all policies funded by taxpayers through annual budgets appropriated by Parliament to deliver services to them were based. It was, therefore, the basic contract between the NRM Party and the people of Uganda. It is the only document which Parliament has religiously funded with colossal sums of money in the last four years of its existence. 

Using this analysis, the Opposition shall make meaningful conclusion and give advice to Ugandans about the stewardship of the NRM Government over the economy and the people’s welfare. This evaluation comes in the wake of widespread concern that the NRM Government has dismally performed over the last four years. It will, therefore, compel the NRM Government to account for all funds appropriated by the Parliament for “Prosperity-For-All”. This will further help citizens to make well-informed decisions and choices in the forthcoming 2011 Presidential and Parliamentary elections. 

The five-year contract between the NRM Government and the people of Uganda; what was it? 

While wooing Ugandans for their votes in 2006, the NRM Party promised, among others, to do the following in five years, once entrusted with power. I suggest that Members take a pen and tick off whichever has been achieved and then we assess at the end. 

i)	Ensure prosperity for all by transforming Uganda from a poor peasant economy into a modern industrial united prosperous society where each family gets at least Shs 20 million annually as minimum income; 
ii) 	Ensure protection and promotion of workers’ rights;
iii) 	Strengthen the institution of Parliament and independence of the Judiciary;
iv) 	Modernisation and professionalisation of the UPDF; 
v) 	Equip and direct resources towards improving the welfare of Police and Prisons officers, especially accommodation; 
vi)	Promote zero-tolerance policy on corruption; 
vii) 	Protect the Constitution and promote the culture of constitutionalism and the rule of law;
viii) 	Promote all human rights and freedoms as contained in the UN conventions, covenants and treaties and regional treaties; 
ix) 	Provide a fully equipped hospital with a doctor, an operating theatre, ambulance and maternity ward in each constituency;
x)	Equip all health centres with personnel and essential drugs;
xi)	Introduce social and community health insurance to protect formal and informal sectors against high expenditure;
xii)	Work towards eradication of malaria within five years;
xiii)	Build vocational schools and polytechnics and equip one laboratory per sub-county;
xiv)	Improve the quality of education through a progressive scheme for teachers’ remuneration and infrastructure;
xv)	Increase access to clean safe water to 72 percent; sanitation to 60 percent; and provide piped water to every district headquarter.
xvi)	Make mortgage finance affordable and build low-cost housing for the urban poor;
xvii)	Implement the Greater Kampala Transport Master Plan;
xviii)	Solve flooding problems in Kalerwe, Bwaise, Lubigi, etc.;
xix)	Re-open Soroti-Gulu-Packwach railway line and extend the line to Koboko via Arua, and in partnership with the Government of Southern Sudan, to Yei;
xx)	Provide additional ferry services at Lwampanga/Namasale, Bukungu/Muntu, Nabuganyi/ Mbulamuti and Obongi;
xxi)	Develop an inland container port near Kampala;
xxii)	Upgrade Kasese, Arua and Soroti aerodromes and construct a new Ntungamo airfield;
xxiii)	Effect afforestation of all bare hills in the country;
xxiv)	Construction of Nyagak and Buseruka hydropower projects;
xxv)	Develop 12 megawatts hydropower projects from 12 sites on Mt. Elgon;
xxvi)	Extend electricity to Karamoja, Packwach, Koboko and Yumbe;
xxvii)	Explore geothermal power at Kibiro, Buranga and Katwe; and
xxviii)	Provide a reliable UBC Radio and TV signal to every part of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, Ugandans are in a panic, wondering whether they were not fleeced, as they expected the NRM Government to get their priorities right by fighting poverty, corruption and improving access to basic social services in accordance with the above contract, their wishes and aspirations.  

They say they wanted a responsible Government that could attract public investment in the agriculture sector that has arteries running directly to their hearts, create more jobs and improve their quality of life. The citizens further say they did not expect that Government would later supply them with figures of growth, inflation and balance of payments which mean nothing to them as they now resort to prayer for hope.

As the Opposition, our main concern is whether the present state of the Ugandan economy can be considered as having delivered on the promises made in the 2006 NRM Manifesto as outlined above. It is clear from the revealing statistics that NRM leaders abandoned their party manifesto and have since taken to pursuing selfish interests.

The State of the Economy and Government’s Conduct of Affairs in 2009/2010

For the last four years, the Ugandan economy has been characterised by the following:

a)	Poor service delivery with increasing propensity to supply ethnic districts aimed at increasing the number of Members of Parliament loyal to the NRM party;
b)	Increased corruption and accumulation of wealth by a few individuals at the expense of national building;
c)	Under-developed private sector with only 25 percent of our population engaged in the formal sector while the rest remain in the informal sector;
d)	Unprecedented rise in wealth disparities with benefits of economic growth going disproportionately to the wealthiest 20 percent of the population, leading to heightened levels of poverty, hunger, school drop-outs and unemployment;
e)	Declining performance in the agriculture sector yet it contributes to 20 percent of GDP, 48 percent of export earnings, provides the bulk of raw materials for industry, and employs over 73 percent of the population;
f)	Declining per capita agriculture GDP caused by a law rate of growth of agriculture at 2.1 percent, which is far below the population growth rate of 3.2 percent;
g)	Acute food shortages caused by low food production growth at only 1.5 percent, which cannot cope with the high population growth rate of 3.2 percent; and
h)	Borrowing has been rising faster than economic growth, and the road infrastructure has fallen apart with most roads potholed and with community access roads impassable.

Economic Indicators

As usual, the minister trumpeted the traditional economic indicators to imply that the country is enjoying steady growth and consistent growth. However, she could not explain why, despite such impressive economic growth, Uganda remains one of the poorest countries in the world, ranking 157 out of 182. She could not explain also, why the country has one of the lowest per capita incomes with most of its population still relying on subsistence farming for a livelihood. She further failed to explain why economic growth is seen as an end in itself without showing how it leads to poverty reduction. 

There seems to be a mismatch between economic growth and livelihood indicators. Otherwise, why is it that:

•	Nineteen percent of the population is considered to be malnourished with 1.4 million people food insecure? 

There are references in here to all these statistics at the bottom of the document, so that we do not debate statistics, but we debate the facts?

•	20.4 percent of the population is still in chronic poverty, spending 60 percent of their incomes on food compared to MDG targets of 11.5 percent?
•	There is a persistent growing gap between imports and exports, registering a 16 percent fall in official exports from US$ 854 million in 2008 to US$ 714 million in 2009?
•	Eighty percent of the people live in disadvantaged rural areas where resources and potential to tap higher growth is under utilised?
•	Revenue to GDP ratio has remained stagnant at 13 percent and national savings to GDP ratio is only 15.7 percent?

Development is about building institutions that help people to improve their social welfare. However, Government has not only failed to build institutions, but is also undermining existing ones such as Parliament. This is exhibited by the several attempts by the Executive and the ruling NRM Party to control Parliament. 

It is important that Government recognises that democracy requires a Parliament that represents the people and not one that is controlled by the President. An effective Parliament and responsible Opposition are the essential and effective means of creating checks and accountability in service delivery and a prerequisite for good governance.

National Development Planning

During the 2009/2010 financial year, the National Planning Authority was mandated to develop, validate, seek approval and launch national development plans that were badly needed for national development since we were in a planning vacuum after the expiry of the PEAP in June 2008. Parliament duly approved funds for this purpose. However, Government later bypassed Parliament and crafted what they now call a national development plan, contrary to Section 8(6) of the National Planning Authority Act. Most Ugandans lost confidence and their last hope was eroded when the President courageously signed, launched and disseminated a pigeon-hole plan completely ignoring the legal requirements.

Meanwhile, the honourable minister continues to mislead the public that the “National Development Plan” was approved and adopted by Parliament, whereas it was not. This budget now seeks to implement what is contained in an illegal document, yet there cannot be meaningful development without a credible National Development Plan that is widely approved and adopted by all concerned stakeholders.

Ugandans no longer want to hear about roads, security and the like because they do not show tangible results. They now believe it is better to divide the national budget among the 31 million people to enable everyone get his or her own share for the year than relying on incredible budgets and unreliable promises of Government. Prudence demands that Parliament exercises its powers to sanction Government and ensure that the National Development Plan is looked at and debated in a bi-partisan way. This is the only way Parliament will restore and enhance its public image for it exists not only to transact business of the state, but also to provide a forum on which all legitimate points of view can be expressed to ensure balanced development for all Ugandans and regions.

GDP Growth

While Government takes pride in sustaining relatively high GDP growth rates, this growth has not helped in reducing income disparities between the rich and the poor. It does not generate more economic activity and jobs to give people their daily bread and it has failed to target programmes that provide basic social services such as health, education and water to give equal opportunities to all Ugandans.

For the last four years, GDP growth has left the majority of Ugandans engaged in agriculture, and trapped in perpetual poverty as a few privileged ones reap the benefits of rising abundance. This is because our GDP growth is not rooted in the fundamentals of the economy such as industry and agriculture, but aid industry. This is because the average growth rate of 5.6 percent is below the seven percent target required to reduce absolute poverty to below 10 percent of the population by 2017 as envisaged by the then Poverty Eradication Action Plan.

Uganda’s impressive economic statistics have not improved the standards of living of the citizens as unemployment and low incomes are still the main causes of poverty. The widely publicised economic statics have only created a comfort zone for political leaders and development partners while the ordinary Ugandans cannot access essential medicines in Government hospitals. Pregnant mothers are dying in the corridors of our national referral hospitals and rural Uganda is being swallowed up by poverty.

Inflation is the rise in the general level of prices of goods and services in an economy over a period of time. Annual inflation erodes the purchasing power of money and lowers the standards of living of the people. As the population increases, excess demand is placed on all sectors of the economy, thus intensifying the inflation rate. Ugandans need an explanation about the minister’s assertion that inflation reduced from 13.9 percent in 2008/2009 to 4.4 percent in May 2010 yet fuel prices are on the increase, the price of sugar has hit Shs 3,000, our interest rates are still prohibitively high, and our exchange rate is under severe pressure. 

Uganda’s rapid population growth without commensurate GDP growth is largely responsible for inflationary pressure. It poses a great challenge to job creation, agriculture production, income distribution and delivery of basic services. It further contributes to the degradation of the natural resources, especially land, the baseline of our economy and livelihood. The major concern is not the size of the population, but the rate and structure of its growth, where over 19 million people are now dependants comprising of children and the aged, and do not contribute meaningfully to national development.

The rapid population growth is undermining the economic gains the country may have made so far. However, the NRM leaders, especially his Excellency the President, continue to make contentious statements contradicting the National Population Policy. The problem is that they look at a large population only as a source of votes without reference to how it affects the quality of basic social services such as health and education.

The Opposition has continuously advised this government that the rate at which our population is growing causes upward inflationary pressures as supply, surrounded by constraints which Government has failed to resolve, cannot cope with excess demand, but they do not heed. As a result, the economic gains talked about continue to be eroded and the standard of living of our people remains unacceptably low.

Employment is one of the principle challenges in the transformation of Uganda from a poor agrarian to a modern, prosperous and skilled society. Although economic growth has been steady over the last four years, the growth process has not created more and better jobs; as a result, a large proportion of the population remains poor. Despite the growth rate in GDP, the wages, especially for the low paid workers fell in real terms, and thus, their standards of living remained low.

Government has not come up with an employment policy and the majority of the people remain stuck in abject poverty. The agricultural sector which employs the rapid growing population is seriously underfunded and thus unemployment remains high among the majority of the labour force in the sector, who are mainly women, youth and the disabled.

Recent estimates show that out of the 400,000 students who graduate each year, only 8,000 of these get a chance to be gainfully employed.

Quality of life

Over the last four years, the number of Ugandans characterised as poor has steadily increased by 3.5 million people from 8.4 million people, being 31.1 percent of the population in January 2006, to 11.9 million people, being the recently estimated 37.7 percent of the population in June 2010; an additional 3.5 million people to the poverty group.

In spite of the above, Government’s anti-poverty programmes are frequently a state of isolated and small-scale interventions usually involving social services or the provision of credit to the people. Furthermore, pro-poor budgeting has been seriously hampered by supplementary allocations to “powerful” ministries in the public administration and security sectors which create budget cuts from less powerful ministries.

In addition, the decline of four percent in the funding for pro-poor allocations to the local governments has left little hope for Uganda’s poor people, who are mostly resident in the local governments.

Defence and National Security 

The first duty of any government is to ensure safety of its citizens and their property. However, the NRM Government seems to have abandoned this duty as shown by the growing trend of ritual murders and the gender based violence where homicides have hit a record 7.4 per 100,000 people, while their leaders sleep well in bullet proof vests.

The citizens have been left with no right of appeal or protesting for better roads and basic services, and if they do, they risk Police brutality and teargas. And yet the known criminals of Kiboko Squad dine and wine with the Police.

The welfare of most of our forces in whose hands security matters lie, remains poor with inadequate housing, medical care, salaries and basic needs. Social security and operational capacities remain inadequate with most of our ex-servicemen, widows, widowers and orphans still languishing in poverty as their packages for compensation are yet to be paid. 

For the last four years, Government has promised to improve the welfare of the forces through construction of barracks, improvement of health facilities, computerisation of financial and human resource management, and provision of iron sheets and cement for soldiers. However, most of our soldiers are still housed in “mama ingia pole” and the Police officers in abandoned toilets. The cement and iron sheets that were promised in financial year 2007/2008 are yet to be seen. This lip service by Government is not only de-motivating but a threat to the country’s national security. 

Education

Education remains one of the most important components of development as it empowers citizens to increase their productivity and potential to achieve a high standard of living. However, despite its importance and the fact that all countries were encouraged to dedicate at least 20 percent of their national budgets to education, Uganda’s percentage share of the national budget to education has fallen to 14.6 percent in the financial year 2010/2011, down from a fluctuating range of 15 to 18 percent in the past, yet there is a shortage of classrooms, teachers are insufficient and teacher absenteeism is incredibly high in most parts of the country. 

In Uganda, teacher absenteeism is one of the highest in the world with rates between 20 and 30 percent, varying with districts, and costs Government a whopping US$ 30 million per year for paid but undelivered services. 

As a result of teacher absenteeism, 27 percent of children are not at school at any given moment and others end up dropping out of school. Teacher absenteeism is mainly caused by lack of adequate motivation and inspection and has not only led to a decline in the UPE standards and quality of education, but also to wasteful Government expenditure. 

While school enrolment indicators are promising, they have been negated by high dropout rates. The primary school completion rate dropped from 48 percent in 2006 to 30.1 percent in 2009 against the MDG target of 69 percent. This decline is mainly attributed to class repetition estimated at 11 percent and outright school dropout estimated at 6.7 percent. An estimated 1.3 million school-going age children being five percent, are not at school due to poverty and child labour. The pupil-teacher ratio has risen from 48:1 in 2006 to 52:1 in 2009, with an average class having 72 children, and the pupil-latrine stance ratio is 65:1, compared with the recommended pupil-latrine stance ratio of 40:1.

At higher levels, particularly the university, Government contribution to public universities has stagnated at 0.3 percent of GDP and the burden has been left to the poor parents who sell everything they possess to educate their children. The students’ loan schemes promised over the years remain in abeyance. 

Unless a serious implementation review of UPE is done, the worst is yet to happen. We have recommended that this could be addressed by raising the teachers’ pay to a minimum of Shs 400,000 per month for a primary school teacher, to match the rising cost of living; setting performance standards for teachers; providing teachers’ accommodation beginning with hard-to-reach areas; improving school sanitation and hygiene facilities; providing quality learning materials; and revisiting the role of parents in the education of children.

Health 

The primary purpose of the National Health System is to attain a good health standard for all citizens and reduce morbidity and mortality from major causes of illness and premature deaths. However, the gross neglect of population matters poses a long-term challenge to growth and poverty reduction as Uganda is now ranked 149th out of 190 countries in health standards. Health expenditure as a share of the national budget has for the last four years stagnated at an average of 9.6 percent, far below the threshold of 15 percent agreed upon by African leaders in the Abuja Declaration of 2001. 

Uganda’s health spending covers only a third of what is needed to meet the minimum health care package, yet health remains an important prerequisite for economic growth. Out of the US$ 28 per capita required to fully finance the minimum health care package, only US$ 10.4 is provided. It compares even less favourably with the assessed per capita health expenditure of US$ 34 for low income countries. Health care, therefore, has remained a major challenge, where: 

•	Only 40 percent of the available health equipment are in working condition and 17 percent need replacement;
•	Only a third of health-facility delivery services  have basic equipment and supplies for conducting normal delivery;
•	Drugs stock-outs have remained a chronic problem, affecting 72 percent of Government health units;
•	Less than a quarter of health facilities have all the essential equipment for basic antenatal care;
•	Forty-six percent of the people get treatment from private clinics, 13 percent from pharmacies, 22 percent from public health units, seven percent from public hospitals, four percent from NGO health units and two percent from NGO hospitals; 
•	40 percent of total health facilities are provided by private health practitioners that are usually profit-making institutions;
•	Only 2 percent of the People With Disabilities have access to rehabilitation services; and
•	300,000 Ugandans, being 10 percent of the population, have hearing impairments, while 250,000 are blind due to preventable causes.

Medical workers remain grossly underpaid, thus undermining the morale, service delivery and the availability of medical personnel in public health units. A fresh medical officer in a public health facility earns less than Shs 800,000 and a nurse/midwife about Shs 350,000 while an RDC earns more than Shs 2,000,000 per month. A doctor in Kenya earns four times more than the counterpart in Uganda, and United Kingdom is 12 times higher. The result is the following:

•	The vacancy rates for nurses at health centres II, III and IV are at 53 percent, 54 percent and 37 percent respectively;
•	There are only 10 specialist surgeons and 350 anaesthetists to serve a population of over 30 million people;
•	70 percent of physicians/dentists, 80 percent of pharmacists and 40 percent of nurses/midwives are in urban areas serving 13 percent of the population only; 
•	Doctor/patient ratio is 1:24,725 compared to Kenya’s 1:7,100;
•	For every 100,000 citizens, there are only eight physicians, 70 nurses and midwives, three pharmacists, one dentist, six laboratory technicians and four public environmental health workers; 
•	The attrition rate of doctors is 35 percent and that of nurses and midwives 32 percent, but is worse in rural areas;
•	The health worker to population ratio of 1:1,298 is far below the 1:439 recommended by the World Health Organisation. 

Malaria remains the leading cause of morbidity and mortality in Uganda with 95 percent of the country still classified as endemic to the disease affecting approximately 90 percent of the population. It accounts for 25 to 40 percent of out-patient, 15 to 20 percent of hospital admissions, 9 to 14 percent of in-patient deaths, 70,000 to 110,000 deaths annually and 320 deaths daily. As a result, 25 percent of household income is spent on malaria and US$ 6 million is lost in productivity. Worse still, the country faces a problem of stockouts of essential drugs to treat malaria due to over reliance on donations and inefficient supply chain management by NMS and Ministry of Health. 

Although the use of maternal health services is one of the cornerstones for safe motherhood, most women in rural areas don’t use health services during pregnancy. Furthermore, access to emergency obstetric care, which is the main determining factor for improved maternal and neonatal survival, remains poor. This has made Uganda one of the countries with the highest mortality rates in the world at 435 per 100,000 with an average of 16 mothers dying during child birth daily. 

For the last four years, the burden of health service delivery has been left to citizens who are poorly paid and unemployed as Government responds by spending US$ 48.2 million on a new Presidential jet. In the financial years 2009/10 and 2010/11, budgetary allocation to the 13 regional referral hospitals was only Shs 46.6 billion and 45.3 billion respectively compared to 76.4 billion and 72.5 billion allocated to State House in these years. 

In spite of the poor health indicators as outlined above, this year’s budget did not provide adequate funds for maternal and reproductive health supplies, Diabetes and Cancer treatment and mental health drugs. 
 
Furthermore, there is no development budget for regional referral hospitals and infrastructure expansion for Mulago Maternity Block.  

The weak and underfunded health system poses a challenge to maternal health and child mortality in Uganda. This is in the wake of the recent pronouncement by the African leaders when they were here to place the welfare of women and safe motherhood at the fore of their development agenda this year. What an irony!

Agriculture

Although agriculture remains the core sector of Uganda’s economy in terms of its potential to contribute to GDP and employment, this sector has over the last four years grown slower than overall economic growth. The sector was severely affected by drought, floods, and waste disease, yet for poverty to fall below 20 percent, agricultural growth must be an average six percent, a figure well beyond the current growth rates. The inability of our Government to substantially raise agriculture spending will, therefore, have serious implications on poverty reduction and food security in the country.  

The vital role of agriculture in delivering growth and reducing poverty was underlined in the World Development Report, 2008, which stated that: “If the world is committed to reducing poverty and achieving sustainable growth, the powers of agriculture must be unleashed.” Agriculture growth has been a feature of countries that have successfully reduced poverty. For, it lowers and stabilises food prices, improves rural employment, increases demand for goods and services, stimulates growth in other sectors of the economy, and is widely acknowledged as crucial for poverty reduction and broader economic growth.

Agriculture connects economic growth and the rural poor by increasing their productivity and incomes. For the poorest people, GDP growth from agriculture is about four times more effective in raising income than GDOP from other sectors, and is central to development. Investing in agriculture, therefore, remains the surest way to achieve higher agricultural sector growth and effectively reducing poverty through increased productivity and enhanced rural household incomes and consumption.    

Although public spending on the agriculture sector is paramount for meaningful growth and development, the sector has been prioritised only rhetorically and not in actual expenditure allocations. Over the last 20 years, agriculture spending in Uganda has stagnated at four percent of the national budget. 

In the financial year 2008/09, Government promised to avail farmers with 500 walking tractors, implements and agriculture credit to increase productivity and value addition. However, this was not done. And there is nothing in this budget that will make a significant difference if the vagaries of weather, spending on new technologies, research and development and agriculture credit are not seriously addressed in the budgetary allocations. 

The gross neglect and mismanagement of the agricultural sector is reflected in our country’s grim sector statistics. Annual public spending on agriculture has barely increased by 0.5 percent from last financial year to 4.9 percent in 2010/2011 ranking only No.10 in sector budget allocations. The sector contribution to GDP declined from 21.7 percent in 2006/2007 to 15 percent in 2009/2010. The rate of agriculture research to GDP is 0.3 percent far below the Maputo Declaration of six percent. 

The sector growth rates declined from two percent in 2004/2005 to 0.1 percent in 2006/2007 and increased slightly to 0.7 in 2007/2008. Per capita agriculture GDP is on a decline, and a number of people who are food insecure have now reached 2.027 million.  

Uganda’s agriculture is characterised by low yields due to low application of modern technology. The 2005/2006 survey showed that use of agriculture inputs such as seeds, fertilisers, pesticides and manure were limited in all households. Uganda’s fertiliser application is among the lowest in the world at less than one kilogramme per hectare compared to six kilogrammes per hectare in Tanzania, 32 kilogrammes per hectare in Kenya and the average of 8 kilogrammes per hectare in sub-Saharan Africa. This was attributed to the high cost of fertilisers, which almost tripled from US$ 252 per tonne in 2007 to US$ 752 per tonne in 2008. 

Only 6.3 percent of the farmers use improved seeds while a meagre 3.4 percent use agro-chemicals, yet the use of improved seeds and agro-chemicals increases production by 21 percent on average. Overall, five percent of the farmers use modern farming inputs such as fertilisers and pesticides lagging behind the international average of 25 percent recommended for most agro-based countries.

Access to agriculture finance remains a major constraint to overall sector growth because financial institutions are unwilling to offer long-term loans to smallholder farmers, which would enable them invest in the sector, compete in the market and improve their livelihoods. Therefore, the small time borrowing taking place is only for school fees, medical bills and food. Only 11.4 percent of households use the available financial services while 41.6 percent have very general awareness of rural financial services in sub-counties.

Use of SACCOS has proved inappropriate to finance smallholder farmers due to the high interest rates ranging from 36 percent to 48 percent per annum, inadequate working capital and over politicisation of these SACCOS. 

While Uganda’s agriculture production and productivity has stagnated, the population has been growing faster resulting in high dependency and food insecurity. As a result, Uganda is listed by the Food and Agricultural Organisation as one of the 31 countries in crisis requiring external food assistance, and one of the 82 low income food deficit countries. It is also ranked 44th out of 88 countries by the International Food Policy Research Institute in its global hunger index.

Despite the revealing statistics and the adoption of the Agricultural Sector Development Strategy and Investment Plan for 2010-2011 to 2014-2015 in March 2010, Government will not be able to implement the plan due to limited funding. Out of the Shs 457.9 billion required for the first financial year, only Shs 342.3 billion has been availed under the MTEF in FY 2010-2011. In contrast, our neighbours in Kenya, despite being more industrialised than Uganda, have recognised the fundamental importance of the agricultural sector to their economy and the central role it will play in development, economic growth and poverty reduction. They recently launched a US$ 10 billion modern farming blue print, being their private sector driven strategy, aimed at creating opportunities for irrigation, farming inputs, landing materials and research.

The overall objectives of this strategy in Kenya are: 

(a) 	Slashing poverty by half in ten years.
(b) 	Boosting agriculture growth by 7 percent.
(c) 	Increasing agriculture contribution to GDP by 25 percent.
(d) 	Rescuing 2 million people from starvation, that is in Kenya.

Madam Speaker, transforming agriculture requires a substantial increase in the sector share of funding from the national budget with greater emphasis on small-scale irrigation schemes. This requires commitment of adequate resources to finance water for production and new technologies. Until Government realises this, growth in rural household incomes and poverty reduction will remain a wish.

Environment and Natural Resources

Madam Speaker and Members, Uganda’s economy is natural resource dependent. Therefore, the environment and natural resource protection are central to the country’s development. Indeed, for the last four years, the Opposition has raised a number of environmental governance concerns, but it seems Government is not committed to environmental protection.

At the current rate of environmental degradation, if soil erosion is not checked, it will end up an economic disaster in the near future. This, coupled with the rapid population growth, not only poses a danger to the environment, but is also a threat to human settlement, tourism and food security. Natural resource degradation is estimated to cost over 17 percent of GNP per year of which six percent represents forest destruction and 11 percent soil degradation. Further, the country loses over 1.9 percent of its forest cover annually. Uganda’s rate of soil fertility depletion is among the highest in sub-Saharan Africa with an annual rate of depletion at 70 kilograms of Nitrogen, Phosphorus and Potassium per hectare.

A comprehensive study by Moyini and Muramira 2001, cited in our 2009/2010 financial response to the budget, provides an independent evaluation of the extent of the problem and rings the bell loud enough for urgent action in this country. We unreservedly made wide ranging recommendations to save this sector, but instead, this sector has received the greatest assault from the managers of this economy.

Infrastructure

Madam Speaker, the importance of physical infrastructure in the movement of goods and services as well as factor inputs from points of supply to the consumers, cannot be over emphasised. Inadequate physical infrastructure constrains production in many sectors of the economy. In this regard, there is urgent need for aggressive social spending and investment in infrastructure to enable the country compete favourably in the region.

Only seven percent of the roads in Uganda are paved compared to an average of 23 to 27 percent in the region, yet roads carry 97 percent of our total cargo. Less than 10 percent of community roads are motorable. As a result, it is difficult for the rural households to move their agricultural produce to the market. This, coupled with lack of storage facilities, compels the rural poor to sell their produce at giveaway prices and succumb to impoverishment. 

Public spending for road construction and maintenance remained stagnant at US$ 250 million to US$ 300 million from 2002 to 2007 but later increased to US$ 500 million between 2008/2009. This increase, however, has not improved the condition of our roads. Instead, the unit cost of road construction and maintenance shot up with increased funding to the sector. During financial year 2009/2010 the Minister for Works and Transport confirmed to Parliament while defending borrowing for road construction that the unit cost of construction has now reached a record US$ 1,000,000 per km having risen from about US$ 200,000 in 2002. 

Research by the World Bank has established that the average unit cost of constructing a road of greater than 50 km in sub-Saharan Africa, is US$ 344,135 per km, in the upper quarter; that is the maximum. This was arrived at after a survey of a total of 115 road projects in the region with Angola, Burkina Faso, Mozambique and Uganda being the best represented in that sample. At US$ 1,000,000 per km it means that construction costs in Uganda have increased three times the sub-Saharan average as the budget funding to the sector increased. Whereas this wastage and leakage of public funds in the sector is known to the President, our NRM leaders have chosen to bury their heads in some quasi anti-corruption unit to be established in the Office of the President - as if this country has a shortage of anti-corruption institutions - instead of firing the longest-serving minister of works who has not lived to the country’s expectations.

Only 26% of rail network is still functional, having reduced from 1,266 km in 1990 to 321 km in 2009. As a result, most of our cargo is still carried by road, yet the cost of freight services by road is three times higher than rail. The rail concessionaire, Rift Valley Railways (RVR) has failed to realise the expected investment and maintenance of our railway system, let alone payment of concession fees. Government must be asked to explain their campaign pledge to revamp the railway system and extend the same to Sudan and Congo.

Air and water transport remain important for our economic security and prosperity. In spite of this, they have been neglected in terms of financing. Most of our ferry services are in disuse and there is only one point that serves as a functional exit point. Other airports designated as exit points remain dilapidated and navigation is regulated by obsolete disjointed laws, regulations and standards that need review. 

Energy

Electricity supply in Uganda remains one of the biggest challenges to growth and investment. Much of the electricity is at present poorly maintained and the country experiences frequent power cuts. The rate of growth in demand for electricity far outstrips the rate of growth in supply. At the current installed capacity of 300 megawatts, the country experiences a deficit of up to 120 megawatts at peak hours. 

Uganda has one of the lowest access levels to electricity in the world with less than five percent of the population connected. This is worse in the rural areas with less than one percent having access to the national grid. Electricity consumption remains low at 60 kilowatt hours per capita compared to Kenya’s 152 kilowatt hours, Ghana’s 253 kilowatt hours, the African average of 578 kilowatt hours and the world average of 2752 kilowatt hours. This is mainly due the high tariff rates standing at 24 cents compared to Kenya’s 13 cents and 8 cents in Tanzania.

The high tariffs in Uganda are brought about by high centralised energy infrastructure which requires huge investment for the distribution-supply chain losses and outright profiteering by concessionaire under the watchful eye of Government. The costly and unreliable power supply has not only disrupted production, but also affected our profitability and competitiveness in the region. Government should, therefore, be reminded and asked again to explain the fate of their campaign pledge to explore geothermal power and hydro electricity on Mt Elgon.

Management of Oil Revenues

Government said that it was putting in place the legal infrastructure to ensure prudent management of oil revenue. Our concern is that production sharing agreements that were kept secret for very long were only recently reluctantly laid before Parliament as if there is a conspiracy between Government and oil companies. In addition, the national gas and oil policy was not widely discussed by all stakeholders including Parliament. 

In some countries such as Ghana, management of oil revenue has become a subject of open debate to ensure prudent management of oil revenue for the benefit of all nationals. In some other countries where oil revenue has been included in the mainstream budget, it has disrupted other sectors of the economy such as agriculture. Given the people’s mandate, our priority would be to engage all stakeholders in discussions to agree on how best to manage oil revenue for the best of all citizens. A separate account where oil revenue should be banked would be opened and managed by an independent body for use in infrastructure development. 

We now leave it to everyone to judge whether the contract signed in 2006 between the NRM party and the citizens whose terms are spelt out in paragraph 23 above has been delivered. You have to judge whether everyone earns a minimum of Shs 20 million annually, whether corruption is a no-go area and dangerous business for anyone to think of getting involved in, and if each constituency has a fully-fledged hospital with a doctor, an operating theatre, an ambulance and a maternity ward. 

We need to know whether the quality of education has improved through a progressive scheme for teachers’ remuneration and infrastructure. The NRM should tell us whether the Soroti-Gulu-Pakwach railway line has been re-opened and extended to Koboko via Arua or if it has been extended to Yei. We need to know whether the greater Kampala transport master plan has now been implemented and a solution has been sought for the flooding problems in Kalerwe and Bwaise. 

Government should tell us whether mortgage finance is affordable and low cost houses have been built for the urban poor. We need to know whether an inland container port has now been developed near Kampala or if all health centres have efficient personnel and essential drugs. We must be told whether community health insurance has been introduced or if malaria has been eradicated within five years of election in 2006.

We should know whether equipment and resources have been directed towards improvement of the welfare of Police and Prisons officers, especially accommodation. We want know whether Kasese, Arua and Soroti aerodromes have been developed and a new one in Ntungamo has been constructed, or if a 12 megawatts hydro power project from 12 sites on Mt Elgon has been developed. We need to know from the NRM whether trees have been planted on all bare hills and if all districts have a clear signal of UBC TV and radio.

In our assessment, the implementation of the NRM Manifesto has been a miserable failure. We ask the NRM Government to take responsibility for non-performance against the assurances and the resources appropriated by Parliament for this purpose. We are sure that the remaining six months cannot help this Government to cover the unfulfilled pledges and none of these will be delivered by February 2011.

Appraisal of Government Proposals for 2010/2011 

As indicated in the budget statement for 2010/2011, the budget was more of a party election manifesto than a budget that deals with fundamentals of the economy. Among the East African countries, it is Uganda that chose to ride safely to avoid rubbing the wounds inflicted on Ugandans by biting poverty for fear of losing the coming elections.

Uganda’s infrastructure development is still rated as poor, hence slowing economic activities. The percentage allocation to the transport and energy sectors was reduced by 24 percent and 31 percent, respectively. While all districts were promised road equipment in FY 2008/2009, only four motor graders were procured in FY 2009/2010 and only three graders and one backhoe loader have been budgeted for in 2010/2011. No explanation or accountability has been provided for the funds that were appropriated for this activity. 

In spite of the glaring funding gaps in the road and energy sectors, included in the budget is Shs 2 billion which has been earmarked for paying outstanding CHOGM debts and land compensations; Shs 1 billion for land titles belonging to State House; Shs 1 billion for additional State House furniture. This confirms our long held suspicion that interests of those in power have become paramount and the interests of the people ignored as these funding priorities will leave most of our community roads impassable. 

This year’s budget is silent about a comprehensive agricultural census pointed out. A comprehensive agricultural census was carried out in 1963/65 with a household one in 1992. Therefore, the data on which Government bases its policies is grossly outdated and not useful for informing policy and planning in agriculture. 

Madam Speaker, last financial year we asked the minister to table the guidelines for accessing the Shs 60 billion disbursed to support agricultural mechanisation and agro-processing. The funds were disbursed without the requested guidelines. We demand that a list of the beneficiaries and the modalities for disbursing the Shs 15 billion Commercialisation Challenge Fund be tabled and debated by Parliament before the money is appropriated. This is the only way the Executive can be held accountable to the citizens.

An analysis of the key social sectors such as health, education and water indicate that Government has sought to balance the books at the expense of people’s lives. This is evidenced by the inadequate allocation to these sectors. What puzzles us is whether Government is concerned about the public frustration over failure to access prescribed drugs in public health units. The people have resorted to drug shops for self-medication, quack medical practitioners and private clinics at their cost, while their leaders are treated abroad at their expense.

Over the last four years, Government has not set priorities and funding programmes that benefit the majority of the rural poor. Agriculture, which employs the majority of the rural poor, is not adequately funded and could, therefore, not provide adequate food for the rapidly growing population. While nutrition plays a key role in the health status and overall wellbeing and productivity of the population, inadequate food results in malnutrition and under-nourishment of the young ones of this country. An estimated 45 percent of child deaths in Uganda are attributable to malnutrition. As a result, Uganda has one of the highest levels of childhood stunting in sub-Saharan Africa.

This budget, like the previous ones, does not reduce the burden the rural poor meet in financing higher education as evidenced by lack of provision of funds to kick-start the needy students’ loan scheme. There are no funds for maintenance of health equipment and utilities, and repair and development of regional referral hospitals.  The budget falls short of providing for water for irrigation and livestock, yet enhancement of agricultural production and productivity is considered one of its key priorities. Our view is that Government has no plan to deliver Ugandans from the biting poverty.

The Minister for Finance attempted to hoodwink Ugandans that she was going to improve service delivery by paying honoraria to the LCI and II chairpersons to the tune of Shs 10.7 billion in recognition of their contribution to improving governance and accountability, and another Shs 10.7 billion to procure bicycles for LCI chairpersons to facilitate their work in governance and administration. However, we note that there is no budgetary provision for these expenditure items as confirmed by the Minister of Local Government in his policy statement for financial year 2010/2011 where he lamented thus: 

“The sum of money allocated to Ministry of Local Government for the recurrent and development budget in financial years 2009/2010 and 2010/2011 is exactly the same, save for the additional resources provided for the regional tier and procurement of bicycles for parish chiefs.”  

This is reflected on page 6 of the policy statement of the Ministry of Local Government. This is what crowns this year’s budget as the election statement of the NRM Party.

Article 152(1) vests powers of Parliament to impose any tax by an Act of Parliament. However, clause 2 of the same Article allows Parliament to delegate powers to any person under an Act of Parliament to vary or waive a tax imposed by law and periodically report to Parliament. For the last five years, the minister has waived, varied or paid taxes amounting to over Shs 90 billion using Article 152(2) without giving Parliament details of the companies, hotels, NGOs and individuals that benefited.  The details are as shown below:

Financial Year 2006/2007
•	Shs 18.65 billion
Purpose: Taxes for hotel, developers, NGOs, higher institutions of learning and some enterprises.

Financial Year 2007/2008
•	Shs 4.85 billion
	Purpose: Income tax and VAT waivers.
•	Shs 6.34 billion
	Purpose: Payment of NGOs
•	Shs 4.44 billion
	Purpose: Payment for private enterprises/hotels
•	Shs 71.27 million
	Purpose: Penal Tax
•	Shs 15.48 million
	Purpose: PAYE

Financial Year 2008/2009
•	Shs 4.70 billion
	Purpose: Income Tax and VAT waivers
•	Shs 21 billion
	Purpose: Payment for private hotels and NGOs

Financial Year 2009/2010
•	Shs 2.34 billion
	Purpose: Income Tax and VAT waivers
•	Shs 12.84 billion
	Purpose: Payment for private hotels and NGOs

Financial Year 2010/2011
•	Shs 4.31 billion
Purpose: Income Tax and VAT waivers
·	Shs 12.42 billion
Purpose: Payment for hotels, tertiary institutions, hospitals and NGOs

Grand total is Shs 91.98 billion for arbitrary tax waivers and variations 

Madam Speaker, the Opposition is concerned that these tax waivers may be subject to abuse. We, therefore, propose that the particular laws be amended immediately to require the minister to seek parliamentary approval, giving reasons and details of such proposed waivers or tax variations. (Applause) We further demand that the list of companies, hotels, tertiary institutions, NGOs and hospitals that benefited in the last five years be tabled in Parliament for further scrutiny.

Local governments remain vital in the provision of basic services such as primary education and health care, which are administered by districts. However, this is not reflected in the budgetary allocations to the local governments as there is an imbalance in funding between the central and local governments. 

In our response last financial year, we pointed out that although Parliament passed a resolution to set up a select committee to review the formula for allocation of equalization and unconditional grants in 2007, the select committee was muzzled by the then Government Chief Whip. To-date, it has not taken off and no one seems to be concerned.

Over the last four years, the funding to local governments averaged 20 percent of the total budgets. In financial year 2010/2011, the funding allocation to local governments has declined by four percent from the financial year 2009/2010 level.  As a result, most local governments will continue to accumulate pension and gratuity arrears due to insufficient funding. We, therefore, propose that the payment of gratuity, pensions and pension arrears be handled by the Central Government since most local governments do not have adequate sources of revenue. This will ease the suffering pensioners in local governments.

Government has been tempted to shift its focus away from poverty reduction to development, completely losing purview of poverty challenges.  They now think that it is a waste of time to talk about poverty, rather than development. They believe it is better to move with a few progressive people on the road to development rather than be bogged down by a whole load of miserable people. This arbitrary shift of focus has left over 11 million people without meaningful affirmative action programmes. 

We advise Government that the road to development cannot start until someone is out of abject poverty and hunger. To abandon the poverty focus at this stage, therefore, is to be insensitive to the plight of the many poor Ugandans.

Our Proposals for 2010/2011 and Beyond

Madam Speaker and Members, the Opposition believes that this country needs to develop a people’s plan to guide its future. We gave comprehensive proposals in the last financial year, 2009/10, for all sectors of the economy. Since many of them remain unimplemented but valid in terms of our preferred strategy, they have been restated and modified where necessary with comments on how far Government has gone in attempting to implement them. They are summarised in Appendix 1 at the back of the document.

For purposes of transparency and accountability, we declare that given the people’s mandate, the following resources will become available for national development programmes towards service delivery. A long-term national development plan will be developed from which medium and short-term plans will be curved, with full approval by all stakeholders so that it is fully owned and adequately resourced:

a) 	Shs 7.5 trillion estimated by Government as available in the Budget;

b) 	Shs 3.196 trillion to be made available from initiatives identified last financial year; and

c) 	Oil revenues, which our estimate puts at US$ 2 to 3 billion.  These revenues shall be openly tabled and managed by an independent body with the watchful eye of the public. We will abolish the current Government’s practice of keeping the oil revenue off the balance sheet, and treating it as if it were a side pocket of Government.

Madam Speaker, last financial year we promised to table an Agriculture Development Bank Bill to create a bank that would avail affordable credit to the agriculture sector. (Applause) I am happy to report that the process is now complete. Independent consultants have already produced a comprehensive report detailing the case for creation of an agriculture development bank as the best mechanism for financing agricultural development. 

Respondents interviewed in the study included officials from Bank of Uganda, Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, farmers associations and the Ministry of Finance, among others. The draft Bill and motion are ready and I will soon seek leave of this House to proceed and table the Agriculture Development Bank Bill. (Applause) A similar study is being undertaken for the Industrial Development Bank Bill.

Over the last four years, the Opposition pointed out that the NAADS programme, like most agriculture interventions, is characterised by handouts for political patronage and could, therefore, not move the country out of poverty. At last, the President has also realised this as evidenced by the frequent suspensions of the programme and arrests of thieving officials. We believe that no amount of restructuring will salvage this programme.  We must put to an end the pain and ridicule it has caused the rural poor. We, therefore, reaffirm our commitment to completely scrap the haphazard programme.

For the last four years, the promise by the NRM Government to respect and protect workers’ rights has remained on paper as the implementation of the Labour Act, 2006 and performance of the Industrial Court has been hampered by inadequate funding. The workers and pensioners of this country need a compassionate Government that will give them a living wage and protect and ensure their rights. They need a Government that will immediately reform the pensions sector.

We estimate that with the resources at our disposal and with prudent management thereof, the budgetary allocation to the agriculture sector will be increased to more than 10 percent. (Applause) The following key objectives will be pursued and achieved in five years:

a) 	Reduce the number of poor people from over 11 million to less than two million in the next five years.

b) 	Rescue the current two million people who are food insecure.

c) 	Reduce income and wealth disparities by half between individuals and regions in five years by equitably redistributing resources by progressive taxation and poverty-sensitive national development planning. (Applause)

d) 	Reduce donor funding to less than five percent of the national budget in five years, and later phase it off. (Applause)

e) 	Maintain economic growth at over nine percent per annum over the short and medium terms.

Good governance depends on the extent to which the citizenry perceive a government to be legitimate, committed to improving their general welfare, competent to maintain law and order and deliver public services, able to create an enabling environment for productive activities and equitable in its conduct. For the last four years, we advised Ugandans that this Government cannot deliver. If the ruling politicians are failing the people, it is our responsibility to come in and fill the gap by providing alternative policy options to deal with challenges that confront our country.

We have been advising the NRM Government leaders that the only way to remove people from the biting poverty is to increase agriculture funding, but they have not taken our advice. We advised them on the need for a comprehensive agriculture census, but they did not take heed. We advised that a country with a large mass of water cannot solely rely on rain-fed agriculture, but no one is listening. (Laughter) They only look at us as adversaries instead of partners in governance.

The problem of not listening to advice and an alternative voice is common where concentration of power is in the Executive and in particular, a single individual. It cripples a system of checks and balances. Some of the NRM leaders have become synonymous with the party and personality cult has become a cancer, rendering irrelevant the principles and practices of public accountability and faith in due processes. (Applause)

Conclusion

The NRM Government has been given a chance in the five years to address the problems of this country but has miserably failed, as you have seen, due to poor policies and self-interest. The poor, and particularly the working poor, know that neither this budget nor the previous ones offer solutions to their dilemma. They know that the leaders seek their own interest even when it clashes with national interest. They recognise that with the NRM Government in power, the standards of living will continue to deteriorate. 

The people of Uganda deserve - and will have - an open and honest Government that serves them. They need a Government that appropriates their tax wisely and eliminates waste and inefficiency, is compassionate, and provides critical services to those in need. They need an efficient and effective administration committed to improving their quality of life, willing and having the capacity to fulfil their expectations (Applause).
 
The Opposition is here to speak for and on behalf of the teachers and doctors who cannot afford to take their children to higher institutions of learning due to low pay. It is here to advocate for the poor people who cannot afford the medical bills. It is the voice of the workers who have nowhere to turn when arbitrarily sacked by their employers. We gladly represent our mothers who sleep on the floor of our national referral hospitals when in labour pains as our leaders get treatment in foreign capitals at their expense.
 
Once in power, the new government will focus on the fundamentals – economic diversification, tax base, planning, priority spending and elimination of waste. Our role so far has been to make it very difficult for anyone to say one day, “we were not advised”. We will bring back trust in Government and its institutions, and we will restore growth with equity, mutual respect and satisfaction among all our people; for there must be only one Uganda and one people. 
 
I thank you for your kind attention and beg to respond (Applause).
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much shadow minister for the lengthy response. Now, as he was making his response, we were joined in the gallery by five students from the International Institute. They have been able to sit here and observe the proceedings. 
 
Hon. Members, I wish only to respond to paragraph 33, page 17 with regard to the National Development Plan. I would like it to be recorded in the Hansard that I committed this National Development Plan to the Committee on Finance; it is with us. The impression given here is that we are doing nothing about it. I want that to be corrected. The Committee on Finance should bring it up and we discuss it, and we will try to create the time if you are available. 
 
Hon. Members, I would want you to go and study this response and deal with it together with the committee reports which are coming in on Tuesday morning. So, we shall not debate it now. You can take the weekend to look at it and then we resume on Tuesday with the debate on the Budget. 
 
In the meantime, hon. Bahane wanted to raise something and I think hon. Epetait too has something to say. 
 
4.36
MR YOKASI BIHANDE (FDC, Bukonjo County East, Kasese): Madam Speaker, hon. Bahane is from Kisoro and Bihande is from Bukonjo East, Kasese – 
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is almost the same. It is you I am talking about.
 
MR BIHANDE: Bihande is FDC while Bahane is NRM.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are all my Members (Laughter).
 
MR BIHANDE: Madam Speaker, I am rising on the issue concerning the recruitment of cadets in the Uganda Police. Some time back, the Police advertised that they were going to recruit cadets and put the age limit between 25 and 35 years. In today’s, paper, they re-advertised and reduced the age to between 20 to 25 years. 
 
When you look at the rural population, most of our children start school when they are above eight years. In a place like Kasese, you have to learn how to cross the river before you can go to school. It means that most of our graduates leave Makerere and other universities when they are 25 years and above. So when you put the age limit between 20 and 25 years, that means most of the graduates in the rural areas are not going to be recruited. 
 
We also have so many graduates who were passed out four, five years ago that could have benefited in joining the Police. If they left the university at 25 years, now they are above 30. I request, therefore, that the recruitment age be brought back to that of the earlier advert, between 25 and 35 years – (Interruption)
 
MR ODONGA-OTTO: Thank you very much, hon. Bihande. This morning, a youth walked into my office - I usually leave the door open - and he said he completed university four years ago and has been on the streets looking for a job. The only opportunity which has availed itself was to join the Uganda Police Force. He was carrying a newspaper cutting which automatically leaves him out because he completed university at 23 years and he has been on the streets. So, he is about 27 or 28 years. So, he was asking if there is anything Parliament could do about this. 
 
There are many of them; some have been on the streets for ten years and they are seeing joining the Police as an opening. So they are wondering if anything could be done, like Parliament directing the Police to reconsider the age limit before the deadline comes on Friday. 
 
Secondly, why the change of mind all of a sudden? People have been tendering in applications and all of a sudden, there is a change of position. I was one of the youngest Members of Parliament in 2001 - I was the youngest actually. I left university at 22 and three months later I joined Parliament. I studied in record time. I started P.1 at about seven years in 1984 and I completed university. However, even those of us who broke the record of finishing education early cannot even qualify for this thing of IGP Kale Kayihura. So, who are they targeting? That is the information I wanted to give.
 
MR BIHANDE: Thank you very much for the information. You remember the last time cadets were recruited in the Police, it created a lot of anxiety in Parliament here and in the general population in the country. Madam Speaker, you instructed that a committee of Parliament investigates that recruitment and brings a report here, but the report has never been brought. 
 
I would request that this time cadets are recruited according to district population quotas. In the last recruitment, over 80 percent of the cadets that were recruited in this country came from one region, and that is western. Within that region, the majority came from about three districts. We do not want a repeat of the same to occur. (Interruption)
 
MR KYANJO: Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way and thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I want to give is that I was one of the members of the committee which was tasked with the duty of looking into the imbalances and discrepancies in recruitment. This report was finished a long time ago and what we hear is that your office, Madam Speaker, has not availed space on the Order Paper. (Interjections) This is to draw your attention to that allegation so that you can help the House understand what is happening. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think this House is aware that it is the Business Committee which sets the programmes. It is on our list of activities to come but I cannot bring it before we finish with the budget. So, the sooner you stay here and we finish, the faster we shall attend to other business.

MR BIHANDE BWAMBALE: In conclusion, Madam Speaker, a list of those cadets was laid on the Table - one Member is murmuring that I should lay the information on the Table. That list was laid on the Table. It was supposed to go to a committee to scrutinise where each member who was recruited comes from.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you are in breach of Rule 60. You are speculating about the contents of the report. You asked to talk about the age of recruitment. Why don’t you stop at that and then we debate the other one when it comes because I do not have your report?

MR BIHANDE BWAMBALE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think the Prime Minister could respond to that, but I still request that recruitment should be by quota according to the district population. 

MR BUKENI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is true there was an advert today changing what was there. We have received many queries from the people who have been affected.

As you are aware, not every region has enough resources to move people at various levels. Some people first stop at A’ Level and do other things to earn money and be able to go to school. Some people first get diplomas, then they get money and do degrees and some of them finish after 25. Some people have not been lucky to get jobs immediately they finish university, but they are Ugandans and well qualified.

I think that the Police, from the lectures I received from the Leader of Government Business, is like any other Public Service institution in the country. Laws that govern the recruitment of that service are like any other in the Public Service. It is not right for a change to be made without giving reasons. Why was the advert that run changed?

It is a request we have received from the people outside there and it is also my request, from what I know about how Government recruits, that the first advert be left to apply. People in Uganda and everywhere who have qualified but maybe because of one reason or another have not got jobs or did not finish university early, can then be given a chance to be absorbed into the Police and they serve their country. That is their request. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does the Prime Minister wish to say something about that?

4.46
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Madam Speaker, it is unfortunate that the Ministry of Internal Affairs is not represented here. So, it is only fair that the minister explains on Tuesday. (Interjections) Alright, let us extend the deadline so that he can explain -(Interjections)- because he may have found reasons. We cannot take a decision until we have heard the other side of the story. I thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, House adjourned to Tuesday at 10 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 4.47 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 10 August 2010 at 10.00 a.m.) 
