Tuesday, 3rd August, 1993

(The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala).

PRAYERS

(The Vice-Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair).

The Council was called to order.

LAYING OF PAPERS

MR. OBWANGOR: Point of order.  Since in the House a quorum is not there, are we in order to proceed with national dispatch of business in this House.

THE CHAIRMAN:  We do not form a quorum; therefore adjourn for 15 minutes, please.

(Council adjourned for 15 minutes).

LAYING OF PAPERS

T1HE DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Mr. Kafumbe Mukasa): Mr. Chairman, according to Paragraph 28 (2) of the Public Finance Act, Chapter 149 and permit to quote; The Minister shall not later than 14 days after the first Sitting of the National Assembly, next after the receipt of the Report mentioned in Sub-section (1) of this Section cause the same to be laid before the National Assembly and if the Minister makes default in so laying the Report, the Auditor General shall submit the same to the Speaker directly.  I beg therefore, Sir, now to move that according with Article (99) the Constitution.  I beg to lay on the Table Volume No. (1) containing the Report of the Auditor General on Public Accounts of Ministries, Departments and Projects for the year ended 30th June, 1991; (Applause) and in Volume (2) Accounts if Ministries, Departments and Projects of the Republic of Uganda for the year ended 30th June, 1991.  I thank you, Sir. (Applause)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE FINANCE BILL, 1993

MR. BUTAGIRA: Point of clarification.  I am seeking clarification, Mr. Chairman. When the House sat last week, there was a Motion that was passed for this House to resolve itself into a Committee of Supply to consider detailed Estimates of Expenditure and Revenue.  This Motion was passed and it is on the Floor of the House. Now we see before us the Finance Bill, which is being tabled for the Second Reading.  This Finance Bill should normally come at the end - after we have considered the Estimates, the Committee of Supply and then the Finance Bill -(Applause)- is discussed and it sums up that process.  In view of this, is it in order for us to go to the Second Reading of the Finance Bill before we have discussed the details of the Revenue of Expenditure and also Development.  (Applause)

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to concede hon. Butagira’s concern about procedure.  If we passed the whole House to go to a Committee of Supply and we are in a Committee of Supply, it is not procedurally correct to consider a Bill; because a Bill is a substantive Law and we can only consider a Law when you are constituted as House so that we can consider the various stages of that Law.  I must however, explain that the Minister of Finance had wanted to respond to request from Members who had wished that they would like to consider Financial Proposals first; but I admit much as he has wanted to respond to this - Procedures are such that it is not possible to consider a Bill when you are in a Committee of Supply.  Therefore, the Ministry would like to concede to this observation on procedures and if Members do not mind - we do not buy the following the usual procedure -(Applause)- and with this in mind, I would beg that Members proceed to consider the Motion which they have approved as soon as possible, so that we can finish matter related to the Budget as a matter of urgency. 

THE CHAIRMAN: So, it is not in order?

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: Procedurally, it is not correct.

THE CHAIRMAN:  It is not in order to proceed with the Finance Bill. (Applause)

MR. RWAKAKOOKO:  Mr. Chairman, I would like first of all to thank you for this wisdom and guidance as usual and I would like in pursuit of your guidance and also following the admission of the technical problem by the Minister of Finance and in order to assist in pursuance of the correct procedure. Permit me Mr. Chairman, to move and beg for support of this House that the hitherto ad-hoc Committees on the Budget be now regularised as Standing Committees of this House. (Applause) I would also like to move that in fact beyond this, this House now begins to consider all submissions of the Bills submitted before it by way of providing for Referral System once the Bills have been read for the First Time.  I would like to list the Committees for which I am seeking regularisation into Standing Committees of the House (1) The Sectoral Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.  (2) Trade and Industry (3) Finance and Economic Planning.  Also to include the Auditor General’s Department. (4) Social Services. To include Education and Sports, Health, Labour and Social Services, Women in Development, Youth and Culture, Information, Mulago Hospital Complex, Makerere University and  (5) -(Interruption)

MR. OBWANGOR: Point of order.  With all the collective wisdom of this House, is it right for the hon. Rwakakooko to address the House on a Motion that is not tabled, which is not on the Order Paper.  How does he bring a matter out of the blue to discuss with hon. House?

MR. RWAKAKOOKO: Mr. Chairman, I place myself before your discretionary decision. Mr. Chairman, you have, I believe, permitted me to proceed and that was the basis of my proceeding.  (Applause) I had left No.4; I was now going to No.5 Transport, Works and Communication.  Also to include Land, Housing and Urban Development.  No.6 Security and Legal Affairs.  Also to include Defence, Internal Affairs, Police, Prisons, Judiciary, Justice and Constitutional Affairs and Law Reform Commission.  No.7 Public Service, Local Government and Mass Mobilisation.  Also to include Public Service Commission, Uganda Management Institute and the National Assembly.  No.8 Natural Resources.  

Also, to include Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities.  I submit that the 9th Committee should be one to handle the Office of the President.  Also to include State House, Office of the Vice President, Office of the Prime Minister, Foreign Affairs Ministry, Inspectorate of Government and Karamoja Development Agency.  The House will recall that of late we have been handling Bills which are either inaccurate because they have been written badly or where the substance has not been properly researched into before coming here.  I would like this House to be fully conscious and to try and save the taxpayer’s money by undertaking ahead of time, in good time, the scrutiny of what business is coming before this House.  We are the final authority in matters of Legislation of this nation; and I think it is important that all business brought here, is properly researched, is properly written and is well understood.  On the basis of all this, I would like to submit that permission is granted for this House to consider and approve the Sectoral Committees into permanency.  I beg your indulgence. (Interruption)

MR.KARUHANGA (Nyabushozi County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman I stand to second the Motion. I have the following reasons to give.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please, order, please. Continue hon. Karuhanga.

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Chairman, I think this is the only Parliament in the world, which does not work using this method, and it is probably time that we got some efficiency introduced in the House.  You may recall that there are some Bills that have been hanging around and not being attended to.  The reason is because of the methods of work.  With this Motion, we will be able to see through all the Bills in this Session without any doubt.  When we look at Bills like the Medical Drugs Bill - they would have been handled years ago (by December) but the method, which is employed, finds it almost impossible to get this implemented.  I am advised that this Session, we have more 25 Bills and obviously if we continue using the method we have been using, we will never go through these Bills.  It will cost the taxpayer a lot of money; but this method will save a lot of money for the House.  It will also mean that each one of us will have an opportunity to contribute; because time will be available and you will also contribute where you best feel you can actually meaningfully be beneficial to this country.  Because you will go to those areas or those committees where you know, you have special interest and special knowledge.  

When it comes to deciding matters on environment, for example, not everybody has the task for it but you may find that there are some people here who have taken special interest in this area. It would be very beneficial for them to be allowed to have the opportunity to go through Bills on environment and when they come to the House, they only spend a day or so.  These Bills which are in front of us are very specialised Bills.  Take the Bill on PAC, take the Bill on Decentralisation, and take the Bill coming on Environment, on Drug Policy, on Industry.  Look how cotton is influencing certain sectors but not others.  When you talk about cotton, people in Nyabushozi will not send me to make a lot of quarrels here.  They will just say go and sit down and hear how cotton is being handled because they do not produce cotton; but we are interested to make sure that people who have a cotton interest, they show it and they talk about it and they represent the people’s interests.  In a bit House like this, you will find that maybe somebody who is not knowledgeable in cotton will have the floor and the business will drag on and will never be efficient.  It is very important that we start specialisation.  We have been missing this and it has been a big handicap. We also saw what happened last year, when for the first time we broke ourselves into committees and the amount of knowledge we were able to show to the public, the amount of good we generated to the public and the fact that the public, who were interested in certain aspects were welcomed to join us and deliberate on behalf of our country was also a very big achievement.  It was the first time that the Civil Servants also joined us in deliberating for our country and they gave us a lot of information, which we would never have heard. 

Otherwise, was it only that we should do that beautiful work for a temporary period, and once and for all, why not do it throughout the year?  Then it came to aspect of monitoring the Budget during the year. This was left only to the Economic Committee and even then they were handicapped.  I do not think it is unwise for us to do the obvious.  I think this Motion is an obvious Motion, and it needs your support.  If you do not support it, what alternative do you have? It is a question of efficiency versus inefficiency. Saving money versus spending a lot of money and I think it is therefore, also it is very important that we meet in the august House, we do not waste a lot of time in details.  This will also help us to have our Committees actually active.  Look at what has happened this afternoon - The Finance Bill is being tabled and it is procedurally wrong.  If the Committees were working, the Committee on Procedure of the House, which is headed by Learned brother, the Representative of Rubaga would have sorted this one out and even the Committee on discipline would have been much more active -(Laughter) 

This Motion is a logical step to what we did.  We are not doing things in a hurry.  We tried the Committees first - we saw how we went through last year.  Everybody was very happy.  The Members of Parliament, the Chairman was very happy, the Reports were well done, the Civil Servants who were dealing with us (who at first thought they ware going to be roasted and crucified), they came when they were shaking and thinking it is terrible and by the time they left, they were happy that all the things they always kept to their hearts, had finally found room; and they are very pleased with this. The Ministers, who thought that they were going to be roasted by Backbenchers, actually found that we had done a lot of work for them - and they were very grateful, except one or two Ministers. (Laughter) 

But even that very Minister at the end of the day was there happy because the results were positive for the Ministry and I am very sure that other Ministers who are interested in seeing progress in their own Ministries. In fact, we helped them even to fish out some of the information they would not have found.  So, I call upon the Members to allow this Motion to go through unanimously because immediately we will then break into these Committees, people will sign which Committees they want to join.  You do not have to be stuck where you were last year.  If you failed and also there is no need for us to say you are stuck to one Committee.  If you have the time, you can always move and represent the interest of your Constituency in any Committee.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. OBWANGOR (Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Mr. Chairman, I love Parliament as well as other Members in this august House do.  The most important noble work of this House is to debate deliberately, justly, honestly matters as they will be put in the Standing Orders of the day.  The Standing Orders stand for the House so that, part of the public business is done correctly in the interest of the nation, and if there is any move, as in to today’s order.  There should have been a movement either the leader of the Government Business or a Member moving a Motion to suspend a certain Standing Order in order to bring a Motion into to the House.  I duplicate in my heart to discuss and approve the matter which are brought as to where by tricks of jumping onto the matter which was not put to the Members of the House, so that they could deliberately understand what is -(Interruption)

MR. BUTAGIRA: Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, in view of your ruling, that hon. Rwakakooko moves his Motion and obviously under standing orders, Sir, you have the right to permit one to move a Motion, and he has done so.  Is hon. Obwangor in order to challenge this?

THE CHAIRMAN: Not in order but I allow him to continue. (Laughter)

MR. OBWANGOR:  Mr. Chairman, I withdraw if I am not in order but -(Interjection)- withdraw if I am in disorder. My point is this, I oppose the Motion.  (Interjection) Yes, I have a right in this House to oppose the Motion, and no one can dictate on me.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order hon. Obwangor, please.

MR. OBWANGOR: I have every right to this House, and that is my political rights number one, to speak.  So, therefore, while I very well know, I am educated enough and I have a right experience, democracy can be bewitched, so, therefore, for me I oppose the Motion, though I like the Committees but I oppose the Motion in which the spirit it was brought. (Laughter)

MR. MAYENGO (Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I think we can save democracy from being bewitched by supporting this Motion. The idea of using committees in any House if this size, is the only thing that can make business go on.  The way we are, we are obviously too many, and in order to do anything, thoroughly, we have to break up into some smaller groups and be able to consider any business with thoroughness, with accuracy and with reasonable justice, if justice is needed. You may realise that almost about 30 Members of this House have yet to deliver their maiden speeches, despite, the four years that we have been around.  I am not saying that by being quiet in this House, one is not an important Member of this House. If I may recall an incident out of the House of Commons, there was someone, they used to call Silent Gibon. This was about 100 years ago, a Member of the House of Commons called Gibons sat for eight Sessions in the House of Commons without saying a word and he wrote to a friend and said; “I am still a mute, the good speakers of the House feel me with despair, and the bad speakers with terror, it is more tremendous than I thought, despite any efforts, some invisible power ties me to my seat.” Gibons was nevertheless, an important Member in the House of Commons.   

So, if we broke up into these smaller groups Members, who appear to have no contribution in this House will surprise you.  None of them is without something positive to offer; but the way we are, it is impossible to offer it adequately.  I know that I was a little bit late, when the Motion was being moved, but I trust that the Mover might have mentioned, that it might be necessary to tamper a little bit with the rules of procedure because the question is, when exactly is a Bill to be sent to the committee? 

We have been following to certain extent the way Congress in America does it. I trust that with able leader of our Rules and Orders Committees, he will definitely be able to find way of tampering with Rule No.58 or 54 to find how to fit in, and this exactly is not to say that I am slightly shifting towards the position of hon. Obwangor, not at all.  It is a simple business of just how to adjust our procedure to see how a Bill fits in and how it gets reported back and then how much more has to be said about it, after it has been thoroughly examined.  Still in support of the Motion, let me probably conclude, the exact some way that I did, when I seconded the Motion when hon. Rwakakooko introduce it last year.  I said, quoting the former President of America Dickson when he said, “Congress in its plenary Sessions, as we are is congress for public exhibition for the News Papers to write but congress in its committees, is congress at work.” That exactly, is the way we would like to work.  Thank you very much,

MR. BITAMAZIRE: Mr. Chairman, thank you to give me a chance to deliberate on this Motion as the chairman of the Committee on the Economy of our country. I was one of those who took part in the Sectoral Committee, I think of Finance and Economic Planning, but I realise there were number of deficiencies in that system.  I remember very well we started with a very funny case where hon. William Wanendeya, who was a Member to the Committee, moved that the reporter from New Vision should leave immediately, and he left.  Then, I found that when it came to present our decisions or our deliberations in the House, I remember the report by hon. Ben Luwuum who was our chairman, was disputed in this House, it was disputed by even the Members of the Committee and even the whole House. I also found that the data, our database in the Committee Stages, at the Committee of Supply were not very regular and authentic.  At one stage, we wanted to get figures from ATM in Mbale, about certain loan allocations that they had utilised, and then we found that information was being interfered with because some of the people in that committee were the Directors in that farm.  We could not get the actual authentic data because one of the Members on the committee was a Director of ATM - just one example. 

I also found that, this system lacks direction, in other words, it is a bit difficult for the chairman of the sub-committee to give zone rules of procedure within the committee at certain stages, because sometime it was difficult to get Member in the Committee whom we wanted to get!  So, we did not know really the powers of sub-committee, for example, to get directors of a company or a Government Parastatal bodies or some Members or directors those bodies.  

So, I am bringing this to the House, because I felt the whole country was cheated because the Budget was not discussed properly, especially, when it came to two levels.  One level, was the micro-aggregates, the House must discuss the micro aspect.  We must agree on micro-movement, otherwise if you go in details, if you go to the micro, he wants to start the other way round, from micro to micro, you find some problem.  It is better to start from micro aspect to discuss by the whole House then we can go into micro after having discussed the major aspects of our economy.  This is my feeling.  

Since we have wasted a lot of time, I would like to ask the Mover of the Motion, to give us one assurance, I support the Motion but I would like one assurance, that whatever the deliberations are made within the committees, are really put on record, because our presence here is for five years, and we would like to say whatever word, whatever query we make must be put on record in Hansard.  I would like to find mechanism whereby whatever our deliberations are in sub-committees are recorded probably for the future history of this country.  Mr. Chairman, I would have a situation where history of this country is going to be changed again, because it is not written, we have all the possible gadgets of technology to record all our deliberations. I do not know why, when -(Interruption)

MR. WANENDEYA: Point of information.  Thank you Mr. Chairman. May I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor of the House that we are becoming eventually democratic with our NRM and eventually when we get the Constitution in place, we would be following the democratic principles as exercised in countries of Europe, America and Australia.  The point over here is that most countries which are developed and have been assisting Uganda.  They work through committees and there is no way where you can get a lot of love except through committees, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you.

MR. MAYENGO: Point of information.  It seems as if the Member is saying that he would like the proceedings  of the committees to be recorded.  I would like to inform him that the committees do their work, sort of informally and that to the committees, even people who are not Members of this House, people from the public are welcome. It would be sort of tedious, us to record such things and in the committees. One can talk as many times as necessary, I think it should be ridiculous to how the committees recorded.  

I thank Members for the information, especially, one from hon. Wanendeya and hon. Mayengo, all I am saying is that the present age of technology has availed several facilities. I do not think it is really difficult to record; what I am saying is that, I do not think, you are saying Africa is failing to get system of recording, if other countries can do it why not our country devising it because all our deliberations as Members of Parliament, I think are traditionally being led by people seriously, and if you are going to spend the next three weeks, discussing things which are not being recorded, then I would regret that.  

I would like to end my contribution on this Motion with a request that, the Chairman of the Committee on Economy should be able to liaise with these committees, these committees should be seen to be working, should be consulted, as we go on over the Financial Year.  It is not enough to say, we bring them up at the last hour or to discuss the Budget, but I think the chairman of the Economy Committee should be able to consult those various committees as the Financial Year goes on, Mr. Chairman. Thank you very much.

MR. KANYOMOZI (Kajara County, Bushenyi): Mr. Chairman, while supporting the idea of having committees we need also to reflect on the rules which are now governing us and see how we tied these things together, from section 58 up to the section on sessional committees on page 25 and through.  Because unless we do that, the reporting procedure will be a bit difficult and also leaving it open-ended so that people select where there are that permanency in those committees will be lacking.  So, I am suggesting, while I support the idea of the committees that first we formalise them so that we avoid the situation of choosing where to go and then we go out and what have you, what has been hitherto the case.  We need a form of structures so that the reporting and recording can be done probably. So, I am requesting that both the Mover of the Motion together with the committee which looks on the rules and order in the Council, do sit down and formulate how these committees should be done, since they are going either to be Standing Committees of the House.  (Interruption)

MR. BUTAGIRA: Point of information. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to inform hon. Kanyomozi on the Floor that, the point he has raised is very important, in that because the way we understand these committees, now since they are going to be standing, they are not going to be confined to only Budget Session.  They are going even to consider Bills, to consider all other business that committees in other Parliaments do.  So, in view of that careful attention should be paid to the issue of composition of who should be there, the issue of chairman of these committees is also important, so that all these committees are made to be to function like other Standing Committees of Parliament, Mr. Chairman. 

MR. KANYOMOZI:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank the hon. Butagira for that information.  So I am saying that we need to formalise these structures so that they are no longer sub-committees of the committee on the economy.  They are standing committees of the House, they will look at all the Bill coming from the Ministry of Finance, we know after the First and Second Reading, we know where to send it for the Committee Stage, and then there will be a report which will be discussed here and passed and it will lessen our work, because that expertise is needed. Secondly, Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)

MR. OBWANGOR: Point of information.  The Committees as the Standing Orders stipulate should not come from a committee from this House e.g. Standing Committee on Order, or the Economy.  It should be the Leader of Government Business having over all view of what committees the nation - you see because also the economy is affected, paper, manpower that is utilized in such Committees.  That the Leader of Government Business through his work acts in liaison consultation with these other committees, what committee it should be appropriately with the time be put  -(Interruption)

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, is the hon. Obwangor in order to continue labouring a point on which you ruled.  Is he in order to overrule the Chairman?

THE CHAIRMAN:  No, no, this is a different issue all together, proceed, please.

MR. OBWANGOR:  Mr. Chairman, my information, to the hon. Member holding the Floor of the House, is the coordination through the authority of the Leader of Government Business who coordinates, who is the Chief Coordinator of the activities of the hon. House.

MR. KANYOMOZI:  Mr. Chairman, while with all due respect to my hon. Colleague, I find his arguments very difficult. If the Leader of Government Business had known, that there was a need for this issue, he should have done it.  We have been labouring under this for two years, three years, now that we want the system to work, I feel that the House is entitled and this nation is entitled to having these committees so as to make our work efficient.  The Leader of Government Business will be informed of the procedures we have adopted, we hope he is going to cooperate with us and we move in unison with him.  So, I am not denying that the Leader of Government Business should, but I think my Colleagues is going to what was what should be - world without end Amen.  We need to look at a bit ahead and see what can be done.  

Let me also say this about recording the sessional committees; procedurally although the technology may allow us to do that the expense involved in recording all the people who come these committees may be executive.  We may take a method of work which allows various members of the committees’ statements may be to be recorded plus those who are formerly invited as they do in US conqueror.  They invite people, they give testimony, they do reporting.  I think at the moment our resources may not allow us to fully record much as we desire it, to fully record every session of the committee in full and be able to reproduce them in sort of reports that are normally done in the advanced countries.  I agree with hon. Bitamazire that in the end we may have to do that later, but we need to look at the resources, which are going to be involved at this stage.  So we will record the -(Interruption) 

MR. BYARUHANGA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor, that actually the problem is more compounded than that.  Even the writing of the minutes themselves. The writing of actual deliberations, the recording down to talk about who is the secretary of the committee, how you will write the actual contributions - because these are the most important aspects to these.  So, while the information is true, but I still see that the systems needs to be more clarified, especially, when it comes to recording what has been decided and you find that for example, the Secretary might take three (3) days writing these minutes without actually - you may not be qualified as such but I think, it is important to record all the deliberations as time goes on, instead of waiting, waiting till the last days of the Budget discussion.  That is what I am saying, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KANYOMOZI: I think that is purely administrative.  We need to make the recording efficient, we need to get the minutes out, if we have the resources regarding secretarial services, these would be done that is why I am saying we need formalised committees so that we know who the secretariats are, and how often they should report and the members who are permanent to receive those minutes and approve them, before they come up with the final report to this House.  These are the details the administrative and they should be done.  Let us first pass the Motion, get the system going, move on and deal with these administrative issues.  I know the problem the committees have.  The one that I chair, we have not been able to produce a report.  We have a report written, but we cannot produce it, and I even do not have an office yet. I have been begging for it as you know, and these are problems basing but I am sure we will live through them, and be able to move on. I am suggesting that let us formalise these committees, and then have the system going.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. D. LUBEGA (Rubaga Division, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I support in principle the Motion moved by hon. Rwakakooko, as a matter of fact, the different chairmen of the sectoral committees and the secretaries at one point of time discussed the need for set more committees to be included in our usual procedures but now as hon. Rwakakooko tabled the Motion. I think the Motion needs to be refined, and I would recommend, and strongly thought that the Mover together with, maybe, either the chairmen of the sectoral committees because that is our basis, for with the commission rules and order meet after this, it can only pass the Motion in principle, so that we can consider the logistics and details of functions of these various committees and probably the list may not be comprehensive we may have even some other committees we have been talking of a committee on legislation, he mentioned a committee for instance, on security and  that could be refined.  So, I propose that we could refine this and debate the Motion further, in details before we can pass it in the details as the mover has put it.  Thank you.

MR. NTIMBA (Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I rise to support the Motion, and I am glad that for a least one year now we have almost agreed to using the sectoral committee system.  Now experience showed that apart from the fact that almost every Member that had a contribution to make was given opportunity to do so.  Secondly, as we sit here, we represent various talents and professions, and naturally when these sectoral committees went to discuss the various aspects of the Budget last year, people went chose to go to committees which were more less related to their inclinations of professions.  For example, in a committee dealing with social services; I saw more Members of this House who are of the teaching professions, of medical professions, journalists in that sectoral committee. The contributions they made were more effective than if we were to discuss these matters in a plenary session.  

So, there is a lot to be learnt not only by Members who are contributing, but those Ministers who are charged with various responsibilities and various Ministries.  I wish to say that Ministers were able to talk with more confidence, rather than stand in a House like this where more often than not in the past many minister have tended to think they came here to face confrontation from the Back benchers Members or to be put on the red carpet because they have failed to do certain things.  

I have misgivings about the reproduction of the proceedings.  If Members can recall the latest Hansard to come out from the Government Printer, was in respect of the NRC meeting that took place around January-February, March 1988.  Now if we go into this committee system, it means there is going to be more volume of work to be typed and the chances are that it may take us five, six, seven years before what has been discussed in sectoral committee is printed in the Hansard.  I also wish to  -(Interruption)

MR. MAYENGO:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Normally, the proceedings of the committees do not appear in the Hansard.  First of all, committees do not make decisions; they only make recommendations for the House.  It is the House that makes the decision.  Those are the decisions that appear in the Hansard.  Thank you Mr. Chairman.

MR. NTIMBA:  Mr. Chairman, I am very grateful for the guidance from the hon. Member.  Again when we think in terms of discussing these matters from various committees it actually means that - and I hope we budget for this, it will mean that the Clerk to the National Assembly will be charged with the duty of producing more typist staff to ensure that the committees operate effectively.  I hope we will be able to take care of this.  Because I saw last year Members of the various committees fumbling going around towns to look for typists and things of the kind.  I thought this was a rather unsatisfactory arrangement.  I would rather think that the work of this committee should be typed and processed by the clerical and typing staff of this National Assembly.  

Finally, it is a pity that we did not have earlier warning as to the composition of these various committees.  If we had more time, maybe we would have been able to sit and deliberate on how the committees were grouped.  I have a feeling that the committees are probably too many; and considering the facilities we have, maybe, if we were to have time we could have sat down and re-organised them in such a way that instead of having as many as 10 or eleven sectoral committees, we could have regrouped them into about six making it easier for us to operate.  

As you are aware, very soon there is going to be an important national exercise, that is the Constituent Assembly Elections, and some Members of this House will want to participate in it. Now we have been told that their timetabling is going to be made in such way that when the CA is meeting the NRC will not be meeting.  Now if we can  -(Interruption)

MR. KANYOMOZI: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, the hon. Member if he was sitting during the debate on CA. the Minister for Constitutional Affairs assured us that the scheduling of the meetings of the CA and the National Assembly will be such that they do not come into conflict so as to enable those Members who would have been elected the CA to participate fully in both institutions.  So I do not know why this now comes in during the Budget.  I am wondering whether he was present or he mixed up. 

MR. KARUHANGA:  Further information. Mr. Chairman, I wish to inform hon. Ntimba from Mbarara that in fact, the more reason why we need to go in committees is that, we can finish all the pending work, in a very short time so that there is no need to invite him to come back on Bills during that time because we need a break.  Secondly, I think he is getting derailed from the point because the point is that we passed the Motion in principle, we have rules and orders, the committee that will sit together with various committees and work out the details and what have you.  But the Motion ought to be passed and then the committee is relevant for working out the details.  Thank you.

MR. NTIMBA: Mr. Chairman, I am grateful to hon. Karuhanga because he is virtually taking words out of my mouth.  I was gong to say that if we use the system of the sectoral committees, we shall be able to dispose a larger volume work within a fairly short time.  In that way, it will make easier the work of those who will be timetabling the work of the CA and the work of the NRC.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I support the Motion. 

MR. RWAKAKOOKO (Ruhama County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I would like to thank the Members of this august House, my Colleagues who have endorsed both the concept and the methodology of work which show our last year’s deliberations on Budget much more involving and much more rewarding.

I want to comment on the request to assurance required of me by hon. Raphael Bitamazire, that is on recording of the proceedings of the sectoral committees.  I think that from what we saw last year, and the way we participated in these deliberations; each individual’s submissions, deliberations were recorded in the preliminary recordings of those sectoral committees. However, when it reached the end and the Members’ deliberations were still there, with the chairmen and secretaries; what was important to record was the substance that came out of the deliberations of the various sectoral committees rather than assigning them to individuals.  Initially, in fact, if I recalled all the papers you will find what each Member of that Sectoral Committee said.  But it would have been practically impossible for the report which has now come before this House as report number four (4) of the committee on the economy to have contained what each and everybody said as if we were supposed to record them verbatim.  So I think we were interested in the points that were said without assigning names to be probably read as part of the report in history.

I would also like to make a comment on the structure of the committees.  Once we are envisaged once we pass this Motion, the committees will be the committees of this House.  They will not be the sub-committees of the committee on the economy, if that was so, there would not have been any need for me to bring the Motion here, because the committee on the economy as the standing committee of this august House could have continued to operate by co-opting Members to serve in specialised areas. But I wanted it formerly recorded recognised that this House should operate through committees so that all the business of this House comes under more scrutiny to avoid mistakes, to avoid time consumption, and therefore, to save cost.  That was the reason why I formally brought these committees so that they are directly committees of this House.

I also want to touch on the definition of the methods of work of these committees.  I agree that the committee on the rules and procedures should get involved with committees after here together with the Committee on the Economy so as to come out with the report to the House on how these committees will function. That will enable this House not only to know what they should demand from the committees but also it makes very clear on records what each Member of those committees is supposed to do, and how their proceedings are supposed to follow.  Probably at that time it will even be very clear who should submit which Budget statements to which committee, so as to avoid the problem of waiting.  Right now, this House does not have the Budget Statements, Ministerial Statements of the various accounting centres.  So, if we have this working, it will help in alerting the various accounting centres to make available their statements, and their implementation reports.  I however, want to make some corrections. 

Last year the Committee on the Economy working with sectoral committees tried to follow up the implementation of the Budget 1992/93 Budget recommendations as passed in this House, however, because of the problems, related to the fact the committees had elapsed because they were ad-hoc.  It was not possible for them to be brought in place as I did not have the mandate myself to co-opt the entire House. So, once they are regularised, they should be able to do their own agendas, and call upon those who are supposed to appear before them with due authority to do so.  So, I would like with your permission to request the Member to give maximum support to the setting up on permanent basis on these sectoral committees.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
 
(Question put and agreed to)

MOTION CARRIED

(The Council rose at 5.00 p.m. and adjourned until 2.30 p.m. Tuesday 17th August, 1993).


