Wednesday, 4 August 2010

Parliament met at 2.52 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. I apologise for our failure to meet in the morning. The minister in charge of the sector could not be found so we had to wait until now.  Therefore, we had to abandon the morning sitting. 

2.55
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance to address the House on an incident that took place at Munyonyo on Sunday, 25th of July this year.

We all remember that on that day, there was the opening ceremony for the 15th Summit of the African Union. To this gathering, most of the dignitaries in this country, Members of Parliament, ministers, cultural leaders and party leaders were all invited. I was invited but because I had more important matters pertaining to UPC grassroots elections, I could not attend; I was in the North. But I called the Protocol Officer of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and gave my apology.  

On Friday 23rd in the evening, I received a call from my party headquarters asking me whether I had an invitation card for our Party President to attend that important function. The Protocol Office of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Uganda had informed Uganda House that the card had been delivered to me together with mine. I replied in the negative, and then Uganda House went back to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs who changed the story and said the card had been delivered to the Opposition Chief Whip. 

Again, I was contacted to supply the telephone number of hon. Wadri and hon. Leader of the Opposition, Prof. Ogenga-Latigo. These two Members of Parliament did not have the card for our Party President. The cards that were brought to the Leader of the Opposition’s office were for other party leaders excluding Ambassador Dr Olara Otunnu. 

The same evening, Foreign Affairs was contacted again and they looked around and said, “The card is here because we did not know where UPC headquarters was.” (Interjections) This is the Foreign Affairs of Uganda, which has not heard about Uganda House; has not seen Uganda House. They said, “The card is here, come and pick it.” Somebody was sent, went and picked the card but without a sticker.

Madam Speaker, the invitation card is here. I brought a photocopy because the matter, which I am alluding to, is with the Police so I could not bring the original. I beg to lay the photocopy of this invitation card on the Table. People at my party headquarters were advised to collect the sticker for the car from Kololo Independence grounds the following day, which was Saturday. This was done and the sticker’s serial No.4A2 was given. A copy of the sticker is here. I lay it on the Table.

On Sunday 25th, the day of the function, my party president went there punctually. There were a number of check-points. At the first check-point, he was cleared and pushed to the next. They moved to the next check-point, he was cleared and given a clearance certificate. The clearance certificate was stamped and signed by the Director, Counter-Terrorism headquarters, Kampala. The clearance certificate is here. I also wish to lay a copy on the Table. 

My party president was driven to the next point, which was checking everybody who had this clearance certificate. People were showing their certificates and being told to drive on. But when he arrived at that point, they stopped him and started making a phone call. He asked why they were delaying him and was told that they were seeking clearance from above to know whether Dr Olara Otunnu should be allowed to proceed and attend the function.

There was a debate which took three and a half hours to resolve. As Dr Olara Otunnu was arguing with the security people, a vehicle came from behind and knocked his vehicle on the right side, dented it and went. That vehicle was number UG 0950C. It knocked the right hand side of the car and went. Dr Olara Otunnu refused to come out. As he was still arguing with the security people, another vehicle came. It had a similar number, UG 0951C and knocked his vehicle on the left and went. (Interjections) He refused to come out.

Madam Speaker, soon after, another vehicle which was labelled LL629 came directly behind and hit this car at the back on the spare tyre, smashed the windscreen, reversed and drove off fast. After two and half hours of making no progress and yet the function had begun, Dr Olara decided that he should not proceed. His car made a three-point turn and came back to Kampala and reported the incident to the nearest Police post, which in this case was Kabalagala. The case was recorded and this vehicle was directed to proceed to Naguru for inspection. They reported the case to Kabalagala Police Station, a copy of which is here, and the vehicle was taken to Naguru for inspection. 

Madam Speaker, at Kabalagala, the Police officer that recorded the case called it a minor accident. I do not know the definition of accidents, but I don’t think that when people come in their cars thrice and knock a stationary vehicle, then that qualifies to be called a minor accident. 

When this car was being knocked, Dr Olara Otunnu immediately called the Inspector General of Police, Mr Kale Kayihura himself, but when he identified himself that he was the one calling because there was a problem, Mr Kayihura switched off his telephone. 

This incident raises a number of questions; first, who was in charge of security at Munyonyo if the Inspector General of Police was irrelevant? 

Two, who was in charge of protocol if the people from Foreign Affairs who should have been at the scene to help were not there? The Naguru Inspector of Vehicles Office report is here and as I said, the matter is now in the hands of the Police. 

Madam Speaker, following this incident, there has been a lot of propaganda going on. First was that Dr Olara Otunnu was not invited to this function. 

The second, which was actually advanced by the journalists who were addressed by Dr Olara Otunnu on the same day and who had talked to the Inspector General of Police, was that the Inspector General of Police had informed them that Dr Olara Otunnu would be a threat to national security at Munyonyo. 

The third was that Dr Olara Otunnu was not accredited. All this propaganda, in my view, could be called nonsense because all the documents are here. He was invited and he was cleared; I do not know what more accreditation was required. If there was any other, he should have been advised. 

In conclusion, I would like to call upon all peace-loving Ugandans, to condemn in the strongest terms possible this barbaric, terrorist act on behalf of whoever was concerned. I think it was a barbaric, terrorist act to subject a prominent citizen of our country to an inhumane and degrading treatment contrary to our Constitution. I would like to make it categorically clear that Ambassador Olara Otunnu is an accomplished diplomat. He will never ever be a source of insecurity to this country –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Member, you have said this matter is with the Police and you are arguing the case for and against; please, I think you have made your point. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I am concluding, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, now you are pre-empting the merits of the matter.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I am saying it because he was called a terrorist. Madam Speaker, finally, for whoever was involved, I would like to say this; that we cannot stop everything, but we shall not stop the end. The end will certainly one day come. I thank you, for listening to me. 

3.10
MR MOSES KABUUSU (Independent, Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance and it concerns the water accidents -(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence to guide us in regard to the issue which hon. Okello-Okello has raised. With due respect to my colleague, hon. Kabuusu, I am not in anyway trying to eat into your time. Because of the gravity of the issues raised by hon. Okello-Okello concerning the UPC President, Ambassador Dr Olara Otunnu, wouldn’t it be appropriate that Government commits itself on record by either responding right now and/or promising when they will be able to make an official response so that we know that the whole process is complete; because as of now, it is very difficult for us to follow up in terms of commitments from the Government side. I seek your indulgence. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I will ask the government to answer to all of them.

MR KABUUSU: Madam Speaker, early in the morning of 21 July, a passenger and cargo canoe sailing from Jana Island to Kasenyi-Entebbe capsized after it knocked a rock and cracked. A total number of 13 passengers on board died. The fishermen who were coming from fishing that morning managed to pick two of them who were found alive and saved them. We have been looking for those bodies and getting one by one until we have got a total of nine bodies. Three more bodies are still missing and we are still searching for them.

This becomes a matter of national importance that Government has not come to help ever since the accident occurred. We have a Department of Marine in the Police and a Department of Marine in the UPDF and the PGB. We informed them when the accident occurred but none of the relevant ministries responded. It is the fishermen, the common men, and at least the politicians who are trying to solicit for support and who have been trying to look for these bodies.  It is the duty of Police and the state in whatever circumstance to come to the rescue of the public whenever an accident happens. I demand that the Ministry of Internal Affairs -(Interruption)

MR MUKITALE: Thank you very much hon. Colleague for giving way. Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I want to add a rejoinder. You have all been reading of the unfortunate incident on Lake Albert where we lost our people and we are yet to recover some bodies. For the last four years, I have been demanding a lakeside road. When people die from the Congo side we do not report, but there are so many incidences.

There is a market in Panyamur every Monday and every week there is traffic - people from West Nile, Bundibugyo, Kibale, Hoima, Bulisa. We are losing people because it is very expensive to move by road, because there is no lakeside road from Ntoroko, Bugoma, Kaiso-Tonya, up to Butiaba; so, they prefer to use water transport which is very unsafe.

I would like to urge the Ministry of Works to fast-track the lakeside road which afterall is actually connecting the oil Albertine area and is a very good tourism circuit. Short of that we shall continue losing our people. It is almost a weekly incident. At times when it is on the Congo side we keep quiet, but it must be addressed. I thought I should add that, hon. Colleague.

MR KABUUSU: Thank you hon. Member for that information and submission. Madam Speaker, I wanted the ministry or Government in this case to explain why, when there is an accident on water no Government official seems to be concerned; a tragedy that takes more than 20 people like you had in Buliisa or in Kalangala and not even a statement is made at the Government Media Centre; not any Government official travels, of course to share with the members who have lost relatives and friends on the water. I do not know whether the Department of Marine has no budget whatsoever to operate whenever an accident occurs. 

I am a victim of a water accident but a survivor. When we were travelling to Kalangala from Entebbe, our boat also capsized. For hours we had informed people in Entebbe, the Marines Department and the Fire Department of CAA, to come to our rescue but nobody was concerned until the fishermen themselves organised from the distant islands to come to our rescue. Is this Department of Marine still worthy to be called a department?  Does it have a budget? And if it does not have any budget, the minister should come out and tell us Parliament so that we give them an allocation to that effect.

Interestingly, there is an Inland Water Transport Control Act enacted in 1939 and which was operational in January 1939, which regulates the transport on inland water bodies. This Act has never been reviewed; there are no statutory instruments to operationalise it -(Laughter)– and this Act only talks about ferries and Government vessels. It puts conditions and requirements for a Government vessel to operate. The most popular means of transport on water are the canoes and the wooden boats, but they are not regulated. Everybody operates as they want without any guidance from the line ministries, and thus the accidents. It is a requirement that water vessels have life-saving gear. Madam Speaker, the life saving gear on the market is substandard. Many of my voters - my constituents, have bought this gear commonly known as life jackets - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Member, you are all making submissions. I thought you wanted to ask for help, but now you are talking about taxation, policy and pricing - 

MR KABUUSU: Madam Speaker, as I conclude, I will request that Government commits itself to the pledges that were made to the people of Kalangala. Government pledged a number of vessels to ease safe means of transport to the islanders. For the five years I have been here in Parliament, we have been interacting with the ministry and in the committee. There are no indications that Government will ever live up to the promises made. 

And on this note I want also to - Madam Speaker, this is your constituency. When I went to Nabuganyi, the voters were telling us that Government pledged a ferry from Kamuli to Kayunga and they have been waiting for this ferry, and that Government should of course come out and give a final statement. When will that ferry start operating to link your constituency to the mainland of Kayunga, Madam Speaker?


3.21
MR JOSEPH BALIKUDDEMBE (DP, Busiiro County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Whereas my friend hon. Kabuusu has come out clearly on this issue, I wish to make a simple supplement so that we can have other business go on.

With grief I speak on the Floor of Parliament, for the lives that were lost. Over 150 Ugandans in the last two weeks have died because of the carelessness there is on water transport. I will frankly tell you. We went to Kasenyi on 22 July, but when hon. Kabuusu and I got there, believe me you there is still a lot to be desired for all those people using water transport. I hail from Kalangala; that is my origin. I am an Omusese and so I am bound to speak for those people because I am a landlord in that area -(Laughter)- not an absentee landlord. (Laughter)

I want to very much dwell on regulation as against what is required of the Ministry of Transport and Works. Whereas it is very true that when we got to the islands there was no sign of any Government intervention, it is a thorough requirement when you visit the website of the Ministry of Works and Transport. The very first thing you are going to see there is Transport Regulation Department. What are the requirements of the Transport Regulation Department? It is responsible for initiating and developing policies.

The department is also entitled to handle aspects of inspection and licensing of water vessels. The others are to investigate accidents, which has not been done; inspect and licence passenger safety, which has not been done; and to formulate, initiate and review transport legislations to ensure provisions for effective, efficient and safe transport. You can look at what we have been told, 1939. That is the legislation and law we still have as Parliament and yet the ministry is supposed to regulate what goes on with water transport. So, I call upon the ministry to come out clearly on this. Regulation is of paramount importance. We need to come out to help our people because there are a number of people who live on the islands.

When you look at what happened on Lake Albert, over 100 people were seated in a water vessel. It got to a point that some of these people were supposed to jump off the boat but because it takes them one to three days to get off the islands, they found themselves in the boat and unfortunately they all passed on.

So, it is a general requirement that the Ministry of Works and Transport comes up with thorough regulations to offer our people who use water vessels - and the ministry should come out with a statement because we have lost almost 150 Ugandans. We call upon the ministry to come out clearly on this. Brothers and sisters in this House, let us be supportive to those people. It is not always air transport or road carnage; let us also stand out for the people that use the water vessels. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okupa, hon. Mukitale and then we shall hear from the Government.

3.26
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise here, knowing one, most of the Members may not be aware that our Clerk, Mr Tandekwire A.M. who has been sick for some time is back in Parliament -(Applause)- he reported this Monday. We must thank God for his life and for having brought him back here. To those who visited him in the hospital and at home, I think we need to thank and welcome him back. (Applause) Thank you, Members.

But I have been irked, Madam Speaker, by the document that is in my possession. That in his absence, some people seem to have not wished him well, and I want to read these documents. I will lay them on the Table. This is a letter from Office of the Head of the Public Service and the Secretary to Cabinet.

“Ref: SPH/197/230/01
10 June 2010

To: 	The Rt.Hon.Speaker
Parliament of Uganda
Kampala.

RE: Clerk to Parliament

By now, you might have received a copy of a letter, President’s Office/23 which the Principal Private Secretary to His Excellency the President addressed to me on the 10 May 2010 in connection with the above subject. For ease of reference, a photocopy of that letter is attached.

In that letter, it is stated that His Excellency the President had appointed Mr Bakwega Emmanuel as Clerk to Parliament and that Mr Kaija Kwamya Chris Abwooli and Mr Wabwire Gamusi Paul should be re-integrated into the Civil Service.

Sir, before I take action, I seek guidance from you on the following:

1.	Currently, Mr Tandekwire A.M. is still having a running contract as Clerk to Parliament with about one and half years to go. Consequently, the appointment of Mr Bakwega will mean that Mr Tandekwire’s contract has to be terminated.

2.	The other two officers mentioned in the letter, directly fall under the Parliamentary Commission and it may not be legally possible to integrate them into the traditional Public Service, let alone the fact that there may be no vacancies for them to occupy.

As soon as I get your guidance, I will take appropriate action.

J. Mitala
Head of Public Service and Secretary to the Cabinet”.

c.c. 
The Chairperson Public Service Commission, The Deputy Head of Public Service and Secretary for Administration Reform,
The Rt. Hon. Second Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Public Service, 
The Rt. Hon. Deputy Speaker, 
The Private Secretary to His Excellency the President.

I also have in my possession, a reply by the Speaker on the 21 June 2010.

“To: Mr Mitala,
	Head of Public Service and Secretary to the Cabinet.

Re: Clerk to Parliament

Your letter ref: SPH197/230/01 of 10 June 2010 refers. Other than the information contained in the above, I have not received any information on the subject.

Currently, Mr Tandekwire A.M. has a contract for the job which was issued to him at the end of 2008, although, since beginning of 2009 to date he has not been in office because of ill health, the details of which can be obtained.

Mr Kaija Kwamya as the most senior Deputy Clerk has been carrying out his duties. Mr Kaija Kwamya and George Wabwire Gamusi Paul are no longer members of the traditional Civil Service but staff under the Parliamentary Service Commission with known terms including the Parliamentary retirement benefits. I do not know whether they would accept the proposed re-integration into the Civil Service.

Currently, Mr Kaija Kwamya Chris Abwooli is a Deputy Clerk Administrative Services, Mr Paul Gamusi Wabwire is Deputy Clerk Legislative Services and Mr Emmanuel Bakwega is Director Department of Clerks.

I hope I have given the information you require to enable you to take appropriate action.

Edward K. Ssekandi
Speaker.”

cc
Rt. Hon. Deputy Speaker, 
Rt. Hon. Second Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Public Service, 
The Chairperson Public Service Commission, 
The Deputy Head of Public Service, 
The Secretary Public Service Commission and 
The Principal Private Secretary to His Excellency the President. 

I will lay these on the Table.

Madam Speaker, in our traditions and cultures, if a member of a society is sick, you do not struggle for his job. It is bad manners to say the least and a bad practice. In fact in Teso, they will even call you a witch and the elders will not forgive you unless some traditional rituals are performed. (Laughter) 

The Parliamentary Commission here is an independent body. How can someone misadvise the President? The Head of Public Service has stated here the legal issues. The Parliamentary Commission is an independent body. What message are you sending to the two senior officers who would possibly replace him if his term came to an end?  I read this in the papers, but I could not raise it on the Floor then until this date when I received this document; that is when I thought it was the usual communication – (Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Member for giving way. I am rising to give information to my colleague that one morning I read a story in the Red Pepper saying, Ssekandi, Mbabazi, split over new House clerk, and I thought it was rubbish, but as is my usual practice, I kept it. (Interjection) I have many documents with me and it takes me three weeks to offload. So, when the Member stood up I was amazed and I am here, therefore, to lay this piece of paper as part of the information that was available in that regard.

MR OKUPA: Thank you hon. Kyanjo. I always don’t take the Red Pepper seriously. I had read it but I could not raise it at the time until I got this document. 

Madam Speaker, you remember sometime back, hon. Reagan Okumu laid a list here about these regional distributions. So, with this type of behaviour, people will evoke these emotions; that is it because Wabwire is from the East; is it because Kaija is from Bunyoro. We should not allow this type of thing to repeat.

I remember –(Interjection)- whether he is from the North; but wherever he’s from. I think the Parliamentary Commission – I remember last time we had even made a proposal that the appointment of the Clerk to Parliament should be on the recommendation of the Parliamentary Commission to the President.  I think this type of behaviour again opens our minds. What type of staff are we going to have in Parliament? We are going to end up having divisions among the members of staff of Parliament if this is allowed to continue. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, in the absence of Tandekwire there has been a lot of informal tension. (Interjection) Excuse me for my height. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why don’t you come where you will be a bit more comfortable? 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, in the absence of Tandekwire, there has been a lot of bickering and tension among the staff of Parliament that I rise up to implore the Parliamentary Commission, as a matter of urgency, to have a meeting among the staff of Parliament at a certain rank and above. Because what appears in the newspaper that I read is that it was hon. Amama Mbabazi and Hope Mwesigye putting Bakwega to meet their ends. 

As Parliament, I think this is an opportunity for us to amend the laws and allow the Parliamentary Commission to be independent to even recruit the Clerk to Parliament. Because the way things are going on now, people have started picking others from the back door – to me it is an insult even to a person like Kaija. They pick your junior and they try to leap him over you and then they rush to push you into the Civil Service. This is a culture that should not be tolerated in any Government department. These are pensionable people. We have just passed the Pension’s Act; if they work for a certain number of years that is when they get pension under the Parliamentary Pension Scheme. But we are here removing these senior people and bringing cadres on board. We shall not accept this as Parliament even if it means taking a political decision. That is the little I wanted to add.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, this should not be allowed to happen. I know there are even Members who are targeting your position. (Laughter) For us, we shall do whatever it takes to make sure that the Speaker’s position remains in the East. Whether it is the Movement or whoever it is in power that seat must be that side. (Interjections)(Laughter) And Madam Speaker, no one should intimidate you because we have heard in the corridors of people who are targeting your seat. We are not going to allow this type of thing.

Madam Speaker, allow me to lay this on Table, but we shall explore it with the Parliamentary Commission to deal with these issues. We shall not allow people to jump the queue. (Laughter) Allow me lay this letter from the office of the head of Public Service and Secretary to the Cabinet, which is dated 10 June 2010, written to the Rt Hon. Speaker, regarding the Clerk to Parliament; and a copy of the Speaker’s response to Mr Mitala, Head of Public Service and Secretary to the Cabinet, which was dated 21 June 2010. 

The Minister of the Presidency is here; deal with these people who want to mislead the President because the law is very clear as stated by the head of Public Service here. They would want to take advantage of possibly the busy schedule of His Excellency to misguide him. Thank you.

3.39
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Masindi): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for allowing me raise this matter of national importance. Madam Speaker and colleagues, all is not well in Buliisa. I am speaking here because of the mercy of God. (Interjection) The honourable minister here is saying that it is because of oil, and it could be so. 

Last month, I did report here that those who were surveying oil wells and land had got protection from the Police and they wanted to arrest me for being the cause of a problem, saying that I am a security problem. Two weeks ago, before the NRM elections were to be conducted, those who had imagined I would be the candidate were working with the Police to make sure that I am arrested for inciting people. Four days before the elections, rumours were going around in the village that I was wanted by Police; that I am going to be arrested, so that by election day I am not present.

On the day of the elections, I was dumbfounded: The O/C Buliisa Police Station, ASP Muhangi Edison, from the blue appeared at the place of the elections and assaulted the NRM District Chairman, Simon Kinene, who is also the District Councillor; he assaulted, humiliated and roughed up the sub-county chairman in charge of NRM publicity; he used a baton to beat everybody – I was about 30 metres away; people ran in my direction. He came to even batter me.

ASP Muhangi Edison, who two weeks ago had said he was going to deal with me, humiliated NRM leaders, roughed them up, and assaulted them; they ran away and he followed them up to where I was and wanted to assault me.  Since I did not want the Sembabule scenario, I talked to the people to keep calm and do the wise thing of making a petition in case they have a disagreement. People moved a distance of 2 kilometres to the sub-county but the ASP, Muhangi Edison, followed them to provoke them once again to the sub-county – that they should not write a petition against him.   

I had to call the DPC who was out of the station. I do not know why on such an important day he left the DISO and the ASP to be in charge. When I called them, I told them, “If you do not restrain this man, he is provoking people to actually lynch him.”  It is the OC CID who actually came after 20 minutes and pulled this man from the community which was peaceful at the sub-county office, 2 kilometres away from the polling station where he caused the mess. The information I got then was that he and the DISO reported to a lady minister that the mission had been accomplished. 

Now, the reason why they came to follow us was that since their mission of arresting and locking me up for inciting violence had not succeeded because I was not on site, the intention was now that I should be seen to cause fracas at the sub-county and then be framed from the sub-county for causing the violence. And thank God, I didn’t. (Interjection) I will give you a chance shortly. So, they said, “If the mission is not accomplished and the MP goes to Kampala, you are in problems; if you have not arrested him, at least cause something so that he can cause a fight and if he resists arrest, just shoot him.”  That is why I am saying that I am speaking here by the mercy of God. They wanted me in Luzira; they could not succeed; by the grace of God, I was a distance away. They followed us so as to provoke us so that I could either be arrested or shot down, but it did not happen [MEMBER: “That is NRM.”]

Rt hon. Speaker and hon. Colleagues, all this is happening because of unattended to problems in Buliisa. The country is expecting oil from this region. For the last four years I have been reporting here about land grabbers here. For the last 11/2 years I have been telling you how people have since infiltrated Government secrets and all the oil wells are about to be owned by individuals. 

Madam Speaker, it was promised here last year that an investigation was going to be done on the issue of oil wells, but nothing has happened. The information we are now getting is that those who want all the oil wealth are surveying; those who want all the land in the Albertine have pushed a lot of money into the security in Buliisa and they are doing everything possible to make sure that they are in charge of the security and elected leaders in this region.  I would like to make a plea that the issues of land in Buliisa are handled immediately. 

Two, that the leakage of Government secrets of where oil wells are going to be with maximum precision, which are now owned by individuals, and which we raised here long ago and Speaker, you directed that a report be brought; and those people should be brought to book because the more we, the whistleblowers, bring this information and these people are not brought to book, the more our lives are in danger. I am speaking for national interest and these individuals are trying to make sure that those of us who raise the issues here are eliminated. 

I also want to make a plea that the OC Station is interdicted immediately and investigations are done as to why this OC says he is on a mission. He is on a mission and he has continually protected those interested in the oil wells; he has continually protected those who are surveying the land even when the President directed that nobody should attempt to secure land individually where oil has been protected. But now Government organs are moving against the Presidential directive. Is that by accident? This is something that must be handled immediately because our lives are now in danger despite our raising these matters time and again.  

Now, the District Chairman NRM and the leaders who are being arrested want to demonstrate against all these actions. Are we going to seek permission from Police in order to demonstrate? I have seen Sudanese demonstrating peacefully in Uganda and so I think my people in Buliisa have a right to demonstrate.   

Madam Speaker, I am making a plea to the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the IGP to withdraw and bring more mature people to be deployed in Buliisa because the ones who are there right now are working for some interests. 

Two, the district chairman’s vehicle delivered at a polling station a boot full of what in Lugungu we call byongolo -(Laughter)-  that is the equivalent of what the Interahamwe used to kill people in Rwanda - the militia kind of people - and that was not the OC Station’s business. 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Rt hon. Speaker. I also thank the hon. Colleague for accepting to at least clarify to us the doubts in our minds.  Ever since the hon. Member talked about a lady minister, I have not been settled in my mind. I have moved around; I have looked around; I have seen the hon. Minister for Education whom I always proudly refer to as, “Mama Education” -(Laughter)– and I now see here the hon. Minister in Charge of the Presidency, all the way from the East. Could you just put our hearts to rest so that all these female ministers who are in the House and outside do not go about pondering as to whether they are the ones or not. Could you just specify who that female minister who has put your life –(Hon. Kabakumba entered_)- in danger; could you please -(Applause)- let us know so that we – I do not know whether this is a sign that the person you are meaning is the one coming in? Well, I do not know. But put our hearts to rest because these are facts that are going to remain as official information in our copies of Hansard. 

MR MUKITALE: Rt hon. Speaker and hon. colleagues, I am reporting what my people heard; a phone call between the OC Station, the DISO and the people he was talking to; and the information which has been circulating in the community two weeks before concerning those giving directives about what should be done in Buliisa. The only person who called me about two days before the structures, to ask me how the structures were going, was hon. Masiko Kabakumba, but that was before the incident. I am saying that Government must investigate these security officials who cannot protect the people but are working for the land grabbers. Those who are interested in oil against the population and NRM leaders are the ones I am requesting should be brought to book. I am also saying that on the many issues of Buliisa which we have been bringing on the Floor, including the pastoralists report, demarcation of land, leakage of Government secrets of where oil wells are found and are in the possession of individuals with foreign interests, no action is being taken and this is putting our lives in danger. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me ask the honourable commissioner to speak briefly on the issue raised by hon. Okupa and then the Prime Minister can address the other issues. You came in late but there were others before this.

3.54
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern Region): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me just provide some brief information to this Parliament in regard to the issue raised by hon. Elijah Okupa and the two letters he has just laid on the Table. I am speaking as a Parliamentary Commissioner. One is that as per the provisions of Article 87(1), there is only one staff in Parliament who is not appointed by the Parliamentary Commission and that is the Clerk to Parliament. As far as the Parliamentary Commission is concerned, the substantive Clerk to Parliament is Mr Tandekwire because he still has a running contract. 

Regarding the two deputy clerks, there is no way you can withdraw them from the Parliamentary Commission without their consent. Therefore, the provision in that letter to me is null and void according to the law. There is no way you can withdraw any of the two deputy clerks because they are directly appointed by the Parliamentary Commission.

When the substantive Clerk was on sick leave, Mr Kaija, the Deputy Clerk in charge of Administration, was appointed as the accounting officer of Parliament. I think now that the Clerk is back, definitely the Clerk will resume all his duties and mandate as provided by law. 

I want to really say that this thing has reached the attention of the Parliamentary Commission and it is good that it has come before the tenure or contract of the substantive Clerk has expired. I want to assure this Parliament that the Commission also has the mandate of advising where necessary and the chair at the moment, the Deputy Speaker, is also part of the Parliamentary Commission. I want to assure you that we shall handle this matter expeditiously and ensure that justice is done to all Ugandans. Thank you.

3.56
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Madam Speaker of Parliament and hon. Members of Parliament, the Minister of Internal Affairs will handle the problem of hon. Mukitale and I request him to make a statement next Thursday on this matter. With regard to issues of land and oil, the ministers of lands and energy will also make statements on this matter.

With regard to our Clerk to Parliament, I am delighted that he has recovered. We thank the Almighty Creator who has sustained him and I hope that our discussion is not embarrassing him. I wish we handled it diplomatically not on -(Interjection)- ngoja kidogo - not on the Floor of Parliament. That was my view. If I knew in advance, I would have recommended that we handle this matter diplomatically, but hon. Okello-Okello is yearning to –(Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I thank the hon. Prime Minister for giving way. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

What hon. Okupa has raised is not new. I was very nearly a victim of the same kind of mercenary action. In the late 1980s, I was interviewed to become the Commissioner of Lands. I came top but my results were changed to somebody else and the arrangement was that the three departments in lands should all be headed by people from one region. The matter was put in the press and fortunately for me, the late Canon John Bikangaga was still alive and he took the matter so seriously that it cost an acting PS a job. He was interdicted and up to now he has not gone back to the office.

To believe in tribalism to me is primitive. In my view, believing in tribalism - that only your tribe can be the best in any situation - is the beginning of the world. You are so backward that you simply do not know what you are doing.

What I wanted the Prime Minister to clarify is: He is the Leader of Government Business in Parliament and this matter is happening in Parliament, was he aware? Was he consulted? What is he leading here? The letter was not even copied to him. (Laughter)

On a more serious note, I have a lot of respect for Dr Mitala, the head of Civil Service. If I were him, I would not have sought any advice or guidance from the Speaker because the matter is so obvious. The employees the letter was talking about were not under him. How do you ask me about people who are not under me? Just tell them these are not my people, full stop. This idea of fear that “I will lose my job if I do not do this” is what is sinking this country. These two letters mean that all is not well with our country. I thank you.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Madam Speaker and Members of Parliament, I want to assert that this country is not sinking and that you are secure. The Second Deputy Premier and Minister of Public Service will make a statement on this matter, again next Thursday.

Hon. Okupa has gone out but you remember you also raised another matter with me. When we get out of Parliament, I will inform you. (Laughter) The point I am making is that hon. Okupa is very practical. When he has a burning problem, he lets me know and I tackle it immediately instead of coming here and causing me to do it.
 
MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I thank the Prime Minister for giving way. The Prime Minister is speaking on record about matters of public interest. I am not sure it is procedurally right to bring on record a matter that was between him and hon. Okupa. Should we have that one on our record, because that is a private matter? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, sometimes when we have issues here, we agree to meet in the canteen and agree from there. That is what the hon. Prime Minister is organising with hon. Okupa.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for being so understanding. There was the issue of hon. Kabusu. The Minister of Internal Affairs will answer your question next Thursday. You will liaise with the Ministry of Works. The works minister is superior to him; he can summon him and they resolve the matter. He can make a statement next Thursday. Since the Minister of Internal Affairs is not here, I request hon. Migereko to notify him.

With regard to the matter of hon. Okello-Okello, the Minister of Internal Affairs will make a statement next Thursday because it must be thoroughly investigated. As you know, I coordinated the AU Summit affairs and it was my desire that we should not have any bad incident. I also instructed them to invite many of you including our Speaker and Deputy Speaker. Hon. Okello-Okello we missed you there. 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

4.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICROFINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): I beg to present a request for Government to borrow Special Drawing Rights (SDR) of US$ 33,500,000 from the International Fund for Agricultural Development for financing phase II of the Vegetable Oil Development Project.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Committed to the Committee of National Economy for perusal and they will report back.

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, I beg to present a request for Government to borrow Special Drawing Rights of US$ 130 million from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank group for financing of the health systems strengthening project. I beg to present.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before I commit it, I want confirmation that it concerns what we have been asking for. Is it on maternal health? 

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, the information regarding this request is entitled in this report. Since you are committing it to the committee, they will confirm that it is taking care of concerns of maternal health.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I directed here that that loan should come quickly; I want an assurance before we go any further. 

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, I am giving you the assurance. May I read it?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, read it.

MS NANKABIRWA: On page 3 of this document, paragraph (b), it talks about maternal and newborn services. Uganda’s maternal mortality ratio has remained high and currently it is 445 deaths per 100,000 live births. This translates to about 6,000 women dying every year due to pregnancy related causes. For every woman who dies from maternal causes, six survive with chronic conditions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is okay.

MR EPETAIT: Let us be clear on this; the request has four components. It has a component of maternal and newborn health, human resources, health infrastructure plus leadership and management. For maternal and newborn health, it is US$ 30 million; human resource gets US$ 5 million; the biggest chunk of the money goes to health infrastructure because it takes US$ 85 million; leadership and management take US$ 10 million. I thought that is clearer.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now direct the request to be committed to the Committee on National Economy and be handled expeditiously.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE COMPUTER MISUSE BILL, 2008

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, last time we had considered most of the clauses of that Bill and we differed some. Can we now hear from the minister?

4.11
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Aggrey Awori): We stood over one item regarding pornography. We were addressing the issue of pornography as to restrain paedophilias. I know my colleagues were insisting that we have an omnibus Bill covering the entire scope of pornography. Without going into details, I would rather stick to what we have now, especially taking into consideration the international conventions and best practices in the sector -(Interjection)- I was giving the Floor to my colleague from the other side, but apparently he has changed his mind because I am on the right track.

We are addressing the issue of paedophilia - people who try to misuse the computer for the purpose of perverting young minds. There are general principles regarding pornography, without going into another aspect of debate as to whether pornography should be confined to adult minds of 18 years and above – I leave that to my honourable colleague, the Attorney-General. I do not know whether they have such a thing in mind or not at all. However, as regards this particular item, I would like to say that we are only sticking to international conventions and best practices to stop the misuse of the computer for perversion of young people’s minds.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I ask the Attorney-General to say something because we had tasked him to give us the legal opinion.

4.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, this is to supplement what my senior colleague has just said on the Floor of the House. I would like to add that whereas Section 166 of the Penal Code Act of Uganda makes it an offence for a person to publish, print or traffic in obscene material, it is just a general provision on obscenity; it does not significantly deal with the exploitation of children. With the advancement in technology, there is an increased risk that children will be exposed to sexual and commercial exploitation, which is not envisaged under Section 166 of the Penal Code Act of Uganda. There is, therefore, need to protect children from the vice. 

In addition, this area has also been identified at the East African Community level as one where legislation has to strongly be made to protect children from being used to promote immorality and obscenity. Indeed, the East African Community legal framework on cyber law of 2010 requires us to legislate on the protection of children from being used to promote any form of pornography. This provision would have been properly covered in a law on pornography but that law is yet to be in existence although there is work going on to have it in place.

In the absence of a specific law on pornography, the opportunity is being taken in this particular Bill to provide against child pornography over the electronic environment in the laws regulating that environment. Madam Speaker, thank you.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Madam Speaker, thank you. I know this is one of the questions that I coincidentally orally asked and I also know that the opinion of the Attorney-General is binding on all arms of Government including Parliament. However, for Members who were not here the last time we sat, I would like to inform them that it is just one clause delaying the passage of this Bill and that is clause 20. Probably, they could have an appreciation under the Computer Misuse Bill. 

Clause 20 of the Bill talks about child pornography and it reads: “A person who produces child pornography for the purpose of its distribution and…” Our contention on this side is that we should talk of pornography and not just child pornography. We are saying this because Section 166 of the Penal Code Act of Uganda already makes it illegal for anyone to deal in pornography. So, it will totally be redundant to allow this clause pass as it is if we only limit ourselves to child pornography. To us this would mean that any person over and above 18 years can use a computer to produce blue movies, but nothing happens to them even if they marketed it to children.

I would still persuasively appeal to Members of the House that since our law prohibits pornography, whether by a child or an adult, we should better stand our ground and provide for pornography generally and not just for child pornography. I would like to insist on that, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that the Computer Misuse Bill be read for a second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE COMPUTER MISUSE BILL, 2008

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, as you recall, last time we had approved the bulk of the Computer Misuse Bill, but there was clause 20 and part of the interpretation section which remained. That section concerned the interpretation of child pornography.  Can I ask the chairperson of the ICT Committee to say something? 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chair, if I may help on this particular clause that was stood over after necessary consultations. The committee had made a presentation and in their proposed amendment they intended to put the expression, “unlawfully” after the word, “who” at the opening. That was to cover every segment of that particular sub-clause (1) up to sub-clause (e). However, you will recall that there were strong discussions to the effect that that expression properly applies to the possession rather than producing, offering and distributing –(Interjections)- It was not disposed; it was only stood over.

The proposal, after consultations, is that the word “unlawful” should best be placed under paragraph (e) of sub-clause (1). So, it would read: “…unlawfully possesses child pornography on a computer system or on a computer data storage medium…” That is where it should be placed and that is my recommendation, Madam Chair. I have discussed it with the concerned minister and the chairperson of the committee. Am I understood, Madam Chair? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Not really.

MR RUHINDI: What I am saying is that the initial proposal was that the expression “unlawfully” should come at the beginning. Look at clause 20, it talks about child pornography. The first proposal was that it should read, “A person who unlawfully…” and that the expression “unlawfully” should apply through seriatim up to (e). However, after necessary consultations, we found that it appropriately applied to the actual possession. So, if you lawfully possess that particular pornographic material, then you should be safeguarded. That is why if it is lawful possession of pornography under paragraph (e), then you are safeguarded. If it is unlawful, then of course you get penalised under that particular section.

MR NABETA: That is what we had agreed upon - that we put the word “unlawful” after the word “person”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, it is “a person who unlawfully...” 

ME NABETA: Yes, “a person who unlawfully...”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But I seem to think that we had agreed on that. We had inserted the word, “unlawfully”. I remember there was an example that if you are an investigating officer and you have to give evidence, you have to possess. I think we discussed that. Yes, we did. Okay, I put the question that clause 20 be amended as proposed.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20, as amended, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You had something you wanted to add?

MR ODONGA-OTTO: We have inserted the word “unlawful” and I think that is okay, but where does it now put the substantial issue I raised of pornography versus child pornography? I think I should be helped –(Interjection)- Yes, what it now means is a person who unlawfully possesses child pornography. So, if you do not have pornographic materials for children, then it is not an offence –(Interjection)- If the Penal Code covers everything under 166, then we just import; why are we departing from the position of the Penal Code? The Penal Code prohibits pornography in whatever form it appears. So, why don’t we just import it because it is still our law? Unless you are saying we are going to amend the Penal Code soon.

MR NABETA: Actually, Madam Chair, this particular Bill is just an enhancement to deal with issues with computers. This is just an enhancement to protect the children and an enhanced punishment for that. Otherwise, the Penal Code actually takes care of the others. This is just an enhancement and, therefore, it is just to cover an enhanced punishment to protect the children. 

MR ODONGA-OTTO: The Penal Code is protecting all Ugandans - children or adults - from pornography. So, there is no way you can say this is an enhancement of the Penal Code if you are protecting only the children. It should probably even protect the animals if you say it is an enhancement. It should go beyond what is in the Penal Code.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, you know when the Penal Code was enacted, I think we encoded it in 1900 something and there were no computers. There was pornography, but there were no computers, and so what the chair is saying is that it has changed form and you can now use computers to do pornography. So, it does not take away the Penal Code’s overall law, but now this is for those who have access to computers.

MR NABETA: We are looking at international conventions. We are modelling this law with international convention laws that we want to be signatories to as Uganda. What they looked at is that they needed an enhanced punishment particularly for child pornography because those are the most vulnerable people when it comes to computers. So, this is modelled according to the international laws just to enhance and protect the children who are the vulnerable people when it comes to child pornography. So, this is only as other international laws have been made. It has been catered to look like all the other laws we have moulded this law against.
 
MR SEBUNYA KASULE: We had debated this part of the Bill. Maybe what we were supposed to do is to go to the particular lines, but if we have already passed the particular Bill, then it is long gone because we debated it. For us we insisted on child pornography and so the debate was over. So, what we are remaining with is to go to a particular line and either pass it, reject it or amend it. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is possible that when the Penal Code was enacted there was no child pornography.

DR EPETAIT: We all agree that pornography is a vice that is unacceptable in society. We know that the Penal Code protects all. Pornography is bad. What would we lose if we just decide to open it and say “pornography” rather than specifying child pornography? If we opened it up that way, both the children and the adults will be protected? Now it is like we are accepting that pornography in the adults is a good practice. (Laughter)

MR NABETA: We are not saying that at all. We are dealing with the Computer Misuse Bill and not the Penal Code. We are, therefore, limiting our issues to only computers and, therefore, we are not saying that it is good or bad. We are saying that as we are making the law, we have looked at the model laws to cater for the issues that concern only computers. We are not going beyond that, because pornography exists in other forms beyond computers and this does not solve the problem. You remember that there was even a select committee in 2003 which was selected by this Parliament to look at the issue of pornography and they presented a report and said they are going to bring a comprehensive Bill. 

So, the solution to this is not to try to create something you cannot even enforce because pornography does exist in very many other ways. I am appealing then that the comprehensive issue should be covered in the Bill to be brought by Cabinet and for us who are dealing with computers we let this only deal with the issues of computers.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: On page 16 they have defined child pornography in clause 20. It says, “Child pornography includes pornographic materials that visually depict a child engaged in sexually suggestive and explicit conduct...” So, if these are the elements of the definition of child pornography, then I would agree with the chairman that it is enhancing and not leaving the general. We would then now need a clause that also tackles general pornography in this thing. 
	As of now, it is now risky to engage in child pornography under this law, but for the ordinary people, it is not a risky business. I think from the definition of what amounts to child pornography, this sounds like an enhancement and so I would withdraw.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay.

MR RUHUNDI: On behalf of the Leader of Government Business, we undertake that we should be coming here with an all encompassing law on matters of pornography which will even be enhancing the sentences specified for the offences under Section 166, because as I speak, they are very low. This one is specific to the computers and to children and it is to tally in harmony with what is proposed at the East Africa regional level. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that Clause 20 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20, as amended, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are they all in 20?

MR NABETA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Clause 20(1) (a), (b), (c) and (d), the committee proposes that we delete the word “system” wherever it appears in each of the paragraphs. The justification is that the word “computer” is defined and it is well encompassing. 

Clause 20(1) (e), delete the words, “...system or on a computer data storage medium”. The word “computer” also is defined and is broad enough. 

Insert a new provision in sub-clause (2) to read as follows: “A person who makes available pornographic material to a child commits an offence.” This is to make the section more encompassing. 

Clause 20(2), delete the word “visually” appearing in line 2. Clause 20(2) (a), (b), (c) substitute the word “and” with the word “or” in each of the paragraphs. Conduct may be sexually suggestive and yet not explicit to the provisions in (a), (b) and (c).  

Rephrase the entire 20(3) to read as follows: “A person who commits an offence under this section is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 360 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding 15 years or both.” The justification is to cater for the new clauses inserted and to make the penalty more deterrent. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 20 be amended first as proposed by adding the word “unlawfully” and then by the introduction of those other amendments as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

 Clause 20, as amended, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Minister, when we were debating last time, I think we said that clause 20 would have an effect on the interpretation section, including harassment and all those others -(Interjection)- Okay, I put the question that the schedule do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule, agreed to.

Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.36
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Aggrey Awori): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House do reports thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.36
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Aggrey Awori): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the committee of the whole House has considered the Bill known as, “the Computer Misuse Bill, 2008” and passed it with amendments. I beg to report. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.37
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Aggrey Awori): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the House adopts the report of the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE COMPUTER MISUSE BILL, 2008

4.37
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Aggrey Awori): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Computer Misuse Bill, 2008” be read for the third time and do pass. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that “the Computer Misuse Bill, 2008”, be read for the third time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE COMPUTER MISUSE ACT, 2008”

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY H.E. THE PRESIDENT TO THIS PARLIAMENT ON WEDNESDAY, 2ND JUNE 2010

(Debate continued.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, yesterday we gave you the opportunity to digest the State of the Nation Address so that today you can make your contributions. 

4.39
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here to add something to what the Leader of the Opposition has already highlighted. I want some clarification on the economy. We have been talking about the growth of the economy now for four years in this Parliament. However, we have not moved any further to see how this growth has benefited the population of the country. 

I think it is important for us to talk about economic development other than completely ignoring the development and just talk about the growth. This growing is centralised in a few hands of the population of Ugandans and the majority of the people – if I take the example of my people who live in Oloho and Dino - are totally poor; they live in abject poverty and yet we are talking about the growth of the economy of Uganda. 

Hon. Minister, even if I was rich like those people who are richer than their country, I think it is not right. The right thing to do is to make sure that the distribution of this growing wealth in Uganda is equal and have it seen in the oil which we talk about. Last week we were discussing oil in Uganda - it is mainly in the Greater North because Bunyoro is in the Greater North and so is Acholi – but the people whose capacity is being built to manage this oil are not from the region. This must be revisited. 

In agriculture, when we talk about 212 animals to farmers in Bunyoro, this also is not very good. My people are still complaining about the animals. Our animals have been removed, and we use our animals for farming as well as for meat and milk. So, I feel that this should be clarified. We want to know how many were given to Acholi sub-region out of the 212 animals. 

All this is under NAADS, and my people say when they watch NTV - sometimes they watch NTV because NTV covers Acholi sub-region and even UBC - they see big calves and other animals being given to farmers. In our region, you find that they take only seedlings - mango seedlings which take quite long to germinate. If you want to take things that benefit our people, you should also take those in-calf cows so that they benefit as quickly as possible.

About the petroleum, the scholarships which are normally given to people must spread and should not just be centralised in one region. The people in the Greater North should be targeted because they are the ones with the oil. Why can’t we have our students there? Those scholarships of the State House actually have eyes. Those scholarships have eyes. We do not want scholarships that have eyes; they should actually take our students so that our children are treated equally regardless of their religion or party affiliation. The scholarships come from public resources so we must treat all our children equally.

Regarding the comprehensive school in Gulu, my own opinion is that this school that targets mainly traumatised children should really be open to all because we do not need to confine these traumatised children. When are they going to be properly integrated into the communities if we isolate them? That is my feeling and I think one time I even discussed it with the honourable minister. We should try to move towards that. (Interjection)

MS NAYIGA FLORENCE SSEKABIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I stand here to support the motion that thanks be recorded to His Excellency the President for his clear and precise exposition of government policy contained in the State of the Nation Address. My areas of focus will be three: The agricultural sector, science and innovation, and then the health sector. 

I appreciate the fact that this government has consistently had concerns on value addition and His Excellency the President has always expressed himself here in our own country and outside the country on the need for us to add value to our agricultural produce. I am happy that the government is committed to see that we have things like maize mills and others to improve and to add value to our agricultural produce. However, when the maize mills are put at the sub-county level, I think that is too far from the farmers. I propose that when the government is trying to provide for this policy implementation, it should be at the parish level; that is where the farmers are and that is where they will be able to access such facilities easily.

We discussed in this Parliament the issue of the Act on the warehouse receipt system, but up to now not much has been done in putting in place these warehouses. Of recent, many people have had a high yield of maize in Kayunga and other parts of the country and it is of great concern to the farmers. Wherever we go, they are demanding for better prices. With liberalisation, it is not easy, but there was a lot of hope that if the warehouse receipt system had been implemented, the famers would be able to store their produce and be able to access some money while the prices would be improving. So, while we talk about value addition, the issue of warehouse receipt system should be given priority and in this financial year, we should be able to see some work being done in this area. 

Regarding the area of irrigation, I am happy Government is committed to address this irrigation programme. The issue of relying on weather as provided naturally by our God may not help much, as the President expresses himself. I have always given the example of Kayunga District that is surrounded by water. When people suffer from famine, the same happens to Kayunga and yet we have Lake Kyoga and the tributaries of River Nile around us. We should be able to provide food throughout the year, but because we depend on the weather, we have always also suffered in the same way. So, I want to call upon Government not to concentrate on areas where those small irrigation schemes have been, but to move as fast as possible to other areas so that we can have production throughout the year.

As for water for production for the districts in the cattle corridor, I appreciate the dams or water reservoirs so far. However, I want also to express the fact that Kayunga is always mentioned among the cattle corridor districts, but up to now, the dams we have are silted and need de-silting. We also need modern dams so that we save the lives of our livestock. Sometimes where there is not enough water, even residents in those areas can benefit from such water.

As for science, technology and innovation, I appreciate Government’s policy on this, but I would also like to encourage Government, in addition to technology in value addition, to look at research in our local herbal plants. You will note, Madam Speaker that in this country, of recent, many people are looking for products like Aloe Vera and GNLD products, which are all herbal and they are helping a great deal in alleviating people’s ailments and improving on their health. Unfortunately, here in Uganda we have all those good medicinal plants which are not being researched on properly -(Member timed out.)

MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute to the State of the Nation Address by His Excellency. I would like to thank him very much for the precise expression of the state of the nation. I think at the end we really clapped because of the wonderful things done previously and in the future.

I would like to mention something on education, health, roads and agriculture. On health, I would like to appreciate the government for trying its best to make sure that we have health centre IIIs in all the sub-counties and also hospitals in districts. However, despite Government policy to ensure that we have hospitals in all the districts, a place like Koboko up to now does not have a hospital, yet we are bordering the large countries of DR Congo and the Sudan. When you are providing health services, you cannot say that this is a Ugandan while this one is a Sudanese who should not receive services.

I would like to urge Government that Koboko now qualifies to have a hospital. We are talking about population; the one of Koboko is now over 200,000 and if you compare the number of people who come from DR Congo and Sudan to invade the OPD, you will find that our population is very close to that one of Arua Hospital. So, the people of Koboko really demand for a hospital. 

When it comes to the health centre IIIs, yes they are there but the drugs are not there. Madam Speaker, I am really embarrassed. No drugs up to the health centre IIs; what has happened to the drugs? I would like to know. At first the policy was for the medical superintendents and the DMOs at that time - now they are called district health officers - to request and buy, but now the policy has changed; it is the National Medical Stores that has to provide these drugs, but they are not reaching the health centres. I would like to find out what plans the minister has to make sure that our people have the drugs? Otherwise, these health centre IIIs have become white elephants. 

We also need the health centre IIs, which are very close to the people, to be facilitated with at least two midwives so that if there is a woman in labour who cannot reach health centre III, she could be assisted by the midwife there. It is a policy but it has not been implemented. The problem is that we have good policies; we have good laws, but implementation is very poor.

That is the same thing with education. We have a plan of having at least a government-aided secondary school in each sub-county. But up to now, in Koboko where we have three sub-counties, since the beginning of 2006, we have been requesting Government to provide seed schools for these three sub-counties but it has all been in vain.  Every year, I see seed schools, but none is built in Koboko. I need Government to explain clearly how they select the latest sub-counties to be given Government-aided secondary schools. We have the schools; we have the teachers; we have everything; but we are never selected. Let me give an example of Koboko Technical School. It has the infrastructure, it has the students, but Government has not taken it. Instead, Government decides to go to the neighbouring district where they start from zero, yet for Koboko, we have everything. 

So, I would like to know the criteria the minister used for selecting these seed schools and schools to be supported by Government. Otherwise, for us in Koboko, we are at a loss. I do not know whether we are still suffering from Amin’s regime effect; I still need an explanation. When it comes to Koboko, we are treated as last citizens. (Interjections)

Madam Speaker, they are talking about the roads. The road we have been talking about since -(Member timed out.)

4.55
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Independent, Woman Representative, Dokolo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute to the President’s address to the nation. I want to thank the movers of the motion for giving us the opportunity to read the President’s mind on matters that pertain to governance, economy and security of this country. 

First of all, allow me to congratulate you upon being elected at the grassroots as the leader of Kamuli on the Movement ticket. I would also like to congratulate several other people who were elected.

I would like to comment on two issues. About the economy, I have read the President’s speech and it contains - in this booklet, there are 55 pages. Thirty-two pages have contributed to the economy alone. That shows that the President is focussing more on the economy than anything else. That is very unrealistic.

However, as nationalists, as leaders of this country and representatives of the poor, it is very important for us to analyse the President’s speech and guide the policy of the country to fulfil the interests of the people we represent. In the 32 pages that the President talked about the economy, nowhere did he mention how he would improve the welfare of the poor; nowhere did he mention about the farmers. If anything, we have been dwelling on false hope. The President thought that the lot of the poor would be improved through the NAADS programme and so on. It has now become a reality that the NAADS programme has failed. In other words, the common man has lost hope.

Secondly, I think many of us read the publication of the Ministry of Finance. I was looking at one of the publications about the performance of the economy. You find that services contribute 50.7 percent to the GDP; 25.5 percent is from industries and only 14.6 percent is from agriculture. 

Madam Speaker, you are a rural lady. I know your background. The majority of the people in Kamuli are poor like the majority of the people in Dokolo. I want us to focus on the people who own the resources; the wealth of this country. It is the people who contribute 50 percent to the GDP and the ones in the industrial sector who contribute 25.5 percent, yet 80 percent of our population live on agriculture? Their contribution to GDP is only 14 percent.

It is a very serious matter and to make it worse, we, as Parliament, have laboured for many years to make sure that the National Planning Authority becomes a reality. The National Planning Authority had presented a document to guide Government and in that document, which all of us have, the National Planning Authority this year recommended that the budget for agriculture must go up by 6.6 percent. But in reality, it is not the case.

Allow me to look at the budget proposal.  The Office of the President alone is Shs 97 billion. That is Vote 001. Vote 002, which is State House, is Shs 76 billion. So, the budget for the Presidency is Shs 173 billion as opposed to agriculture, which is hardly Shs 80 billion. Agriculture, which is practised by 80 percent of the population, is given Shs 80 billion. The Presidency alone - State House and the President’s Office are given Shs 173 billion. (Member timed out.)  

5.00
MR LARTIF SEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My first issue will be on agriculture. Indeed, it is true that our economy depends on agriculture. It is the backbone of our economy. We know that many Ugandans earn their living through this sector. It beats my understanding that having recognised the fact that this is our backbone - the State of the Nation Address and the Budget as my sister has said - this is not reflected. There is no way we can admit that we are depending on agriculture when we are just paying lip service. Government has not done enough to ensure that this sector is strengthened.

In the State of the Nation Address, NAADS was repeated several times and I remember - I do not know what happened to the other terms that we used to have when Government was trying to tell us that they were ready to ensure that agriculture moves to higher horizons. Remember very good words like Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture (PMA) from hoes to tractors etc. You remember the Poverty Eradication Action Plan. All these programmes were under agriculture. I believe we are doing a very big disservice to Ugandans because there is no way we can continue lamenting that our country depends entirely on agriculture when we have not done enough to ensure that we inject enough funds in this sector. We are in a country where a hoe is shared by families in the villages. We cannot even empower our villages to have enough hoes. I am not advocating for hoes, because they told us that we are going to move into modernisation of agriculture, but where are we if we still have situations where a hoe is shared by families? 

Secondly, the unemployment level in this country is alarming. In other countries where they experience unemployment problems, there is a design where governments sweet-talk other governments elsewhere and indeed a policy for labour export comes into existence. If we cannot have a policy where we export our skilled and semi-skilled Ugandans - we have renowned countries like Nigeria where that kind of policy is; people go to the UK and other countries officially sent by the government. I was in the UK a week ago but the complaints that I got from the Ugandans living in the UK were stressing. We are aware that even these remittances from abroad are budgeted for in our Budget and we always tell the nation that we are getting a lot of money from our brothers and sisters from abroad, but when it comes to recognising them - they told me that whenever they come back to their country, when at the airport, they feel like they do not even want to come. They are not recognised as people who are contributing greatly to the economy and they are mistreated at the Entebbe International Airport, and many of them are saying, “We shall never go back to Uganda because of the mistreatment.” They are asked various questions that really demoralise them. 

Madam Speaker, I believe that for a situation where unemployment is a very big problem and in a situation where we could have a policy in place for exporting labour - I will encourage the line minister to ensure that we have this kind of arrangement. Ugandans go abroad on a clear understanding with other –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, just to augment the point made by hon. Sebaggala, when you arrive at the Airport in the Philippines, there is a special queue for the Philippinos who work abroad. They do not go with the ordinary “Basoga”; they are in their own queue and they are given first class treatment. (Laughter)

5.06
MS OLERU HUDA (Independent, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute to the debate on the State of the Nation Address. I have some few concerns that I want to raise, about power and energy. In this booklet, there is a clear network of where the power will be connected. The route to West-Nile will enable power to reach Arua, Maracha and Koboko. Maracha is less than a kilometre to Yumbe but Yumbe is not mentioned. Not even to say that maybe after two or three years, this power will reach Yumbe from Maracha. My people are asking, what is happening? We would like to know. You should put it formally in writing for the interest of the people in Yumbe.  

When Yumbe District Local Government had not been considered under PRDP, GTZ provided for Shs 500 million and the district allocated 20 percent of their budget to provide solar energy, basically for the hospital. But the Ministry of Energy refused and they said that the district local government and GTZ must not continue with that project. How can a hospital operate without power? That is a concern that I feel must be answered.

Concerning roads and transport, we have hope that the tarmac will soon reach Arua–Koboko, still leaving Yumbe out. Whether you want it or not, as a human being, you will be jealous. Everything is just taking the route to Koboko and Sudan and yet we are nearby. What is happening? What is wrong with Yumbe? What have the people of Yumbe done that such amenities cannot be extended to them? The concerns I am raising are from my people; they are not my own interests.

The feeder roads which were taken over by the Central Government are now impassable. When we talked to the local governments, they said that these roads were taken over by the Central Government, which is not doing anything about that condition. This is a time for campaigns and our vehicles cannot even move 5 kilometres before they are off the road. It is a challenge. I do not know what we are going to do and I think this is not only for Yumbe; it might be for the whole country. 

Madam Speaker, another thing is the partial rehabilitation and upgrading of the hospitals. In the State of the Nation Address, many of these hospitals have been mentioned in several other districts but still Yumbe is not included. Yumbe hospital right now is in a terrible state and I hope the Minister of Health is here. I have been coordinating with him and thought he was going to give a promising message, but for five months now, my district has not received drugs from the medical stores. I do not know what is happening. (Interjections) Yes, we stopped receiving drugs in March. Since then, we do not have any drugs in the hospitals. It is a very big challenge. 

Lastly, about justice, we were at a PRDP meeting in West Nile where all the PRDP districts were gathered and in our discussions, we found out that –(Member timed out.)

5.11
MS SUSAN NAMPIJJA (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am going to focus on the petroleum sector on page 17 of the booklet. Many people are very excited about the petroleum sector, but I think there is nothing to be proud of, until the following is done. The public hearing on the environmental impact assessment report on oil made several recommendations which NEMA and Tullow Oil have never fulfilled.

It was supposed to guarantee that oil production will not disrupt the ecological order of Lake Albert, Lake Edward, Lake Kyoga and Lake George. It was also supposed to guarantee that wildlife, including birds in the Albertine region, would remain safe. Out of 1,000 bird species in the country, that area alone harbours 400 species.

It was also supposed to guarantee the disposal of waste to protect agricultural practice in that area. Over 30 percent of the population in the Albertine region largely depends on agricultural production. So, I think if there is improper disposal of waste, it can affect the agricultural practice in that area.

Why am I worried? According to the State of the Environment Report of 2008, before oil production begins, activities like construction, mining and pollution being carried out, can drastically affect the biodiversity in the Albertine region. We should do something about this; otherwise, we are bound to suffer serious negative environmental consequences as a result of oil production.

I would also like to know the government mission on oil production. On page 18, the President said that 75 companies so far have been licensed to carry out work on oil production. But I am wondering because I do not know who is going to cater for Uganda’s interests in oil production before the oil parastatal is officially initiated. 

We are in trouble because currently, we do not have the oil and gas production law.  I think it would be prudent to postpone the oil production until everything has been done -(Interjections)- yes. All the requirements should first be met before we start oil production. Otherwise, we are bound to face danger. You heard the honourable Mukitale from Buliisa. If we do not find a solution, our country will suffer.

On page 4, where the President was very happy about the economic growth rate. However, there is nothing to demonstrate that the economy is growing because in fact there is - I would like to ask –(Member timed out.)

5.17
MS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the mover of the motion, hon. Obua, the two seconders, and honourable members for your constructive comments. We have spoken; it is upon the Executive to pick up what our concerns are.

In this regard, I would like to talk about the issue of transport. I do not know what mind the Executive has on the issue of transport and above all public transport, especially transport in the city.  I do not know what plans there are by Government to improve transport in the city. Government has deliberately left the issue of transport in the city to City Council. It is not thinking about widening the roads. It is not thinking about having dual carriages. It does not have plans to even have well-developed infrastructure as far as the city is concerned.

Hon. Members, we are lucky because we move in our own cars, but if you took trouble to go to the park and see what Ugandans living in Kampala City are using as a mode of transport, you would honestly shudder. I want us to take keen interest in the welfare of the Ugandans we represent.  Public transport is a complete menace. I really wonder why Government has completely ignored the lowly of this country who use public transport. What plans do you have for them? 

On rail transport, when you move in urban cities worldwide, one of the things offsetting jams in the cities is rail transport that carries as many passengers as possible at a go.

There is also the issue of water transport. Madam Speaker, we have waited for the issue of - even our boat, the ferry of Kamuli; you are very passionate about this and we are grateful for that. We have waited and waited. All these things are not moving and what is Government thinking about public transport? That is why we see boats capsizing because of overloading. A boat meant to carry 50 people carries more than 100. What are Government plans on water transport and transport in the city and above all the traffic jam? We are fed up of using a lot of fuel in the traffic jams. When you are going somewhere, you should give yourself three hours in advance in order to get there. So, I think this is a matter that Government has to take keen interest in. 

The other issue I will comment on is energy. You will agree with me that only 3 percent of this country is electrified; only 3 percent. The 97 percent rely on fuel and charcoal for cooking and how much effort has the Ministry of Energy made in order to have Ugandans use gas as an alternative? This definitely is stressing the small percentage of natural resources we have, above all, the wood, and yet the Ministry of Water and Environment is not matching up to the standards of having more trees planted to fight the issue of charcoal burning and cutting down of trees for cooking. 

If we had gas or electricity - it is very expensive for ordinary Ugandans to afford. Possibly Members of this House can afford it, but what about the ordinary Ugandan, and yet fuel, the gas in particular,  outside there is very cheap and almost everyone can afford it, but yet here we are relying on charcoal burning. 

Charcoal burning has become an economic activity. As you drive out of Kampala, even the water stressed areas where there is no rain are burning all types of trees for charcoal; all tribes of charcoal. You get bags lined along the road as if they were attracting tourists. I think Government should take interest in this. 

In Naivasha, just after the border, they are concentrating on geothermal. We still have active volcanoes in Western Uganda. How much effort has Government made in order to make sure that we progress other than relying on charcoal burning and having only 3 percent of the country relying on electricity? I think after 24 years, we should be progressing instead of just moving and marking time.

My area has black soil. Madam Speaker, the soil is as black as that chair you sit on but give us three years and possibly this soil will be wasted because it is being stressed. The trees are being cut down; rains will be affected and what will the common man remain with? The soils will not be productive because of lack of rain. 

Of course, this now brings me to the issue of agriculture. How do I marry this? According to the State of the Nation Address –(Member timed out.)

5.23
MR ROBERT KASULE SEBUNYA (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity and I also thank the Members for their contributions. I would like to thank the President for the well documented speech he gave despite the gestures he used that maybe the Opposition did not like; but read verbatim, this speech is very good. It is a one year’s road map; it is not a document that encompasses a 10-year programme or something like that. It is a one-year plan. So, we should discuss in the context of a one-year plan. It is comparable to the past years, to the present and maybe the future. 

So, we should be very positive about the President’s speech and I thank the Members of Parliament and the Speaker in particular. I was agonised and felt bad when they gave you less days in Parliament than Members who sit here. We should thank ourselves because we have contributed to this development -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You mean they were grading me as well?

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Much less days than even some Members of Parliament in the score card. I think that was a controversy. To go to the point, I would like to applaud the President for pointing out all the issues with figures attached. What has disappointed me is the way the Leader of Opposition responded to the President’s speech. Other than going verbatim using the official booklet of the speech, they used the Hansard where laughter and gestures were recorded; but I hope next year, they follow the speech verbatim and respond to it point by point.

I would also like applaud the President about the plan for agriculture where figures were given. We have heard of increased food security, but as Members were discussing, I pointed out that they were agonising for agriculture not knowing that agriculture contribution to the GDP is unaccounted for. Many of the farmers produce food for their own food security and it does not go through the markets. So, it cannot be captured in these figures of GDP as we expect. Therefore, much of the food Ugandans produce is unaccounted for, but that does not mean that Uganda is food insecure or that people are not digging the way they are doing, tilling this land and making Uganda safer and food secure.

I will also talk about the capacity of Ugandans to produce food that could keep them safe. If you all went to the gardens and we tilled the land instead of maybe going for “ekiggunda” of the year, we would produce food that the rest of Africa could feed on.  The only problem is the marketing. We do not have markets where this food should be sold. Too much food is produced in Uganda. Only recently, much maize was on the market and yet people are complaining that Ugandans are not cultivating. We have too much food. If Ugandans went to dig, maybe we would produce so much food that the rest of Africa would feed on. Government could look at this as the advantage we have in the region, now that many countries are insecure.

Lastly, it is still the way the response of the Opposition was structured. It reads much of a sad story for Uganda and yet the figures here are even proved by some of the activities we see. If they mentioned Namulonge as a centre of excellence recently developed for rice, we can verify. It is in my constituency, but when we read the story of the response, it is much of a sad story. So, I would compel the Opposition that in future, please, when you are responding to what the President has said, give alternative figures or alternative direction where Uganda should go other than discussing the applauses and laughter -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it seems those are the Members who wished to contribute. Twenty five Members have contributed. I want to ask the Minister of Education to respond, first, to the issue raised yesterday on bringing forward the closure of the second term. (Mrs Beatrice Wabudeya rose_) Okay, we start with the Minister for the Presidency.

5.28
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (PRESIDENCY) (Mrs Beatrice Wabudeya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise in support of the motion and I wish, therefore, to register my appreciation to the President for the clear and elaborate address on the state of the nation.

The President clearly went through all sectors bringing out accountability of what has been done and it was unfortunate for the Leader of Opposition to state that the President’s address was highly partisan. It is unfortunate because credit should go where it is deserved. The NRM Government has performed and they need to get credit for the performance. 

I would also like to disagree with the Leader of Opposition when he criticises the President on page 3 and 4 for focusing on the community. I wish to inform the House that indeed the President of the Republic of Uganda is a people’s person and he has always, therefore, interfaced with the community in real terms, and when he makes reference to the community, he is actually doing it passionately because that is where he spends a lot of his time.

To put the record right, on page 15 of the response by the Leader of Opposition, where he states that the original number of families targeted under Prosperity-For-All was 30 per parish, I would like to correct this record and say that originally the numbers were 30 per sub-county and actually because we wanted to focus on the parish, we took an average of five parishes per sub-county and we said six persons per parish who would eventually add up to around 30 people per sub-county. So, I would like to correct that record and misinformation that came out through the Leader of Opposition.

It is not true that the President has abandoned the Bonna Bagaggawale programme for NAADS. From the very beginning, the Bonna Bagaggawale or Prosperity-For-All programme was actually designed to have a number of components that included NAADS, microfinance, SACCO formation and value-addition or industrialisation. So, in reality, there is nothing that has been abandoned. The programme for Prosperity-For-All is going on and this afternoon, I heard Members saying that NAADS has failed. NAADS has not failed; it has had challenges but we are on the ground and I think the population out there is quite happy. All we need to do is to fine-tune, address the challenges that come along with implementation of any programme and NAADS will surely deliver Prosperity-For-All in this country.

I would also like as I finish, to re-state that the Prosperity- For-All programme was indeed a big issue in the Presidential/NRM manifesto of the last elections and there is no way we can separate the manifesto from NAADS and we shall continue pushing for Prosperity-For-All until the people are delivered. So, in other words, the local people - the poor people, have a serious programme for themselves as is being delivered by the NRM Government and I am sure success will speak for itself.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (WATER)(Ms Jennifer Namuyangu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank my colleagues for the comments on the State of the Nation Address.

I have about five issues to respond to. The first one was by hon. Grace Byarugaba, about the dams that we have constructed in Isingiro District. It is true the construction company called Omega abandoned the site in Obwongyerero and Kagamba, but they had done about 98 percent and what was remaining is stone pinching, landscaping and completing the inlet channel which was within the road. This was because the catchment area for Obwongyerero dam is on the opposite side of the road; we had to construct an inlet channel within the road and we did a by-pass. 

So, what the ministry has decided to do is to take over and sub-contract this work to another company to complete it and within two months, up to September, we expect to handover this facility after its completion. 

The other issue was by hon. Alex Byarugaba, concerning why the ministry has chosen to construct big reservoirs instead of moving in to do rainwater harvesting. Dams and valley tanks are another way of harvesting water and the reason we decided to develop these big facilities was that we are developing multipurpose reservoirs which are not only going to be used for watering animals, but also to answer the issue of irrigation and also support our people in terms of providing them with water for domestic use in these areas. So, we have developed four dams and valley tanks: Kagango, Kagamba, Obwongyerero and Rwenjubu. These facilities are good for the people. Equally, we have also tackled rainwater harvesting at household level through an NGO called ACODE, which is operating in Isingiro and the greater Bushenyi. We also have other NGOs like NETWAS, which is also operating in other districts like Kamwenge and other parts of Uganda. We have also set up a demonstration centre in Mukono specifically to develop technologies in rainwater harvesting. 

The other issue was from hon. Nayiga about the valley dams and tanks in Kayunga district, which is also in the cattle corridor. It is true my ministry selected 100 dams and valley tanks throughout the country, including those in Kayunga. We have some facilities in Galilaya. We have already finished the feasibility study. We have done the design, but we have been handicapped by the small resource envelop and that is why we have not yet done the dams in Kayunga; but I can assure my honourable colleague that this will be done as soon as we get the money. 

The other issue is from hon. Nampijja about petroleum and how it is affecting the environment. I want to give her assurance that my ministry through NEMA and the Directorate of Water Resources is working very closely with the Ministry of Energy and the oil companies to ensure that the environment is not polluted. We have been supported by the Norwegian Government to train our people in oil and gas and this will be handled because we all have the interest in it. 

Lastly, about irrigation, this has been mentioned by hon. Namayanja, hon. Nayiga and others. My ministry and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries are working closely to develop irrigation schemes under the support in the project referred to as Farm Income Enhancement and Forest Conservation, which was initially targeting development of small irrigation schemes. Government resolved that we develop bigger schemes, which include Doho, Olweny, Mubuku and Agoro, so that we are able to do irrigation. But we are also developing the irrigation policy, which will eventually cover the whole country because it is the only way to go other than depending on rain fed agriculture. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

5.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Mr Henry Bagiire): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to respond to an issue that was raised by the Leader of Opposition, where it was expressed that there was a shift in the number of families targeted for the support under Prosperity-For-All, from the original 30 families per parish down to six in 2008, and now to what was described as a very attractive and hope building 100 farmers per parish, which he insinuated to be targeting the election period.

It is not true that the implementation of NAADS at one point targeted 30 farmers per parish. I think it was explained by the Minister for the Presidency that it was six farmers per parish and the six farmers per parish would come to about 30 farmers per sub-county because it is known that the average number of parishes per sub-county is five. 

Originally, in what they call the first NAADS, it was not targeting individual farmers, but groups, and these groups had demonstration gardens or demonstration enterprises where farmers would go as a group and learn. 

Later, we started targeting six farmers per parish, but there has been a call by the farmers - when we go to monitor, the ministers and the President, that the six farmers are too few, and also that the selection criteria eliminates the very poor because the criteria targets people who would help others to come and learn from them and that this ends up targeting people who have already done something. Against that background, the ministry and of course with consultation of the President, took a decision to see how they would review it and help more than the six farmers per parish, and that is when it was suggested that this time round, we should target at least 100 farmers per parish. This is also commensurate with the budget that we have been given because a lot more money has been put into the programme.

Last time, when we had not gone with the six farmers, the money that was allotted to the programme was only targeting advisory services; but this time round, there is a component of inputs being given to the farmers. So, this is as a result of lessons, challenges and gaps that we have seen over time in the process of implementing the programme, which has compelled Government to think otherwise; to see to it that it covers and reaches a lot more people.

Right now, under the six farmers, it was a real enterprise where farmers were looking at losses and profits. They were looking at what they would gain out of what they are doing. But previously, under NAADS, it was just technology; the farmers were just looking at it to learn. They were not looking at it as a business. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.43
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Geraldine Bitamazire):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to request your indulgence that I start by making a statement on the issue that was raised on the Floor about the review made in the school calendar for this year. And then I will go on to answer a few questions which were raised on the education sector. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I had already given that instruction that you start with the school calendar. 

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I would like to make a statement on the issue of the review of the school calendar for 2010. You may recall that Government started implementing the Universal Post Primary Education and Training programme about four years ago.  This year, 2010, the first cohort of USE pupils will be sitting their O’Level national examinations. In November 2009, the Ministry of Education and Sports issued a schools and other institutions calendar for the school year, 2010, indicating when terms would start and end.

During the months of March to June 2010, the Uganda National Examinations Board carried out registration of all candidates who will be sitting their O’Level examinations. For Government, this is a critical year because the first cohort of USE will be presented for the first time for that national examination. 

A total of 103,822 candidates have been registered in 1,152 UNEB Centres under USE, out of the total of 264,560 candidates registered in the entire country. So, about half are going to be pupils from the USE Programme.

On 10 June 2009, the Ministry of Education issued a circular No.18/20 on the guidelines on the conduct of USE examinations in 2010 in light of the USE policy, and that copy is attached. In the circular, the headteachers were required to make the necessary adjustments in their school programmes to free space that will be needed for candidates during the examinations. 

Given the overwhelming numbers registered in the USE schools and particularly the schools implementing double shift teaching, the headteachers of the majority of schools requested the Ministry of Education and Sports to come up with guidelines which would provide for a uniform adjustment of the school programmes to ensure that UNEB examinations are conducted in a conducive atmosphere while at the same time the rest of the school and pupils do not lose out. 

Consequently, it was resolved to review the school terms for only post-primary institutions to ensure the following:

1.	End of Term II is brought forward by one week, from 13 August 2010 to 6 August 2010.

2.	Beginning of Term III 2010 is brought forward by two weeks, from 6 September 2010 to 23 August 2010. This in effect would mean that Term III days were increased from 89 to 103 days while Term II days were reduced from 89 to 82 days. 

3.	More teaching time is provided in Term III to prepare for the national examinations and for the rest of the pupils, particularly those who will be asked to remain at home during the examination period, in order to provide for adequate space and facilities for the examinations. 

A question was raised as to whether there is any possibility for the Ministry of Education and Sports to refund parents who had fully cleared school fees and other requirements for the full term. The answer is no, because while Term II was reduced by one week, Term III has been increased by two weeks and all the fees remain the same.  

The next issue was, what justification can the minister give for the early closure of the schools by her ministry? The justification was provided in our circular to schools; that is circular No.11/2010 as has been expounded above. I will refer the Members to the circular which is attached.

Schools are encouraged, when the term begins in the middle of the month, to work closely with parents in order to ensure that students start the term as prescribed and parents meet their school fees obligations where applicable when they are in position.

Hon. Members might also need to appreciate that this is not the first time a school term starts before the end of a month. It has been done before and we do not have many problems arising out of lack of school fees. That is why we are advising the headteachers to work with the parents where it happens.

I would like to draw the attention of Members, as I conclude on this statement, to the attached papers: Appendix 1, Circular No.18/2009, guidelines on the conduct of USE examinations in 2010 in light of the USE policy. This was written on 10 June 2010, to guide teachers on how they should re-organise their programmes to make sure that there is room for the examinations. The specifications by UNEB are standard and if we do not take those standard specifications, we get into problems of cheating and malpractices. So, Appendix 1 is doing exactly that and our headteachers were given such instructions. Appendix 2 is circular No.11/2010 addressed to all headteachers on 20 July 2010 indicating as I have stated above, the changes which we are proposing. 

As I conclude, I would like to say that this country is lucky that we are getting through our system a large number of young people under the USE, but as we move, we keep on improving the facilities we have around us.

Secondly, I would like to point out that we are working with the private sector. Over 600 schools are helping or supplementing Government efforts to offer this programme, but we are also at the same time, as we run the program, building the facilities and capacities to ensure that we can administer a valid and reliable examination to this group of people under that programme.

As we are taking this for the first time after four years only since its implementation, we are at the same time building capacity in terms of facilities and capacity to monitor and run a massive examination with such large numbers. Therefore, those are the main reasons why we thought we could re-adjust so that we do not lose time. The days of study remain the same, but we want to have the students at school so that they do not have to run around for coaching and holiday teaching. They will rest at home for two weeks and come back to school with their teachers; do the revision; get settled; organise themselves for the examinations; and then the rest of the school who might have to go home where the facilities are not adequate for the examination class, also don’t lose out. I beg to submit and thank you.

Having made that statement, I would like to respond to the question, which was raised yesterday and mainly that was after -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, sorry. You know I have not understood what efficiency would be gained by shortening the second term and lengthening the last one. I have listened, but I don’t see the logic in this. Why are you shortening the second term to make the third one longer?

MRS BITAMAZIRE: What we are looking at is mainly the USE programme. These are young people who are participating or taking their examination for the first time. We have gone around the country and there is a lot of panic and excitement especially in the rural areas. We are saying, instead of running around as we have done with coaching individuals during the holidays, if we made the holiday shorter and gave an extra week or ten days for those students to rest for two weeks and come back to school with their teachers and books and do their remedial work at school, it would be easier than the panic that is now being caused in the country.

MS EKWAU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am speaking in the context of a teacher at St Mary’s Kitende above all. By May, we have covered the syllabus and we give teachers who have additional work, time to replenish the students and really take them through areas where there are gaps. Most of the work as a teacher is done between first and second term for the candidate classes, especially for those who will have had problems in their earlier levels of education.

Third term is virtually for going through very many sets of exams from various past papers. By the time you give more time - we need more time earlier in first and second term. In third term, we are done with the work. So, I don’t think you make some of these decisions after consulting the teachers. Don’t come with policies for the ministry that will not benefit the country.

You very well know what students go through. Some of them miss very many stages earlier on so there is need to competently and repeatedly test them in order to bring them up to standard to compete with the Gayazas, Namagungas, Greehills - mention all of them at all levels. So, you may be requested to go and review your policies. I don’t know whether it is because of elections or for whatever reasons, but all we require is time for first and second term, not third term. In third term, we virtually go to sit exams and prepare the students on examination techniques and how to be confident to write exams. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I am seeking has already been touched on by hon. Ekwau. The responsibility for education rests with the government, teachers and students. This policy has raised a lot of concern amongst the parents and teachers. The clarification I am seeking from the minister is, was there consultation before this decision was taken, because it has caused a lot of concern?

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is as a result of poor communication. When the year begins, the ministry has what we call the educational year and in fact even the calendar is issued out to various schools showing the academic year and how it is going to run.

All schools were issued with this arrangement; when to break and when to open. It is really very disappointing that there were very many schools that were working within the conformity of these guidelines from the Ministry of Education and the timetables were drawn long before. When the ministry issued a fresh calendar or timetable, the exams were already in progress.

I would like to ask the minister what is going to be done to schools that have failed to comply because of their earlier engagements. Now, students are still doing exams; for example, in my school, the headmaster tried his best to ensure that he conforms to this directive but he failed and the exams are going to end on Wednesday. So, the school will continue till then. I don’t know whether the minister will come up to work on the schools that have defied the ministry.

Secondly, I think the ministry should really throw more light, because if the argument the minister is giving is that we have so many students who are going to sit exams under USE or UPE programme - we have so many private schools and in fact private schools greatly outnumber UPE and USE schools. It would have been a little bit fair if the ministry had communicated earlier to USE and UPE schools about the arrangement and how it is going to work, and that communication was also forwarded to the private schools that please, for us we are going to do this, but if you cannot accommodate your programmes in ours, then you are allowed to continue and end the term as earlier communicated to you.

I believe that failure of this kind of communication has really led to so many school programmes being cut and indeed we know third term is a very tricky term and many programmes have not been worked on simply because of that kind of arrangement, which was so abrupt.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, I want you to satisfy me. How will the shortening of this term help prepare the children for these exams? I have failed to make sense of what you have said. I am sorry but I can’t make sense of this. I don’t see the rationale, I have still failed maybe you need to help me further.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The first comment and observation was why not cover the syllabus during the term of the four years? Well, examples have been given about schools like Namagunga and others in that category where everything else is set and surely these schools can afford to start on the first day and use all the time and facilities, which they have to cover the syllabus. But I would like to draw the attention of Members to schools all over the country now totalling about 1,500 where we are running and implementing this programme. Not all the schools have got all the facilities, which can enable them to maximise what we call the time on task.

Some students come late, others have not got the facilities and have to share, and we are trying to cope with this situation to ensure that we at least meet the objectives of the programme. So covering the syllabus would be the ideal but taking into account the constraining factors in some of the schools, it is becoming very difficult causing some anxiety among the teachers and students. We have been giving guidelines all through to help these teachers and schools to meet the expected learning time and process, but many of them have found some problems. We are trying to accommodate those schools with such problems to ensure that they complete the syllabus, but at the same time they organise and get their students ready for the examinations.

The second question from hon. Okello was whether we had consulted. The circular was given in June with guidelines after teachers had indicated that they did not have the space, books and teachers. Therefore, we have the guidelines that will create space for examinations. That circular was given after consultations had been made. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Madam Minister, the circular is here. How does shortening the term help create space? Will they buy desks in that short holiday, because it does not add up?

MRS BITAMAZIRE: We are planning as we have always done with PLE to send non examination classes home during the examinations. We do that for PLE and we leave the P7 class in school to occupy all the available space according to UNEB specifications.

MS OBURU: Most of the USE students are above 18 and they were registered as voters. I do not know whether they will again be allowed to leave school to go and vote since they are coming back before the voting time. They are coming back on 23 August and NRM primaries will be on 30th.

MR MUJUZI: I appreciate the concerns of the minister, but is she aware that USE schools have not received 50 percent of second term funds and they are expecting the funds for third term in September? 

MS AOL: I am just seeking this clarification which I got from the parents. I know that if consultations were made at all, then it was not comprehensive. Are you aware that parents also need to prepare themselves to pay the fees? When we change suddenly as we are doing now, they will find difficulty in getting the fees. I do not know whether you had realised that challenge. 

MR SEBAGGALA: The letter the minister is talking about is dated 20th July. By 20th July, all serious schools had already started exams so that they can beat their deadline of the holiday as earlier planned on 13th. Many Muslim institutions had planned according to the earlier circular of 13 August and they knew that Ramadhan was going to begin on 11 so students would come back to school on 6th. So, they would be at school for only 1 week during Ramadhan. This means that they have to incur an extra cost in order to meet expenses of the three weeks that they are going to stay at school during the fasting period.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Thank you very much, hon. Speaker and I appreciate the comments that are being made on this matter. I want to assure the Members that we are monitoring all the implications of this and we shall be guiding the schools accordingly. We will make sure that we meet the expectations. We consulted with the teachers and the examination board for us to have a valid and reliable examination without confusion like situations involving sitting for papers at night. The consultations were done, but probably we needed to consult further.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If you are talking of space in third term, does it make sense to shorten this term and in order to make the last term longer?

MS EKWAU: I am also an examiner with UNEB, of English Language in particular. I want to inform this House that even when we do exams and end in the first week of December, we are able to mark the exams and complete by the 18th. Whatever the minister is talking about UNEB, there is completely nothing that would affect the marking of exams. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: I think the minister may have to go back to the drawing board and reverse the circular. People report two to three weeks late in school because they are looking for school fees. Now you are making the situation worse by shortening the term. Many schools in the villages do not finish the syllabus because of poor teachers. In the last week they try to pump students with a lot of information such that they can be prepared for exams. So, what contribution are you making by shortening the term in order to cover the syllabus? Did you hire a professional consultancy firm to do this job or you were just asking people randomly what their thoughts are on this? You should have used a professional consulting firm to check all these ideas.

MR DENNIS OBUA: I just want to put a straightforward question to the minister. When a politician speaks, you can read the mood. She has just said “We are still monitoring”; this is like someone saying that things are in the pipeline. But normally when things are in the pipeline, is it nearer the tap for water to start flowing? Hon. Minister, is there a way this decision can be revised and changed such that we maintain the status quo?

MRS BITAMAZIRE:  Madam Speaker, let me continue from where I had stopped. Hon. Latif Sebagala wanted to know whether there are any sanctions. I would like to say that we are not putting sanctions on these, but as I said, we want to check out what schools might have special problems with this arrangement and such schools will be guided accordingly. So far, some have written to give such reasons like those you gave, but we are examining their cases accordingly. Otherwise, we do not intend to lay any sanctions on the review of the school term.

He also talked about Ramadhan holidays, but I would like to inform you that our schools have always handled this very well. I know that we have not had any problems. When Ramadhan starts, whether during school or holiday period, the schools are always good at handling the prayers –(Interruption) 

MR SEBAGALA: Madam Speaker, yes we know that schools have always been in position to handle the Ramadhan situation effectively well; I do not doubt that. But what I would like to tell you is that we have been doing this following your calendar that you always provide. The budgets are also always catered for that way. But this time the schools got your calendar, but they realised that they would not have their students during the holy month of Ramadhan. As a result, schools did not do any budgeting for that. So, when you change the programme to include the three weeks of the holy month of Ramadhan, that is what I am talking about. Anyway, since the minister has communicated as she said – many schools are breaking off from tomorrow. What the minister should tell us now is a serious apology that this kind of situation will not surface again. I do not know whether she can revoke that right now. Otherwise, we need an apology because this situation has not only inconvenienced the students, but also school administrators and parents.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Madam Speaker, allow me respond to your question, which you asked in regard to benefits. The benefits are exactly those that I indicated in this statement – we want to get these students prepared with their teachers at school for the examination.

Secondly, the others who, during the examination will have to go back to their homes to create space, will use this time to do some work because as I said, we always do this with PLE. This time with students increasing by 50,000, we shall have to do it with USE as well – having students in the lower classes go home to create room for examinations. If we shorten the holiday, then the lower classes that will have to go home before the term ends can also take advantage of the extra week that we are creating by reorganising the programme. That is where we see one of the benefits.

Third, as I said, these students will report back to school and settle and do revision – my colleague over there said that some schools managed to complete the syllabus while others did not. What I am saying is that the extra 50,000 candidates, especially in our beginning schools, will come back to school and settle with their teachers, do revision and get ready for the examinations, which they will be doing at the end of the year. That is why I highlighted two benefits – one being that for those lower classes – S1 and S2 in the congested schools, who will have to go back to their homes to create space for the candidates - they will have done some studies. And two, those who are preparing to be candidates will also benefit by coming to school early to do revision as they will be preparing for the examinations.

On capitation grant, I would like to say that that is going to be handled. The money will be released to these schools. I do not think there will be a financial crisis.

There was also a question on consultation, but as I have already said, we consulted mainly with the examination body. That is how we came to think that reorganising the term would help us address some of the constraints that we identified especially space.

Well, true I mentioned monitoring, but probably I should have said that we are receiving feedback and handling those particular cases where we find there are serious constraints.

So, as I said, this reorganisation was done in good faith taking into consideration, the challenges facing the system, given the increase of the 50,000 candidates this year who are sitting examinations. The other day I was at UNEB to check whether they have the machinery on the ground to produce the papers that will be required for this exam.

In conclusion, I would like to say that this reorganisation was done in good faith. But also, let me add that it is because of the first year of a large class of students under the USE programme that we thought we should do this reorganisation to ensure we settle for what can be managed during examination time. I hope that in future we shall find a better solution to some of these issues. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, then go to the issues raised in regard to the State of the Nation Address.

6.10
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Geraldine Bitamazire): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There were issues raised, especially following the statement that was presented by the Leader of Opposition. I now would like to respond to some of them. I have three sets of papers and one includes responses to questions on secondary education and the next one is on responses on technical and vocational education, while the third one is on universities and tertiary institutions.

Having read the booklet presented by the Leader of Opposition, I got to realise that there were issues mainly concerning quality of education in this country. The same questions also touched the implementation of the secondary education programme and technical and vocational education. Other issues being raised in this presentation relate to the revamping of science and technical training in our tertiary institutions and universities.

Let me start with issues raised on secondary education. There were five questions on this issue, one of them being whether Government has made any efforts to improve the quality of secondary education to bridge the performance divide between rural and urban schools. 

I am responding in five paragraphs. We are making teachers available in rural schools and figures of teachers recruited are given there in (I).

(II) 	We are enhancing school inspection and money is in the budget to make sure that there is inspection of schools as a quality measure. 

(III) 	We are also providing instructional materials. We are talking about the science kits and of course we are also talking about functional laboratories. So far, we have distributed science kits - a total of 488 science kits were distributed and we are planning to distribute more.

	Over the page on (IV); capacity building initiatives for teachers. We have a programme known as SESEMAT and we are retraining teachers of science to retool them for teaching effectively especially under the science policy. 

(V) We are creating centres of excellence. These are 42 schools around the country. These are schools that have most of the equipment to ensure that even in rural areas our students can access some of the best equipped schools. 

Question 2: What has Government done in the last one year? We are also responding in several paragraphs:

I.	Construction of new secondary schools. I am indicating in that paragraph the number of new secondary schools which have been constructed and stating the capacity - the numbers of students who are accommodated in those new secondary schools.

II.	We are expanding facilities in existing secondary schools and we are indicating that 122 new classrooms have also been expanded in the existing schools sitting 7,320 students.

III.	With support from the African Development Bank, we are reconstructing or rehabilitating traditional schools which are listed there and we are creating capacity for 4,320 students through the rehabilitation that we are carrying out in those schools. 

IV.	With the funding from the Irish Aid, we have rehabilitated 10 out of 11 secondary schools in Karamoja and we have created a lot of space to accommodate 4,000 students in those schools.

V.	Rehabilitation and expansion of works for Sir Samuel Baker. We have created space for 500 more students in that school and I am happy to say that I was there to launch the new buildings in that school.

VI.	We are carrying out other constructions at the same time and we have indicated the schools which we constructed during the time.

Question 3: Plans and commitment for the Financial Year 2010-11

We have indicated in four paragraphs the seed schools to be constructed, and provision of facilities in the already existing secondary schools with the World Bank. 

Under Government’s own resources, we have indicated that we are continuing with construction of six schools and in addition, eight secondary schools will be provided with ICT laboratories and resource centres.

We have also indicated that extension of construction work will continue in the schools in Karamoja. So, during this financial year 2010, we are doing what I have indicated there.

Question 4: Are all commitments including construction of 15 new secondary schools to be carried out within a period of three years? The answer is no. We have indicated how we intend to implement or to construct the 15 schools which we are indicating in the medium term.

On page 5, the final question was, “What was the policy on Government secondary schools per sub-county by 2015?”

We have indicated that the first approach we had was construction of new schools - what we call the seed schools - and to date they are up to 95 such sub-counties without any form of secondary schools and, therefore, we are allocating in a phased manner, the number of schools to be constructed in those sub-counties without. 

This strategy is also being developed to ensure that the remaining 78 sub-counties are covered in the subsequent planning period. 

MRS BABA DIRI: I thank you for also giving me the opportunity. I would like to know, hon. Minister, how many sub-counties have the seed schools and what is the time range - when will they get their seed schools? I thank you.  

MRS BITAMAZIRE: I thank you very much. I indicated elsewhere that we have so far completed several seed schools – that is on page 3 on plans and commitments. We have indicated the seed schools we are putting across and earlier on page 2, I also indicated that seed schools have been one of the ways of creating space for the students under USE. 

So, what I am saying on page 5 is that the policy is one per sub-county, but we are still behind getting one per sub-county and we are looking at 95 such sub-counties without any form of secondary schools. As we create seed schools, new sub-counties also come on board with the new districts; so the idea is that we shall implement that commitment in phases as and when money is available and in the medium term; I believe we shall have covered 78 percent that are remaining. 

So, to specifically answer my colleague on the question of Koboko, we are trying to be equitable; we are distributing these facilities equitably and I am sure through our monies or any grants that will come, Koboko will come on board as well. The commitment is still there that we shall have one secondary school per sub-county by 2015 and in the medium term, I believe there will be money and resources to cover that commitment. 

The second approach that Government is pursuing in the provision of public secondary schools is grant aiding and a total of 77 sub-counties do not have a public secondary school. So, what we do is to partner with the private sector and we grant aid communities. So far, we are planning to grant aid 60 schools per year and if we go on with that rate of grant aiding, we shall be covering quite a number of schools during the medium term.

Madam Speaker, those were the issues raised on secondary education and now I would like to turn to BTVET (Business Technical Vocational Education and Training). Several issues were raised.

The plan to have at least one technical institute, polytechnic, technical or vocational institute per district by 2018; I have attached a schedule indicating the location and distribution of these institutions throughout the country. My colleague hon. Baba Diri has already pointed out that Koboko does not yet have a technical and vocational school, but the strategy is to at least have one per district. 

So, the response is, it is true, His Excellency promised in 2001 to have a polytechnic per sub-county, but after piloting, we realised that probably that would be very difficult to implement. So, we have reorganised that program and as you see from the schedule, we intend to ensure that at least every district has got a technical of one type or the other. 

So, in the medium-term, Government plans to cover all the 112 districts with at least one training centre each. But this does not mean that we are localising the training. People from Kanungu can go to Kamuli and people from Butambala can go to Budaka – we shall continue as we have been working, but at the same time we want to benefit each district with a training institution at a given level as indicated in the project. 

Government in collaboration with development partners has also formulated a BTVET skill development strategy and an investment plan which we intend to implement in the medium-term. The strategy will be in place by 2011 and we shall roll out this programme as we move on, and probably pick some of the examples from the neighbouring countries. 

The last paragraph on page 1 indicates that we have a pilot scheme right now which is running informal extension and we think if it succeeds we shall roll it out during the next financial year for the entire country.

Then, on the universities – it is titled, “Brief on universities and tertiary institutions” - I want to point out that as for public universities, Government will continue with expansion and increased access through the creation of new university campuses as indicated below. So, the biggest developments in this sub-sector are the new universities and campuses. Under Busitema, we shall have Rakai Campus and Namasagali Campus; and under Gulu University, last week I commissioned the Villa Constituent College and then very soon, work will start with West Nile University.

I was advised that probably we should make the names of the universities neutral. So, we are debating whether we should call them, West Nile University, or Arua or whatever. We do not want to localise universities; but we are still consulting on that matter. 

On page 4, we are looking at Makerere University Business School; there is a prospect of elevating that institution to a university status or to a degree-awarding institution in the next academic year. Work has started on amending the law to make that institution a fully-fledged university. The rest of the paper is information which I think can be used on the topics which I have discussed. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Minister. But one other thing which was not raised – it has to do with the quota system admission at the university. One, there is a complaint that the students who are admitted on the quota system are not given professional courses even when they have very good marks. I have students in my constituency who got 23 points, which is just two points below the ultimate; the best student in Kamuli was not admitted either on Government or on quota and we are now running around trying to find out why. He really had very good marks for both ‘O’ and A’Level and I could not understand how he could not be taken either on the main sponsorship or in the quota system. So, I want you to take interest in that system.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Madam Speaker, let me start by commenting on the quota system. We are reviewing that programme because the idea was to make sure that at least each district sends a student to a public university. Before that quota system was put in place, we had six districts which had never sent any student to the university and that was not equitable access; we wanted to follow the principle of equity. That is why we created the quota system. I think in the first year, the quota system covered 15 students per district, but now with more districts, the numbers are becoming even less. 

But we are looking at that programme or policy to try and review it to see how best it can be improved. It has now run for four years. We want to look at the criteria, what courses should be prescribed or how it is being implemented to make sure that the idea of equity is not abused. We have found some cases of abuse and we want to address them. So, Madam Speaker, next year, not this coming year, but the other year, it will come out under a revised implementation strategy. 

Then, on why students on quota system do not go for professional courses; as Government we are sponsoring 4,000 students in public universities per year. And among the 4,000, there are some who qualify for Medicine and many other courses. So, according to the cut-off mark, most of those who would otherwise qualify will have already been picked on merit to join the professional courses at university. So, the students who remain unpicked for the 4,000 normally get into [Mr Bukeni: “Point of clarification”]  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you have just come. 

MRS BITAMAZIRE: As I was explaining, the first 4,000 students are the best and by the time we come to the quota system students, the 4,000 would have already taken the professional courses. But we are saying that this is also good because it gives an opportunity for the student to have an undergraduate degree from where they can work up to other degrees. We have not yet seen a problem with these students taking the subjects they take. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you consider reserving some other places for those children since they get lesser marks because they have no labs and other facilities? That is why we put up the quota system. So, you should also have a small quota for them in the professional courses because some of them are good. 

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Madam Speaker, I take note of your comments and as I said when starting, we are reviewing that policy to see where the loopholes are so we can address them. 

6.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was not here yesterday morning, but I did capture a few concerns by colleagues in the afternoon. I have also been able to read the statement of the Leader of the Opposition in reply to the State of the Nation Address and I would like to respond as follows: 

In his statement, the Leader of the Opposition expressed fears that recentralisation of the procurement and supply of medicines is going to lead to expiry of huge amounts of drugs in the National Medical Stores. I do not think this is correct because previously, the huge expiries of medicines were experienced because of two main reasons. One of those reasons is that there was a sudden change in the malaria treatment policy from chloroquin and fansidar to ACTs, yet the former, that is chloroquin and fansidar, had already been supplied and stored at the National Medical Stores. The bulk of the medicines which expired were Chloroquin and Fansidar. 

The second reason was the overwhelming response by the so many organisations, which got interested in supplying ARVs. This was not properly coordinated and we ended up getting medicines at the National Medical Stores, which had a short shelf life. These ended up expiring because there were few clients for these medicines, which had been prepared. This has stopped and coordination between the Ministry of Health and the donating agencies has been streamlined and is working very well.

The new policy we are talking about entails sending a basic kit to health centre IIs and health centre IIIs while the higher levels of health facilities starting from health centre IVs to the national referral hospitals still place their orders. But for health centre IIs and health centre IIIs, we thought that we should send basic kits because they had problems of making timely orders. 

The staffing levels at those levels of health facilities are very low and so is their capacity. What we have therefore worked out is a basic kit. This basic kit has been carefully stocked and it contains medicines and other health supplies that are very essential at that level. In this basic kit, you will find things like anti-malarials, pain killers, antibiotics and other things. So, we are very careful that as we push these medicines and other health supplies, we do not get into a problem of loading the centres with products that are going to expire. We have been very careful about that.

This new policy, which we are implementing now, has led to an improvement as far as drug stock-outs are concerned although I still hear from some quarters like my honourable friend from Yumbe who says Yumbe has been without medicines for the last five months. I doubt whether that is really true. We will take up this matter, but I doubt that a hospital can go for five months without medicines. It may be one or two products, but it is impossible for a hospital – otherwise it would close.

The other issue raised by many colleagues was about congestion at health facilities and mainly hospitals. Masaka Hospital, which is a regional referral hospital, and Mbarara Hospital, which is also a regional referral hospital, were cited. These are hospitals, which were built in the 1930s and 1940s and, therefore, with the increased population, expect congestion in the wards, especially after this House made a decision that we send a development budget to the hospitals. These hospitals have been fairly rehabilitated, especially when you look at Masaka, and Arua hospitals; some rehabilitation has been undertaken at those facilities. When the rehabilitation was done, there was a tendency for the population to move to the hospitals, which are now looking better. Therefore, you find patients flocking to these hospitals, and leaving the rural health facilities, the health centre IIs and health centre IIIs, because there is a tendency for the health workers to get attracted to towns. That is where you find these hospitals.

I recognise the fact that we still find it very difficult to attract health workers, especially doctors, and today even nurses and midwives, to the rural places. The local governments are finding a lot of difficulties in recruiting those categories of staff. The situation is definitely better -(Interjections)- can I finish this sentence? The situation is definitely better at the regional referral hospitals, which are found in big towns. There is a concentration of health workers and that is the reason why patients tend to flock to these facilities.

However, the development budget is being used for expansion of the wards. I am aware that Masaka Hospital has been guided and is already in the process of procuring contractors to build a new paediatric ward; that is the children’s ward. With the case of Mbarara Hospital, there are big structures already coming up. This is going to create more space and, therefore, ease the congestion. At Mulago Hospital, we have taken a move to decongest the hospital by building general hospitals in the divisions of the city. At Naguru where we used to have a health centre IV, there is a very big hospital coming up, but the structure is going to house a hospital. And with the assistance of a loan from ADB, we will be able to put up another general hospital in Kawempe and another in Makindye Division -(Interjections)- I can take your clarification.

MS EKWAU: Thank you very much, hon. Minister. We appreciate the effort of Government to try and rehabilitate some of the structures the Minister is talking about. But some of the facilities go beyond rehabilitating the buildings. I had a chance of visiting some hospitals and health centres. In fact, the labour wards do not have beds for mothers who may be in labour. Some of them are threatening to throw down the women who are in labour. You can imagine that predicament of going through such a trauma and then you are almost falling off the government bed. 

Hon. Minister, I think you should also coordinate - much as you are providing and rehabilitating the structures, let them be repainted and be able to provide for some of the things that cannot wait. For a mother to deliver and again fall off the delivery bed, I think, would be improper. Thank you. 

MS AOL: Thank you, hon. Minister. I have been wondering about the drug thefts and getting people from the State House to track the thefts. I do not know the sustainability; you could clarify on this. I thought that originally we had health centre management committees and I thought building the capacities of those people would be more sustainable and better to ensure that thefts of these drugs are not carried on instead of using the State House. Are we going to have State House as another government by itself? Clarify on that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Members, you are introducing new matters. We had a debate and we closed it; don’t introduce new matters. Otherwise, everybody will stand up and start bringing in new issues. 

DR NDUHUURA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On the issue of equipment, when I talked about infrastructure, I should have gone ahead to explain that where we are putting up new structures nowadays, we make sure we equip those structures with medical equipment and medical furniture, and medical equipment of course includes delivery beds and the beds in the wards. I thought I should make that clarification. 

On the medicines and health service delivery monitoring unit from State House, I think this unit has done a very good job because it has helped us to discover ghost health facilities in the first instance. That unit has also helped us on issues of drug thefts. So, I really think the work they are doing is commendable and we are working very closely with them. The health unit management committees that you are talking about used to be very active when there was cost-sharing and by then they would receive some money, out of which they would be paid an allowance. But since cost-sharing was abolished, there is no motivation for these health unit management committees -(Interruption)

MS AOL: Thank you. Some of us have a lot of reservations for the State House - the money which is sent to State House to create those units. Why can’t we support health management committees in the health centres instead of just creating structure after structure? And the State House is just for a few categories of people and not for every Ugandan. So, please, let us really have the spirit of oneness in Uganda. Let us use the structures which we originally had, but let us also support them financially. You are supporting the State House units financially; that is why we have big monies moving to State House instead of moving down. Thank you. 

DR NDUHUURA: Madam Speaker, I think that calls for another debate, but it is worth studying. However, I want to assure this House that this unit is doing a very good job. We are working with it to ensure that our drugs are not stolen –(Interjections)– that is something for another day. 

That is what I was able to pick, but I am also aware that we are experiencing absenteeism and late coming of health workers at the health facilities. This is a matter that we have raised with local governments and we really feel they must be supervised. The CAO and the DHO must supervise their staff because these are staff that are recruited and disciplined by the local governments, and for us at the centres to be able to supervise and inspect these health units would be an enormous job because we do not have that staff. The mandate is with the local governments. We are calling upon local governments to make sure that they supervise and inspect the units to make sure that the health workers are there full-time. 

In fact, what we may have to resort to is to discipline the CAOs because at least we have display controls as the Central Government over the CAOs, and we want to impress upon the CAOs that they do this job together with the DHOs. Short of that, he should be the ones to be disciplined. Madam Speaker, I beg to respond.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Members, we shall continue with the responses in the morning, starting with the Minister of Public Service followed by the Minister of Gender. Since you have no Cabinet meeting, I do not expect you not to be available tomorrow morning. So, the House is adjourned to 10.00 O’clock tomorrow. 

(The House rose at 4.29 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 5 August 2010 at 10.00 a.m.) 

