Thursday, 3 August 2006

Parliament met at 2.54 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to welcome you back from work in the committees. When we were adjourning, I indicated that if it becomes necessary to interrupt the committee work we shall do so and such an occasion has arisen. That is why we invited you for a brief plenary. Otherwise, we are delighted to see you again.

Honourable members, in the gallery we have pupils and teachers from Eldoret Preparatory School in Kenya. They are here to study how Parliament works; thank you very much.

Also in the Distinguished Strangers’ Gallery, we have a delegation from the Parliament of Botswana headed by Rt hon. Gladys Kokorwe, Deputy Speaker of the Botswana Parliament. (Applause) We also have hon. Tshireletso, the Chief Whip of the Botswana Parliament and their secretary, Sibongile Sithole. You are all welcome.

I also want to remind honourable members that there was a message from hon. Charles Angiro inviting you for a peace walk at Barlonyo IDP camp on the 10th August. He notifies you that it has been moved a day back to the 9th of August. Please support hon. Angiro on the peace walk; the circulars are in your pigeonholes. Thank you.

2.58
DR SAM LYOMOKI (Independent, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am raising a matter of national importance. Just a few hours ago, nine female workers who have been dismissed by Tri-Star Apparels Uganda limited besieged me. They claim that when they demanded for their terminal benefits they were slapped, given Shs 5000 and sent away.

Madam Speaker, this is not the first time that such a matter comes here. One time we had several workers who camped here and moreover we have been getting information that this industry, which started with 3,500 workers –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lyomoki, what is procedural in what you are saying?

DR LYOMOKI: I am inquiring what I should do because we have got information from these workers that whereas we supported this industry, as government, the owners have been taking away their equipment by night to Southern Sudan. Now, we gave money to this industry to start and they started with 3,500 workers. However, they now have only 300 workers and they have continued to dismiss them.  

If you go to the industry now you will find that they have taken away most of their machinery and it is as if the owner wants to escape. The question I am raising is, what can government do to such investors who come to this nation, are supported with facilitation and incentives only to turn around and violate workers rights without any assistance, moreover workers who have tried to do everything possible even come to parliament here? What can government do to assist workers and the nation in such a situation?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of Government Business, I think he is seeking advice about what can be done.

3.00
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am surprised that I greeted the honourable member of Parliament, we talked for five minutes and he never raised this matter. Therefore, I do not know what his intentions are. Be that as it may, I have no hesitation in requesting the Minister in charge of Labour to handle that matter. However, the honourable member will have to bring hard evidence because he cannot make those statements without bringing hard evidence. I thank you.

BILLS
FIRST READING 

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS 
(AMENDMENT NO. 2) BILL, 2006

3.01
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Maj. Gen. (Rtd.)) Kahinda Otafiire): Madam Speaker, I want to move that the Local Government Amendment Bill, 2006 be read for the first time.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to lay on Table a certificate of financial implications for the amendment of the Local Government Act.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill is committed to the appropriate committee for perusal.

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: Madam Speaker, I beg to move for the suspension of Rules 113(2) and 114(2) that involves committing the motion to the committee because of the urgency of the matter. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I will permit you to move it a little bit later. For now let us deal with an urgent issue of money then we shall come back to your motion.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT SEEKING THE APPROVAL OF PARLIAMENT FOR GOVERNMENT TO INCUR AN EXPENDITURE OF SHS 4.5 BILLION TOWARDS THE EMERGENCY CONTROL AND ERADICATION OF FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE

3.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam speaker and honourable members, I beg to move under Rule 40 (k) that this Parliament does authorize government to incur expenditure of Shs 4.5 billion towards the emergency control and eradication of Foot and Mouth Disease. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Has it been seconded? Okay, three ministers have seconded it.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): WHEREAS the country is experiencing a rapid spread of the Foot and Mouth Disease in cattle mainly caused by the influx of pastoralist families from Tanzania; 

AND WHEREAS the government has put in place measures towards the control of the spread of the disease including, but not limited to the purchase and distribution of Foot and Mouth Disease vaccines and enforcement of quarantine restrictions; 

AND WHEREAS the measures currently being implemented by the government are inadequate and cannot stop the spread of the disease which now threatens to cover the whole country; 

AND WHEREAS on the 15th day of June 2006, government presented before this Parliament the statement of the expenditure and revenue for the financial year 2006/07 in accordance with the provisions of Article 155 of the Constitution; 

AND WHEREAS the said statement of expenditure and revenue did provide only Shs 1.35 billion under the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries development budget for the purchase of veterinary drugs and vaccines and did not envisage the outbreak of Foot and Mouth Disease to the magnitude currently being experienced by the country; 

AND WHEREAS government, having considered the implications of the current epidemic on both the domestic and export market and the potential risk to the tourist industry posed by the continued spread of the disease and generally to the economic activities of the country, considers it appropriate to be authorized to spend an additional Shs 4.5 billion above the Vote on Account in order to halt the epidemic;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that -
1.	the government takes appropriate remedial measures to halt the spread of the Foot and Mouth Disease in the country.
2.	The government is hereby authorized to incur an additional expenditure of Shs 4.5 billion above the Vote on Account during the financial year 2006/07.

Madam Speaker, I wish to justify this motion. During the months of February and March 2006, over 3000 purportedly Ugandan pastoralist families were expelled from Tanzania bringing into our country cattle that had Foot and Mouth Disease. This disease is highly contagious and has various serious consequences on the health of the national herd and international trade in animals and animal products. 

This disease has now spread to 16 districts namely; Rakai, Isingiro, Ntungamo, Mbarara, Masaka, Mpigi, Kampala, Mukono, Luweero, Nakaseke, Kiboga, Mubende, Bushenyi, Kabale, Kasese and Kitgum. There is need for urgent control of this disease because if not controlled, the spread of this disease could lead to the following consequences:

1.	Uganda will be banned from the export of animals and animal products to regional and international markets. 

2.	Tourism will be affected, as foreign guests will be advised not to travel to quarantined areas. The situation will be worse if the Foot and Mouth Disease has spread into the national parks.

3.	If the Foot and Mouth Disease spreads to areas near Entebbe International Airport, a ban may be put on international flights landing at the airport in Entebbe.

4.	Any prolonged quarantine restrictions will affect the availability of meat, trade in animals and animal products in the country thus adversely affecting the incomes of all farmers engaged in livestock farming.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, at the time I presented the budget for the financial year 2006/07 in this House on the 15th of June 2006, details of expenditure for the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries of the epidemic were not available and, therefore, adequate provisions in its budget to meet this emergency epidemic could not be provided. In addition, the Vote on Account also imposes more restrictions on the funds that can be released to the ministry for this purpose.  

Madam Speaker and honourable members, as this is an emergency pressure that requires the immediate purchase of at least two million doses of the Foot and Mouth Disease vaccine to contain the disease in the affected districts and the surrounding areas, it has become imperative that in line with the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Parliament authorizes expenditure of Shs 4.5 billion above the Vote on Account provisions for the procurement of vaccines.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I therefore move that this august House resolves itself to approve the resolution and allow government to spend Shs 4.5 billion as requested.  I beg to move.

3.11
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH (Dr Francis Epetait, FDC): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am Epetait Francis, a veterinary scientist and a Shadow Minister for Health. I am standing in for my colleague who is in charge of Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.  

I want to thank the minister for moving this motion, though belatedly. I know that the issue of Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD) breaking out in the country is not a new phenomenon. We debated this matter over six months ago, and at that time we were urging the Ministry of Finance to immediately release emergency disease control funds for the purchase of vaccines to the Ministry of Agriculture. They dragged their feet yet at that time I think it was only about three districts, which were affected. If the Ministry of Finance had moved as Parliament had advised at that time, we would probably not have incurred this very huge expenditure.  

What I am trying to suggest, Madam Speaker, is that, there is need for us to review where the emergency disease control funds are housed because the bureaucracy of accessing these funds in cases of epidemic outbreaks of this nature needs us to incur exorbitant costs and this is a disease of economic importance. You have highlighted some of the likely problems that the country may face as a result of FMD outbreak.

You have enumerated 16 districts but I think the approach that the country should take is to have a regular annual routine vaccination programme; we do not have to wait until there is an outbreak then we start planning on how to access vaccines. Madam Speaker, in as far as I see it, in order to curb the FMD epidemic in the country, the vaccination should now be targeting all districts because of late you have heard of unexplained movement of livestock from one district to another. In fact, I am even not sure whether this Shs 4.5 billion can now do the job. But really we need to have a focused disease control programme that covers the whole country, as we speak now FMD is actually widespread.

The other thing that I have to observe again is the structure in the ministry itself.  Madam Speaker, the minister rightly put it that Uganda risks its animal products not to be accepted in any international market. It is because a chain of command has broken down. The restructuring that happened in that ministry is the one which has caused a breakdown in the chain of command. Uganda actually risks being expelled from the OIE. 

And at an appropriate time, Madam Speaker, I want to move a motion, and I pray for your support that this Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries be split. I would like to see a situation where we have Animal Industry and Fisheries and probably game as a separate ministry, because as of now the ministry is so enormous and receiving very meagre funding. I really sympathize with the situation.

In any case, because of that minimal funding of the ministry, we have had a cascade of poverty. We always sing about poverty year in year out, and yet the ministry, which is the economic herb of the nation, is perpetually under funded. And within the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, as it is now, the livestock sector is even suffering more under funding that is why at an appropriate time, Madam Speaker, I will table a motion here to see how to help government to run all these sectors at a pace that they would really deserve in order to curb poverty problems in the country.

Madam Speaker, I would like to end by urging all colleagues to support this motion, I know this is a start. I am not even sure whether the Shs 4.5 billion will be enough to help us, but I think this is a fairly good start.  I really want to maintain the point that we have to revisit the issue of housing the funds for emergency diseases control.

MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: Madam Speaker, I thank you for allowing me to give this information to hon. Dr Epetait that it is not only the Ministry of Agriculture, which needs to be split, because the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry used to be the ministry – they used to be five ministries but the restructuring necessitated, in order to comply with World Bank and our donors, that the splitting was mandatory -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, you are a Member of the Cabinet, you should table that in the Cabinet not on the Floor of this House, please.

DR EPETAIT: I want to thank my colleague for supporting me and, Madam Speaker, he will also table his motion. And, please, you do not subject him to disciplinary action the other side. He has spoken his mind out, but the fact remains that we need this money very urgently and the coverage should really target the whole country because we need to be doing this at least once every year.  But you find sometimes there is a total breakdown in a vaccination routines, or let us wait for an epidemic to breakout before a vaccine is procured.  So, Madam Speaker, I want to stop here and urge all colleagues to support the motion. Thank you. 

3.20
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, we have a Minister in charge of Disaster and I would imagine this minister should be the one to handle such issues, and or is prepared for any disaster. So, I do not know what his work is as far as this case is concerned. 

Having said that, Madam Speaker, we gave Ministry of Agriculture a-third of the budget recently, I am not so sure if all the money we gave them has already been expended so that we could now really come here to ask for more money. And I want to ask the Minister of Finance, from which Vote are we going to get this money? Is it from the Ministry of Agriculture or we are going for another ministry or we shall have to get more money from somewhere to deal with this case? Thank you.

3.21
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I wanted the Minister in charge of immigration to tell us -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Minister in charge of what? 

MR OTTO:  Immigration issues, internal affairs, to tell us how 3,000 people can in the year 2006 of our Lord just enter Uganda like that; whether they are pastoralists, whether they have been expelled from Tanzania, maybe we need a little concrete information as to where they are in Uganda, as to whether they have visas or resident permits because it is like we are importing our problems from other countries. Furthermore, the statement should have been more specific concerning the fate of these 3,000 pastoralists that entered Uganda.

Secondly, I would like to challenge the line Minister of Agriculture, hon. Hilary Onek, who should be an authority in this area by now. They are stating that the districts that the disease has hit or has threatened to hit include Rakai, Isingiro, Ntungamo, Mbarara, Kabale, Kasese, Kitgum among others. I just want to know if this is scientific because my understanding is that, the disease should spread from one district to the neighbouring district. So, how does it jump from Kasese to Kitgum? I realise that this might be a political statement being brought to this House. So, I beg for your indulgence.

3.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank members for supporting the motion. I would also like to thank hon. Dr Epetait, who is very well versed with issues concerning animals. We have noted your suggestions, including the one concerning funds to be voted.  

Concerning the slow response, honourable members will note that in February we were conducting elections and the whole country went into that. As a result, it took us some time before we settled down again. Therefore, the slow response was not intentional but better late than never.

The issue raised by hon. Nandala Mafabi was so forthright that it removed all the lights in the Parliament momentarily. However, let me say that the Shs 4.5 billion will be spread out across all the ministries.  

Finally, hon. Otto, the immigrants were okay but their animals were not. I thank you very much and I urge Members to support the motion.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to put the question, as this is a straightforward motion. We are seeking support to facilitate the arrival of drugs for this emergency. I put the question that this House do authorize government to incur expenditure of Shs 4.5 billion towards the emergency control and eradication of the Foot and Mouth Disease.

(Question put and agreed to.)

3.25
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Maj. Gen. (Rtd.) Kahinda Otafiire): Madam Speaker, I had moved a motion and it had been seconded. I beg to move that Rule 113(2) and 114(2) be suspended for us to proceed because of the emergency nature of the matters before this House. I beg to move.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, you have been seconded; now justify.

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: Madam Speaker, the House knows that the Electoral Commission is in the process of organizing elections. This amendment is meant to facilitate the smooth running and operation of those elections and that is why the amendment ought to be disposed of urgently in order to be compatible with the programme of the Electoral Commission for organizing local government elections.  Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister has moved a motion to clarify something concerning the elections. He argues that if we take the matter to the committee it will take a bit of time and disturb the electoral process. I put the question that the rules be suspended as proposed by the minister.

MR KASSIANO WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I normally know hon. Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire as a well-prepared person who means well and is always proactive. Therefore, when I see him come up with such an amendment bill, I wonder whether it will be proper for Parliament to consider this when Forum for Democratic Change, as a party, is in court over matters related to the Local Governments Act and elections. Shall we be in order to continue with this debate when this matter is already in court? I beg your clarification on that matter, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Chief Whip of the Opposition, what is a substance of the matter that is before the court? Parliament does not know, as we are not party to the suit.  

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I have even heard Members like hon. Omara Atubo, who until recently was seated with us here, asking about the court number. Much as I may not be able to produce the court number and its ingredients, to the best of my knowledge and I believe to the best of the knowledge of government this matter is being contested in court.  

MR OMARA ATUBO: Madam Speaker, I am aware that matters before court cannot be discussed by this House as the Speaker knows because it would be subjudice. But for a matter of this nature to be taken seriously by this House, I expect the Opposition Chief Whip to have done his groundwork very well and produced the plaint so that the Speaker can interpret it. This is because not everything that is in court can be of subjudice. 

Therefore, when I ask you for the court number, the plaint and at what stage it has reached, I am only being a serious Member of this House that is all. As you said, you know hon. Otafiire is a serious Member and that he comes well prepared. I also expect you to come to this House serious and well prepared. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, personally this Bill is of urgent national importance for the forthcoming elections.  I urge that we proceed, if nothing is proved to the contrary. 

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I agree with hon. Omara Atubo, about the importance of this amendment bill.  Now that I have been put to task to provide detailed information, and since I know this matter has far-reaching implications for this country, Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence. I request that you give us 10 minutes’ adjournment and we get in touch with our lawyer. We shall then bring all the details of the matter because the whole thing is very important. We are here to determine the fate of this country. I beg that my request for indulgence be granted.  

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Our rules are very clear. Rule 60 provides that it is the Speaker who should interpret the prejudice rule. Is the honourable Chief Whip in order to want to hold this House at ransom, to start invoking the FDC party advocates and the consultations, when actually the power lies with the Chair of the Speaker? Is he in order?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he is not in order.  Honourable members, we issued notice of this meeting on Tuesday and indicated the nature of business to be transacted. There were only two items on the Order Paper. You have been here in your committees and I assume that every Member of this House was informed from Tuesday, yesterday and today about what we were coming to do here.  

Secondly, honourable members, I asked the chief whip to tell me the substance of what is before the court. He has not been able to tell me this.  Therefore, I would like to clarify that this House is not directing the holding of any elections. I have read the Bill; it is seeking to clarify issues of eligibility to contest for these elections. That is all. If the other rulings come, they will be directed to the Electoral Commission, not Parliament. For us we should do our work, streamline the procedure and leave the rest to the Electoral Commission. It is not our work to conduct elections. Proceed.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Madam Speaker, I have been listening very carefully. It would appear to me that the urgency of this Bill has not been brought out quite clearly. I would have loved to hear from the minister when these council elections are due.  When are they due? (Interruption)

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. According to our Rules of Procedure, once a Speaker rules on any motion, no Member is allowed to continue debating the same. Therefore, is the honourable member in order to raise an issue, which you have already ruled on, Madam Speaker? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he is not in order.  Honourable members, I have interpreted the Bill according to how I understand it and I think we should proceed by that.  

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the Attorney General is here. He is well versed with the case I guess, as I see him smile. So, he would be in a better position to advise us on this matter. I beg your indulgence so that he says something on this before we proceed.  

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, the Attorney General does not have the capacity to question the ruling of the Speaker.  

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Madam Speaker, I did not question the Speaker’s ruling. I was only seeking clarification from the minister responsible.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will hear that clarification in the second reading. Therefore, I put the question that the rules be suspended as requested by the honourable minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS 
(AMENDMENT NO.2) BILL, 2006

3.38
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Maj. Gen. (Rtd.) Kahinda Otafiire): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I beg to move that the Local Governments (Amendment NO.2) Bill, 2006 be read for a second time.  Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, your friends are not seconding you today, I do not know – okay, he has been seconded.

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: Madam Speaker, this Bill is to amend the Local Governments Act to provide for public officers and other government or local government employees wishing to stand for elections to a local council office to resign their office at least 30 days before the nomination day.  

Section 116 of the Local Governments Act will be amended by substituting the following sub-section: “Under the multi-party political system, a public officer, a person employed in a government department or agency of the government, an employee of a local council or an employee of a body in which government has controlling interests who wishes to stand for elections to a council office shall resign his or her office at least 30 days before nomination day, in accordance with the procedure of the civil service or employment to which he or she belongs.

For avoidance of doubt, a public officer employed by a local council shall not be a councillor of that local council or any other local council.”  

Madam Speaker, my colleagues will recall that the Local Governments (Amendment NO.2) Act 2005 was enacted by Parliament to provide for local council elections under a multi-party dispensation. Specifically, Section 116 of the Local Governments Act was amended to exclude public officers from being elected councillors of the higher local governments or lower local governments. However, Section 116 of the Local Governments Act allowed public officers to stand for election at village, parish and ward levels.  This means that public officers will participate in the following elections at the village level, which are scheduled to take place some time this year. This kind of situation will generate unnecessary problems as it will allow public officers to take part in partisan politics contrary to the provisions of the Political Parties and Organisations Act, which bars public officers from engaging in partisan politics.
 
Madam Speaker, we are therefore proposing that we amend Section 116 of the Local Governments Act to prohibit public officers from standing for local council elections at all levels right from the district to the village level. The object of this amendment is to ensure that we prohibit public officers from taking part in local council elections in a multi-party system of government.  Good values have been nourished in our public service for a long time and partisan politics should not be allowed to undermine them. 

Madam Speaker, if a public servant engaged in electoral politics under a multi-party dispensation, it would mean that he would have to be sponsored by a party. In case this public servant lost the election, he would have opposed the policies of the parties sponsoring candidates, which will undermine his credibility in continuing as a public servant where he was opposed to the policies of the parties that took part in this election.  

In addition, the Political Parties and Organisations Bill excludes public servants from participating in partisan politics and this is a problem. There is no way you can reconcile the position of a public servant who has participated in partisan politics and the position of the candidates who are sponsored by political parties.  I think for the sake of this principle, we should help our public servants by this amendment so that they are not engaged in any political activities under a multi-party political dispensation.

Finally, the Constitution precluded the movement political system activities in a multi-party setting. When one system is in operation, the other one is in outdated. Therefore, when you allow public servants to participate at this level you are in other words including elements of the movement system political party activities in a multi-party dispensation.  Madam Speaker, I beg to move. 

3.43
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the motion. However, my main concern is that, the minister is not telling us exactly when the elections will take place. My main worry is that, we may pass the law –(Interruption)

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: Madam Speaker, with due respect to the honourable shadow minister, I am not the Electoral Commission. Therefore, I cannot know when the elections will be held. That responsibility is for the Minister of Constitutional Affairs and the Electoral Commission.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI:  Madam Speaker, I think we are at a loss. The minister said it is urgent. This means he has got a time frame in which he is operating. Therefore, he should come out clearly and tell us the urgency instead of telling us to go to the Constitutional Minister. 

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, I believe if we go by what the Bill states, we all know that local council elections are to be held on 10 August and if we pass this amendment then it automatically means it is going to be postponed because public servants must resign 30 days before nomination. Some of these are now contesting. Therefore, by passing this amendment, it automatically means elections have been postponed. 

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like the minister to clarify this matter of partisan members. Are independent members also partisan in that regard?  

MR KABUUSU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is the Seventh Parliament –(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do not echo him please. It is in order for him to make reference to the Seventh Parliament.

MR KABUUSU: It is the Seventh Parliament that amended the Local Governments Act and provided for the resignation of public officers who wish to participate in politics. Uganda is undertaking a multi-party dispensation and it is this very House that must nurture the spirit of political parties.  I believe public officers, officers employed by local councils and other people of that category have a role to play in nurturing Ugandan’s multi-party dispensation that we are undertaking. Whereas the civil servants could work better and advise in the implementation of the Local Governments Act in the rural areas where many people cannot read and write as many of us know.

I believe public officers must also keep off partisan politics. Local governments and administrative units at LC1 and LC2 have some partisan politics to play in the villages. Theirs is administering but the spirit of multi-party politics should be built and maintained. The officers should respect this rule and resignation of the officers who intend to participate in multi-party politics should be affected. Therefore, I support the move the honourable minister is proposing. (Applause)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I am raising a procedural issue. I do not know whether we have reached the debate stage or are we still raising procedural issues? I would like to be clarified such that I contribute.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I gave Members opportunity to – You know, I cannot anticipate whether they are just seeking clarification or contributing. In their own way, they are contributing. We are actually debating. 

MR OKUPA: In that case, Madam Speaker, may I take this opportunity to seek clarification from the minister regarding the issue of public servants resigning 30 days before nomination? He claims that it is the responsibility of the Electoral Commission to set the date. However, what we have been getting is that, it is supposed to be on 10th August. Definitely, if we are to pass this Bill, then we may need to adjust these days. The Electoral Commission will have to adjust these days. 

My concern is that there are areas where we have a hundred percent literacy rate. I could give an example of Makerere University. Most of the people in this area are public servants. In such areas, if you asked them to resign or if they did not, who would take up the LC positions? In Makerere University, almost everyone there is a public servant, apart from the students. Who will be their LC officials? Will they be their houseboys or house girls? I find a problem in such areas. I hear some of my colleagues answering, “Yes”, but there is a problem. These house girls and houseboys cannot write and read. They may know some English but they do not know how to write.

3.52
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The mischief the minister is trying to cure by bringing this Bill is that, we do not want to involve public servants in partisan politics, which I think is a good spirit. However, I think the bigger question we should ask ourselves is what kind of people we want to be LC I chairpersons. We should also ask ourselves what powers an LC I chairperson has and the amount of resources he controls? I will attempt to answer these two questions.
 
Assuming I wanted to be secretary for environment in Pader, in a small village. Just a mere secretary for environment! Why would you expect me to resign all my public offices? You know, our LCI survive on stamp collections of Shs 300. They are complaining in the villages about no salary. They virtually do not control anything. I do not think it is the spirit this Parliament would want to have to ensure that even teachers who can read and write, who have skills of handling local issues are left out.

By the way, many of us in Parliament would even fail to understand a typical village issue. This is because the level in which they handle their issues is very different. I attended a village meeting of my clan where they had put a young lady to sit in front and the whole meeting was discussing the fact that she was found with herbs in her husband’s house. I sat for one hour listening to these people’s discussion and I realised I could not understand. (Laughter) At the end of the day, they said, “Our son is here. Let him talk.” Then I asked these people, “Are you aware there is a police post? You are the prosecutors; you are the defence lawyers; you are the judges and you are the executors. Are you aware there is a police post to where you must report such matters?” 

Here we are, saying the Ottos who can advise that kind of village setting should not be allowed to be LCI chairpersons. I think we are making a mistake.  May be the minister should amend and say from LCI and downwards, all the secretaries to LCI should allow who ever is interested to contest. From LCII, LCIII and LCIV, we could lock public servants out of politics. Otherwise, we would not be helping this country at all. Only village thieves, drunkards and irresponsible people will qualify and we will not be helping this country in any way.

For instance, in Kololo here, who else can be the LCI apart from the civil servants? You would not even find anyone who qualifies. Even in Nakasero where the President resides, you will find only irresponsible people in car washing bays. I am sure even Gen. Otafiire would not respect his summon if called for an LCI meeting. He will ask, “Who is this?” Or he will ask, “mwana oyagaraki?” So, why can’t we allow some people who matter in society to be LCI chairpersons? I beg the General to revisit his thinking.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, madam Speaker. Mine is on a procedural matter. The manner in which this motion has been moved is likely to set a very bad precedent. I know that we have a provision for suspension of rules. Government was also fully aware that there would be elections. However, it took a lot of time for them to get prepared, only to come here to move a motion to suspend rules and yet to me, the issue of legislation should be as widely participative as possible. There should be enough of consultations from a number of stakeholders. Therefore, for this particular motion, the issues now being raised would in my opinion require an in-depth scrutiny. I am here to really oppose the issue of suspending these rules. We need to go to –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. We have already finished with that. We have moved away from that.

3.56
THE MINISTER OF RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I recently bought a book entitled, “How to Live with Reality.” It is a very interesting reading. We have a multi-party dispensation, which we must live with because we decided that that is the way we should govern this country. In that dispensation, you are also saying we should have a permanent civil service, people who are supposed to serve any government of whatever party that wins the mandate of leading the country. Therefore, you are trying to minimise as much opposition as possible from people who implement government policies. You want to have as much of them out of political lime line as possible. And if they are going to participate then they must resign their offices. 

On the other hand, you do not stop civil servants from voting. The voting is secret. They do it their own way. That does not mean that they do not have political inclinations. However, you do not want them to be so divided as to make implementation of government policies difficult. That is a reality we must live with.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, we are asking, “When are these elections taking place?” Whether elections take place or not, they need to be prepared for. You cannot wait until elections take place.

Besides, this amendment comes in to correct something that may have been overlooked.  I remember we talked about making the lower ranks of administration neutral, as is the case in Ghana, where lower local governments are neutral and not partisan.  Here, we found that it was not possible.  Therefore, if you are going to have party alignments participating in LCI elections, for heavens sake, live with this reality. Simply exclude civil servants and let them to be as neutral as possible when they are serving whatever party is in power.  

The other reality is hon. Otto’s experience in his village.  This tells you that we are leading a country, which has hon. Otto and hon. Kabwegyere, which also has people who talk and you do not follow what they are saying.  It is possible that what we are discussing is not of your interest, or you do not bother enough to understand what goes on in the village.  

But above all, the division of our society into these classes – anyway, where hon. Amuriat will say, “I am educated and these other people I represent are not educated”, and yet we go to them to decide how we get back to Parliament.  These are issues we must live with.  Therefore, I recommend that the book “How to Live with Reality” be read.  Democracy now demands that we recognise we have multiparty dispensation. 

 I want to conclude by saying that decentralisation has been operating in this country. It is provided for in the Constitution and decentralisation means empowering people.  There has been debate on the Floor of this House as to what level of education we should assign to people who get involved in local governments.  Fortunately, the decision was made that it should only be the lower levels where qualifications are not an issue.  

In the areas where you have civil servants, the dominant community, let the wives, the houseboys, the maids and the drivers be empowered to lead in the communities where these professionals reside.  That is where it is going to be possible that hon. Otto and hon. Kabwegyere will bother to understand what these people say even when they speak the same language.
 
4.04
MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA (DP, BUKOTO County South, Masaka):  Madam Speaker, the Act we are amending has very serious implications for this country. As we try to amend this Act, all of us have constituencies that we represent and we know the impact of these local leaders. 

Hon. Kabwegyere said that wives and houseboys should venture to take up leadership where majority of civil servants reside.  I have been in local council for quite sometime.  There was a time when LC’s had just started in this country where people shunned the LC system and you found houseboys –take an example of Kololo or Nakasero where only houseboys and maids participated in LC’s. In the evening, you, a Member of Parliament, would want to get a passport. They say, “No. You have to go to the LC I chairman who has to endorse your forms.” [An Honourable Member: What is wrong with that?] He is busy cooking and you will not see him- (Laughter)

Therefore, unless this House agrees that as we amend this Act, we should consider remunerating the LC I chairman. So that if one is a teacher in an area and he resigns, he is assured of getting some payment. But you cannot imagine that in a society like Uganda people should resign their positions in order to take up LC positions. 

Madam Speaker, this is a very serious issue. We all come from rural constituencies. You all know when you hold meetings with LC chairmen. You know the difference between an LC chairman who has read and the one who has not read. If we are to amend this Act, I request this House to think of remunerating these LC councillors who will do the job on the ground.  Thank you.

4.08
MR LIVINGSTON OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I get worried when honourable members say that our people at the local level should be denied quality service. I am not happy.  Yet, to come to this Parliament, we have set a minimum standard of A’ level. Why are we saying, “Down there, those who are capable should go away.” When they go away we shall have house girls and houseboys to run the services.  This is very unfortunate.  We want our people to get quality services from the top to the bottom.

MR WOPUA:  Madam Speaker, I thank honourable member for what he is saying. However, I would like to observe that we should not imagine that those who cook are only able to cook good food and not able to think properly when it comes to other services.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO:  Madam Speaker, I am grateful for the information, but you see, we are saying this work involves writing and not cooking.  With cooking, you do not need to go to school. Cooking is traditional; you do not have to make laws in Parliament about cooking.  This is an obvious thing.

MRS SSEKABIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform hon. Okello Okello that this government has been implementing functional adult literacy all over the country, which is funded under PAF. Many people have accessed adult literacy classes.  Therefore, even the villagers know who has attended functional adult literacy and they vote accordingly.  Thank you.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I am grateful for the information, but it confirms that we are living in two countries. Where I live there has been no adult literacy education at all.  I am grateful she has confirmed that we are living in two countries. This is the reason we should be honest and say this law will apply to these other areas where everybody can now read.  

Madam Speaker, we are being unfair to our people.  Somebody is earning salary and you are telling him, “Resign but we are not going to pay you salary.” Is it logical to expect that somebody who is earning a salary to resign to do something for which he will not be paid? What will happen? Corruption! The passport forms that have been stamped for Ugshs 3,000 will now be stamped for Ugshs 30,000. We are punishing our people at the grassroots, simply because we are trying to rush this law without adequate research.  

MR KAGIMU: During the UPC days, Hajji Musa Sebirumbi was the Chairman of UPC of Luwero District. What was his qualification?

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Madam Speaker, I thought we were dealing with a very serious matter. However, if we are going to bring jokes and insults in a matter like this, it is very sad. This is a national Parliament. Sebirumbi was killed by mistake according to the President’s statement. It was discovered that he was not the one who killed the man he was alleged to have killed. If a young man like hon. Kagimu Kiwanuka tries to play around with this kind of matter, it is very sad.  

During Sebirumbi’s days, we did not have the law. If there had been A’ level or its equivalent, he would have abided by that law. Therefore, we should not try to joke around with this. We are talking about the future of this country, of our children and grandchildren.  

Parliament for the last ten or so years has made laws which have been nullified by courts; I am saying let us avoid passing laws that will be nullified. This will look like we are children. It is very unfortunate that we talk about a matter that is urgent without a time frame. It is not humanly possible to talk about -(Interruption)

MR GAGAWALA WAMBUZI: Is hon. Okello-Okello in order to suggest that this august House is the only Parliament, which passes laws that are challenged by courts? Is he really in order to suggest that this august House in which he has served several times is the only Parliament on this Planet which passes laws that are later nullified by courts?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the legislature has got its own share of the work and so does the judiciary. If something is not right, they can nullify it. That is their work. It is not really a big thing.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I was very reluctant to interrupt my very good friend and colleague hon. Okello-Okello whom I respect very much. The information I am giving is that the law as it stands now is more prone to litigation than what we are trying to do. There is a very big discrepancy between two provisions of our laws, section 116of the Local Governments Act, subsection 5 (2) that we made here in the Seventh Parliament. Section 6(b) of the Local Governments Act where we provided that public officials and civil servants who seek elective posts at these levels need not to resign. This provision is very much in conflict with section 16 of the Political Parties and Organisations Act. We are trying to cure that problem. 

 In addition, Article 69 of the Constitution empowers the people of Uganda to choose, through a referendum, a political system of their choice. We chose a multiparty system of governance right from the top office to the very lowest, without making any exception. The argument that you are actually raising is credible; and by the way, I have that problem myself because of the terrain in which I live in Bugolobi. 

When you talk about who are going to lead at those levels, I surely appreciate it. I have lived through the same problem but we could maybe at a future date, when we are revisiting some of the constitutional provisions that we stood over which we did not complete, we could revisit some of these issues. However, at the moment we are trying to remedy this situation. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Madam Speaker, I am grateful for the information from the Attorney General. I am not opposing amendment of the laws. Rather, what I am saying is that we should do it in a way that will not cause us problems, in a way that will be acceptable to everybody. Let us not rush it.  

I am surprised that my brother hon. Gagawala would be very proud to pass a law that will be nullified by court as long as it is not only this Parliament doing it. I am saddened. We cannot behave like this. We have to do things properly. Let us not go by what the others do. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.19
MR ABRAHAM LOKII (NRM, Jie County, Kotido District): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like to agree with the spirit of the motion.  I have just been asking myself as I was listening to members submitting and I wondered whether we are going to use Bugolobi or Kampala to judge the rest of Uganda.  

We have thousands and millions of Ugandans especially where I come from, where there are people who have not even gone to primary school.  What is going to happen to them if we are to use Bugolobi to say a houseboy cannot take a decision when his master has disagreed with his wife? We should be very realistic.  It is important that those who go to the local council system do their role of monitoring and supervising government activities and leave the civil servants to do implementation of policies.  

I would like to give an example. I know of a sub-county in my constituency where the DEO was also a member of the Executive at LC3 level. When the council was sitting to raise issues on the performance of the teachers in his schools, he stood aside and defended as a councillor. Who was then going to be the DEO to explain to the councillors what they wanted?  These are situations that we need to avoid.  Even in terms of accountability, how are you going to account yourself if you are going to be CAO and at the same time the LC1 Chairman in your village?  These are realities that we should come to.

I would also like us to look back at the time when colonialism was in charge of our country. How did they manage to administer our people and yet there were no people who were educated?  The spirit of the Bill is going to mobilise more adults and parents to look at the need to take children to school. If the LC1 chairman does not know how to read and write, he will see the reason why he should take his child to school so that he is able to help him to do secretarial duties. This will be more –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I thank the honourable member for accepting to take this point of clarification.  While he says this is going to be a moment to sensitise communities to access education, I would like the honourable member to clarify as to what will happen in the execution of the judicial roles that the local councils also have in terms of appellant systems.  If you are an LC1, you sit and you have heard a case, none of you knows how to read and write; how will you refer that matter to the second and third levels?  I just wish to seek your clarification on that.  Thank you.

MR LOKII: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like to make it clear to my brother that the best judges of situations have been the people who live in those situations.  Illiterate Africa has always had matters where they have taken judicial decisions correctly.  I do not think it is going to begin today. The decisions that the councils are going to take are not going to be the ones that judges do. They do not need these books to quote.  They are going to talk about how one ended up beating the other. They are going to talk about why a borehole has not been repaired.  I do not think these things need to be written down.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  In this country, we used to have kings and the famous Kingdom was Buganda, where my friend Mathias over there comes from. They used to have judicial structures and the kings had never gone to school. Yet, they used to function properly and to administer their kingdoms.  How did they do it?  This is common sense.

MR LOKII: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like to conclude by saying that even in some of these communities where we think there are no people to take up these positions, we also have retired civil servants who can play this role.  What has left me wondering is how a CAO would choose to leave his job in order to go for a job where he is not salaried.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I wish to put the record right. The local councils as a matter of law are institutions of court. When they are having appeals from LC1, LC2 to LC3, it is a matter of law that that appeal must be documented. We need to get that very clear. Let us not talk about how colonialists and Kings governed us. This is the law. We made it here in this Parliament.  

Let us agree that basic education skills in reading and writing are a prerequisite.  When we are saying that we need to open up so that even those who are enlightened and able to assist and offer themselves to help us in LC1 or LC2 be considered, please let us bear in mind that these appeals require documentation.

MR LOKII: Madam Speaker, what has been said is in the spirit of the motion. That therefore means that as we ask people to resign, they definitely will be taking a decision to go and serve where they feel their services are required.  Thank you.

4.25
MR EMMANUEL OTIAM (NRM, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I support the motion. I would like to begin by saying that we need to nurture multipartism in this country. We need to give a chance to multipartism to grow and this is our cherished desire. Therefore, it will be a conflict if we bring in civil servants to participate in multiparty politics.  

I would like to inform this House and give my own example.  In 2001 when we still had the movement system in place, I stood after which I went back to serve in that area. However, I want to assure this House that there was so much uproar that I had to leave that place. That is why I am concerned that we should allow the civil servants to contest. What happens when they lose the elections and go back to work? It will be very terrible because, first of all, notwithstanding the fact that there are ethical codes of conduct being observed by the various professions like the medical workers, the people of necessity lose trust.  I am submitting that we keep the civil servants out of multiparty politics.

In addition, in almost every village of Uganda we have retired civil servants who are very knowledgeable.  They could come in to take up these various positions.  We have retired teachers, retired policemen; we have -(Interruption)

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I wanted to give – because if we talk about civil servants, I would not like members to believe that civil servants are the only people who can manage local council elections.  We have so many people outside who do not work in civil service. 

Secondly, the biggest employer is the private sector in rural and urban areas.  I am very comfortable with not allowing civil servants to participate at local elections.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, you are supporting the motion.  Hon. Otiam, please conclude.

MR OTIAM: Thank you very much, my brother, for that very supportive contribution.  I would like to say that now we are talking the same language. I would like to encourage the others also to follow suit.  

Finally, I would like to say that there is a risk associated with everything. Whatever venture one wants to undertake, there is always a risk.  Therefore, if a civil servant wants to take part in politics -then the risk is actually losing payment and so there should be no cause whatsoever that we should equally pay them because they have taken the risk. Some of us also took similar risks to come here and so this is the right direction we are following.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

PROF. KAMUNTU:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  Madam Speaker, what is this amendment trying to cure? What is it that this amendment of requiring employees of government and public officers to resign their position before they can stand for elections trying to cure?  Really what we are trying to cure is simply this. You either go back to Movement system of government in which the system is all inclusive and you do not need to worry about showing your positions or – and there will be consequences- or you go multiparty political dispensation and the consequences will follow. 

What we are trying to cure is a Public Servant, a Servant who is meant to advise any government that is elected; a Servant who is supposed to implement the programmes of government whether he voted for it or he did not vote for it.  That public servant should be protected from being openly identified with the side he supports if the side he supports is defeated in elections and he has to implement a programme of a party he did not support.  

The consequence of that is, if a civil servant openly opposed a party in government, and the party wins, how could this government of the very people he opposed feel comfortable that he will implement the policies of the very party he opposed. It will be very difficult for the civil servant; it would also be very difficult for the political leaders coming into government.

Consequently, this provision is to say, yes, for a government be it for instance we talk about the party in opposition as an alternative to government, if the party in opposition was to come in government and find civil servants who openly identified themselves opposed to your policies the first act you would do is to dismiss them the day you form a government, and that is what this law is trying to really cure.  

So, the next point is, at what level do you identify a Civil Servant to be opposed or to be pro-government even at grass root level, LC1. LC1, honourable members, is where elections is determined. Consequently, if we allow the civil servants to stand in this election under multiparty dispensation showing their sides even at LC1, when a government comes to implement its policies at LC1 level, and the person who identified himself opposed to these policies, you will not expect him to implement that programme.  

Therefore, let us agree that because of the changes we have introduced, we bear the consequences. We have introduced multiparty political systems it is for both government and opposition that those who are supposed to serve any government, which comes in, any party, which comes into government, should be protected and this amendment intends to do precisely that.  I support the amendment.

MR NASASIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Madam Speaker, the few people who are opposing this motion, are opposing it on two grounds. One, they think we should at LC 1 to LC 11 have some educated people who can write.  Secondly, they are saying that we are rushing to pass the law. Those are the two issues I have heard.  

Now on the first one of having educated people, the practice on the ground as we talk now, most LC 1 and LC11 are not civil servants.  They have their education at whatever level they are there, they have been running these councils at that level. If you go back to your villages including Pader, which my hon. Friend Otto could not follow when they were discussing this clan issue, they knew how to handle their matters at clan level.  They are not highly educated, but they have been running these councils and they work.

Secondly, there are other educated people, as hon. Latif said, who are not public servants. Now for God’s sake, some of these people who are opposing this are the very people who have been pushing for multipartism in this country. Now that multipartism has come -(Interruption)

MR NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, is the hon. Minister in order to advocate for the resignation of public officers when the hon. Minister knows that when we were going for elections during this term we were all told to resign our positions and yet the hon. Minister who was a Public Servant did not resign his position?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I await the outcome of the court case on that matter because it is going to be heard.

MR NASASIRA:  Thank you for your ruling.  As far as I know, all my record of work, I have never been a Public Servant.  But anyway, I was saying that now that multipartism has come then there are people who are saying no, no, let us be public servants and at the same time let us be partisan. You cannot have both; you cannot have your cake and eat it.  Really to know that you cannot, this Public Service is supposed to be a service for all of us so that when I walk in a public office whether I am NRM, DP or FDC I know I am going to be served by a public servant.  They are like roads: When you go on a road the road accepts everybody, you just pass.  So, I want to walk in an office and know that, that person who is going to serve me whatever way he voted, he did not public identify himself with any party.

Take an example from this House: You can see how we start getting divided early. You know we have been squeezing ourselves badly here with plenty of space there. We tried to ask for some space, they said, “No. no, no, you stay on your side. You chose your side, stay on your side” and you have been enjoying your empty space there in comfort. 

Now if somebody really can not feel comfortable sitting with me, how can he feel comfortable walking in an office where he knows that that person stood with me, I defeated him but that person is FDC or NRM.  If we cannot even afford to sit together, how can – Please let us protect our Public Service and it remains non-partisan and it serves all of us. 

So, those who are trying to oppose this- and they are enough educated people. Where there are no educated people, we have managed with UPE to catches up with them.  Where there are educated ones they will be there from different sources - business people and retired civil servants will run these local councils.  

Secondly, those opposing it are saying that we are rushing it.  Yes, we should rush it.  We held elections in February where we elected the President, Members of Parliament and District Councils. We must finish this process and get on with work.  Governments must be complete up to LCI so that we can get on with work.  

We do not want to be holding LC elections two years after the general elections of Parliament.  How are we going to run government?  So, we need to rush it and it is important that we all approve the suspension of the Rules, which is within our Rules of Procedure so that we move fast and get this approved.  I appeal to all members to support this motion and we approve it.  Thank you.

4.39
MRS LOI KIRYAPAWO (NRM, Budaka County, Pallisa): I thank you, Madam Speaker.  I stand to support the motion. When we want LC I chairpersons and their executive, we want people who will be committed.  We want people who are prepared to give in their time to do that job and who will be able to serve everybody.  If we allow public servants to retain their jobs where will their commitment be?  How committed will that person be to serve in two positions?

Madam Speaker, we have living examples, where we have ever had public servants taking on these offices, people look for them when they are no where to be seen.  They are in offices; they are in schools teaching.  These are the reasons why we are saying, public servants, anybody who wants to stand as a chairman at LC should resign so that we see that he is committed to serve the people.  These are the same people –(Interruptions)

MR ODONGA-OTTO: I am simply seeking a clarification.  How do we determine a committed person?  Is it the one who has something to do or the one who has nothing to do?  

MS KIRYAPAWO: I am sure hon. Otto you are a committed person.  If you were a public servant, you resigned in order to come here.  You are serving the people and the other one also is going to serve the people.

We are talking about education, but these are the people who have been manning our campaigns.  They have been organising our campaigns and moreover how many people do we have who have attained O’ Level education and do not have –(Interruptions)

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, let us not get lost along the way with the spirit in which we are debating this motion.  I am extremely sure that we are not saying that every place in Uganda has to be contested at LC I level by civil servants. And it is not true that all people who are going to stand are necessarily civil servants.  What we are saying, therefore, is that in places where there are rare species candidates who at the same time are civil servants at LCI level; let us leave these people to contest so that they can serve their people.  I thank you.

MS NVUMETTA: I would just like to ask how we judge people of rare species.  We are all people; we are all in Uganda, so how do we judge those people?

MRS KIRYAPAWO: I do not know whether the honourable member can give us a list of those rare species.  Which area in Uganda do you think you can find “rare species” that we cannot get other people who are not rare species to be elected to do this noble job?

Madam Speaker, people are talking about education, but I am sure in every village in Uganda, we have people who have attained O’ Level education, they are there.  There are those who have attained A’ Level.  

Hon. Latif Sebaggala has said we have even people who are working in the private sector who are business people.  How are they managing their businesses if we doubt their education?  Let us not try to think that we are short of people. Therefore, we have to tell those who are public servants to go and take over these positions.  If anything, let us give jobs to those who do not have them and not burden those who have enough by adding on.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, I am moving a motion that having heard the pros and cons on this Bill, that the question be put and we move to the next stage.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I put the question that the Local Governments (Amendments Bill, No.2) 2006. be read a second time.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS 
(AMENDMENT NO.2) BILL, 2006

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WOPUWA: Madam Chairperson, I want to move an amendment on page 2 of the Bill immediately after clause 1 to insert the following: “(2). Display of voters roll and composition of tribunals for administrative unit elections- 
For the purposes of the village, parish, ward and county elections to be held immediately after the commencement of this Act, the following provisions shall have effect notwithstanding anything in the Electoral Commission Act- 
 a) The period of display of the voters roll under section 25(1) –”

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chairperson, in our Rules, in a section, which I cannot recall well now are very clear on that. The amendment hon. Wopuwa has brought is almost a substantial amendment in itself, which the honourable members should have been given privilege to digest. It has almost seven clauses and it is bigger than the Bill; and our Rules cater for that; that notice should be given and a copy of it be circulated so that members can digest it. 

So, the way things are happening now, it is an ambush, and just because he may be having the numbers, it will pass, but we have not internalised it. I wonder what guidance you can give us on that, Madam Chairperson.  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we are making a law. We know there are laws, which govern elections; we have the Electoral Commission Act, and the way I am seeing my brother hon. Wopuwa moving, he wants to amend the 21 days, which are in the Act to seven. Does it mean that only this law will be applicable to the seven days or he wants to amend even the Electoral Commission Act?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let us hear what he is amending and why he is amending it, then you can speak against it, because I do not know why he wants to make these changes.  

MR WOPUWA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  
“ the Returning Officer shall appoint a tribunal to determine objections received by him or her under section 25(4) of the Electoral Commission Act;
a)	the Returning Officer, for the purposes of the elections, shall be a person appointed by the Electoral Commission;
b)	the tribunal to determine objections under section 25(5) of the Electoral Commission Act shall comprise all registered voters resident in the village;
c)	the tribunal shall elect a chairperson of the tribunal from among their number, under the supervision of the registration officer;  
d)	a person shall not be qualified to be a chairperson of the tribunal if that person:
i)	Is not a resident in the village, parish or ward; or
ii)	Is standing for election as chairperson of an administrative unit.”

Justification: The purpose of the above amendment is to enable the Electoral Commission to abridge the period of displaying the voters roll as provided under section 25(1) of the Electoral Commission Act from 21 days to seven days, and to provide for the composition of the tribunal required under section 25(6) of the Electoral Commission Act to determine objections arising from the display. That is my amendment.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chairperson, without underscoring the good intentions behind this amendment, and given the fact that we are all yet experimenting the multi-party politics, I wanted to know if hon. Wopuwa had given a copy of this amendment to the Government Chief Whip and to the Opposition Chief Whip so that we do not presuppose any bad faith; and my Chief Whip, hon. Wadri Kassiano, should –(Interruption)

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I rise on a point of procedure. Our Rules are very clear on amendment to motions. Rule 48 is extremely clear, it has many provisions, and the only requirement is to give a written notice to the Clerk. There is no requirement whatsoever to give a notice to the Government Chief Whip or the Opposition Whip. This amendment does not substantially affect the motion, which is on the Floor, rather it enhances it because it specifically refers to elections in villages, parishes and wards. So, Madam Chairperson, what hon. Odonga Otto is raising does not apply because our Rules are very clear on that.  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we all agree that the Local Council elections are quite important; everybody has agreed that these are administrative units and we need to do the thing in a right way. We are now putting here the days, reducing them from 21 to seven days. What is the rationale of moving – because I would have been happier if hon. Wopuwa told us the reasons why he wants to move from 21 days to seven days.  Is it because of what they say, that it must be quicker, supposing tomorrow we have time?  

MR WOPUWA: Madam Chairperson, I am looking at seven days instead of 21, first of all because we have already had a display before that. Secondly, because of the time factor, we are trying to ensure that we all have systems of government in place up to LC I; 20 days is too long considering that there will be a period for assenting the Bill. Madam Chairperson, that is my thinking, and that is why I made the amendment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, what does the Minister say about the Bill?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, if that is the reason, just time, then I think we would have maintained the law, and just put maybe an exception because you cannot make a law now just for the sake of convenience. We must make a law, which will survive the test of time.  

PROF. KAMUNTU: I appreciate hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s concern. But if you read the first paragraph on the proposed amendment, this is for the purposes of a village, parish and ward.  Now, displaying voter’s registers is not in a constituency, it is just simply – for instance, if I were in a village, even one day of displaying voter’s registers would be sufficient for me to have known what is on the voter’s register; and if there are objections, these objections can also be taken quite quickly. 

Incidentally, it is even in the interest of the voters themselves that you have a limited time when there is still enthusiasm before mental retention lapses by lack of excitement. You just give – this is a parish, a village; these are small communities, which can really look at the voter’s register without any difficulty. I propose that we maintain the amendment as proposed by hon. Wopuwa.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I want to know whether the mover of the Bill is interested in the amendment because it has been moved and spoken for and against.

MAJ. GEN. KAHINDA OTAFIIRE: Madam Chairperson, I consent to the amendment; I have no problems with it because it facilitates the holding of elections urgently and smoothly. It facilitates both the ministry, and the Electoral Commission. So, I am in full accordance with the mover of the motion. I thank you.  

MR KABUUSU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am concerned with these seven days. I want to inform this House that in my constituency, Kyamuswa, in Ssese Islands, even the 21 days normally allocated in the law have not been enough to display the registers –(Interjection)- may, you protect me, Madam Chairperson?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You are protected.  Please, do not echo the honourable member.

MR KABUUSU: The 21 days have not been enough for the display; voters in the islands, on fishing villages and landing sites only have to go to check from village to village if their names are either –(Interruption)

MAJ. GEN. KAHINDA OTAFIIRE: The law here says you only vote where you reside so there is no business of going to the other Island to find out if you do not reside there. You only vote from where you reside; and in this case, if every Island is a village or a concentration of villages - you cannot have a village comprising of Islands that is not a village. By village, we mean the location where you live, so it is a very small unit, even one meeting would be enough.

MS NVUMETTA: Quite a number of our islanders – as he said, you can spend a whole night on the water, so they reside in all these places looking for fish. Each one of those different islands, which is a village, is their point of residence. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But, hon. Nvumetta, I appreciate the special phenomenon of islands, but you are not going to tell me that these fishermen register in all these islands.  How can that be?

MR NSUBUGA:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I want to inform this House that it is not true that these fishermen do not have a fixed place; they do have residences, but their problem is that they are seasonal. But, even then, they are actually required to vote from the place where they registered. If election come when you have migrated from the place where you registered from that implies that they will not vote.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member for Buvuma, even on the main land, if you move from Kamuli where you registered and go to Kitgum, you obviously miss voting because you are not registered in Kitgum.

MR KABUUSU: Madam Chairperson, as I conclude my plea, is the Electoral Commission specifically in Kalangala not facilitated to do the work or is it a move to fail the voters in the islands to access registers? 

I have evidence, which I reported before I became Member of Parliament. The registers do not go in the time stipulated by Parliament. The people always complain that they cannot access the registers; they always appoint one person for a parish, a parish of nine islands with several fishing villages, definitely someone fails to display the registers. I do not know how orderly it is, if people fail in 21 days how can they in the seven days? Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, but hon. Kabuusu, perhaps you should ask the Minister for Justice to ensure that more electoral officers are sent to special places like the islands, which we know are really scattered.  I think you may want to ask for that.

MR TANNA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to support the motion and also the amendment moved. We are losing focus because when we say seven days of display that is after registration. After registration, the seven days provided for are for correction of errors and omission, therefore –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chairperson, I rise on a point of order in relation to Parliamentary language. The hon. Tanna has just made a clear statement that we seem to be losing focus, and it is absurd to imagine that all these 200 people with a minimum of A’level qualifications are losing focus at the expense of taxpayer‘s money.  Is the honourable member in order to make such wild allegations that can cause us problems before our voters are listening? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You know the honourable member is new, the Rules are also new and we have not distributed them.  Proceed, hon. Tanna.

MR TANNA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson for the wise ruling. The village population also has helped us to reach the figure of seven days. The average population of a village is around 700 to 1000 people and seven days are sufficient to sort out errors and omission.  The seven days given are sufficient because it is there for correction of errors and omissions; it is not another registration process.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I want to seek clarification from you my colleague who is saying that seven days are enough. You are looking at a village, I think for the purpose of the village, parish, ward and county elections - that means you are moving from a village to a county and a county –(Interjection)- yes, that is what it is for.  That means the place you are talking about is wide

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: Madam Chairperson, the eligible voters for these different levels are not the same. At village level, it is universal, it is everybody; at parish level, it is a college; at county level, it is all over, the chairpersons have already been elected. 

So, for the purpose of this registration, “county” is not there, these are colleges and a college is a one-day affair. So, seven days is basically enough; I agree with the honourable mover - seven days is basically for the village and a village should have about 200 people and 200 people is just one meeting.

MR KYANJO: Madam Chairperson, I beg to be excused. This amendment was passed but it was not seconded. I do not know whether it is procedurally right to debate it now.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, we are in a committee. Can you complete?

MR TANNA: Madam Chairperson, the submission is that the seven days are sufficient because when somebody is going to correct an error or omission, the display period, like the honourable minister has just clarified, under normal circumstance and not considering areas like the honourable colleague said about the island, seven days are sufficient to do so and if enough manpower is deployed by the Electoral Commission, they should be able to cover even the Island areas. So, I beg to support this motion. Thank you. 

MS SAUDA MUGERWA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am also concerned about the seven days especially as hon. Kabuusu has explained his position. This position concerns everybody, unless we amend the motion as proposed by hon. Wopuwa, because, when you read the first paragraph, seven days refer to only the village, parish, ward and county levels; the county is involved too. So really, if there is a contention, unless we correct this, we cannot say that the county is not there. 

I talk about this because of what I am going through. I am in court because of the Act we passed concerning days. We passed an Act in October that one should not be nominated before presenting ones academic papers 30 days prior to nomination –(Interjection)- yes, it is in order, I will not definitely sit down –(Laughter). 

So, I was taken to court just because I could not abide by that number of days. It is going to be the same thing here. So, if we have 30 days here, I do not see why we do not go with 21 days. In any case, this Act is not going to concern the forth-coming elections, that means we will have to go back and probably recommit clause 1 so that we exclude the 30 days for the people who are going to stand during in this forthcoming elections. 

Otherwise, I do not know whether we have 30 days to allow our people who are intending to stand and resign within the 30 days prior to their campaigns. So, we need either to recommit clause 1 so that we exclude -(Interruption)

MAJ. GEN. KAHINDA: Madam Chairperson, I am wondering why the honourable member is saying we do not have 30 days. As Minister of Local Government, I do not know when the elections are going to be held. Where does she get the information that there will not be 30 days? I have no information as to when the elections are going to be held. So, where does she get information that we shall not have the 30 days, which are required?

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Honourable Minister, when we were moving this amendment we said that it was urgent. And the House knows that we are in this Committee Stage because the amendment is urgent.  Now, how can the Minister stand on the Floor of this House and say that he does not know when the elections are going to take place? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the gist of this Bill is to exclude those people who are civil servants from participating. They are the ones who require the 30 days and the Bill says that you keep away from these elections that is what it says. 

As for the seven days, it relates to the voters registers. And I have voted a number of times; my register is in my village. I do not go to the county headquarters to check the register; I go to the polling station where I vote. That is where I check my register -(Interjection)– you had completed. You finish, hon. Namaggwa.

MS MUGERWA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I stood up not to oppose my party or my government, but really to pave way for all of us Members of Parliament because we are going back to our constituencies. If I went back today and somebody asked me when we are going to have the elections - I do not know whether it is going to be 10th. If we pass clause 1 of 30 days - because when you say that we want to –(Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Is the honourable member in order to insist when in actual sense he is a Minister of Local Government, the one in charge of the Electoral Commission, that the Local Government Ministry should tell us when we are going to have elections? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, our work is to facilitate the process. Determination of dates is not the business of the Parliament of Uganda. That is for the Electoral Commission. So, let us focus on facilitation because that is where we stop.

MS MUGERWA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. This is why I am standing up so that you can really help our people. Our people are campaigning for 10th August.  So, if we pass clause 1 of 30 days, they can even raise a question on the 12th whether they are not going to elect. If we want to stop the civil servants from participating, why don’t we say it straight away, instead of using an Act in away that is indirect. 

I agree with this Act if it is not going to affect the forthcoming elections –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Now honourable member, I have understood her problem. She is saying that until we brought this Bill, there was no requirement to resign that is what she is asking what is going to happen to those who had gone into the race already and no longer have the 30 days?

MRS MWESIGYE: Madam Chairperson, first of all, those who went in the race had done so illegally. Section 16 of the Political Party and Political Organizations Act prohibits any public officer even to engage in controversial political matters. So, even if they had joined the race, they were contravening the law, it was not allowed by that time. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the Electoral Commission came up and said the LC elections are going to be held on 10th   August. They have distributed – is it forms for application and whatever they have done so. People have been campaigning, now we are making a law, which today I know is going to go through.

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: I would like to inform hon. Nandala Mafabi that the pronouncements of the Electoral Commission are not divine commandments; they can be changed. What we are trying to do here is to harmonise the very problem the honourable lady here is raising, because there was a contradiction between the amendments moved in this House in the former Movement Parliament. The former Movement Parliament did not see anything wrong with civil servants participating in these LC I elections. This is a different breed of Parliamentarians, a multi-party Parliament, which sees a problem with the legislating spirit of the former Movement Parliament. I am here to cure that, hon. Mafabi. 

Now that we have agreed to cure that, the Electoral Commission must move in tandem with the dictates of Parliament; they do not make laws, they interpret laws. Therefore, the elections we are talking about must be in tandem with the dictates of the law, which is passed by this Parliament. I thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Thank you very much, Maj. Gen. Otafiire. That is why we like you. Prof. Kabwegyere has been the problem -(Laughter)- because he knew there were going to be LC elections and instead of bringing the amendment as the Maj. Gen. Otafiire has done - we would not have had this problem and this rush of 21 days reducing to seven. 

Honourable minister, I would also plead with you that let us leave the law of the days of display intact and deal with others; because we are trying to cure Prof. Kabwegyere’s mistakes.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Madam Chairperson, I am not a lawyer and so I have a bit of a problem here. The preamble to this amendment Bill states that it is to amend the Local Governments Act, and no other Act is mentioned in the preamble. I would like to know whether it is in order at this Committee Stage for anyone to come up with almost another amendment Bill to amendment an amendment. I just want to be comfortable that we are doing the right thing.

MS NALULE: I thank you, Madam Chairperson. I rise on a point of information. For the proposed section II, the preamble clearly says that “For the purposes of the village, parish, and county elections to be held immediately after the commencement of this Act, the following provisions shall have effect not withstanding anything in the Electoral Commission’s Act.” So, what this amendment is seeking to do is to amend the Local Governments (Amendment) Bill that the Ministry has presented. It is not amending the Electoral Commission’s Act. It is simply making cross-reference to the Electoral Commission’s Act, because section 25(1) of the Electoral Commission Act had provisions to the effect of displaying the voters’ register. So, it is amending the Local Governments (Amendment) Bill, which is on the Floor. It is not amending the Electoral Commission’s Act.  

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I have a small problem and -(Interruption)  

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I move that you put the question.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to her motion now.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new sub-clause be inserted into the Bill as proposed by hon. Wopuwa.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The title, agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chairperson, I want to move another amendment to insert another clause, which would probably be 7, to read as follows: “The above sub-section (5) would not apply to those wishing to contest for local council I chairpersons and executive portfolios.” I beg to move. You know we have just finished sub-section (5) so the above sub-section would not apply to those wishing to contest for local council I chairperson and their executives. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, you are reinstating the original position, the provision of the Local Governments Act, which we have already. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Yes, that is what I am doing (Laughter)

5.22
MAJ. GEN. KAHINDA OTAFIIRE: Madam Chairperson, with due respect to hon. Odonga Otto, his amendment is quite interesting but it is taking us back to square one. He is reinstating what I am trying to cure and, therefore, not helping this House and the country to hold elections - democratic elections for that matter -which are under a multi-party political dispensation. You see there was a time when these things were working and they were working okay; there was no complaint. Civil servants, all these fellows were participating under the Movement system. We argued in this House that we should maintain it and you refused. Having refused that you should obey and we must rely on it. Therefore, I refuse the amendment by hon. Otto and I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.24
THE MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled the Local Governments (Amendment) Bill No.2, 2006, and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.25
THE MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS 
(AMENDMENT NO. 2) BILL, 2006

THE MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Maj. Gen. (Rtd.) Kahinda Otafiire): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Local Governments (Amendment No. 2) Bill of 2006 be read for the third time and do pass.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, this law we have passed, how will it be read after these elections: because we are saying “for purposes of the village, parish, ward and county elections to be held immediately after commencement of the Act”? Does it mean that in 2011 this word “immediately” will be the one to be referred to? Let us do this thing well; I suggest that we recommit this 5(2) so that we do it in a better way.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala, if you want to recommit, you move a formal motion. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, as it stands it says “immediately.” That means there and then - that is okay for now but what about tomorrow? We are making a law, which should stay for years. Even in 2011 the word “immediately” will still be there. I think it is not relevant. What I want to say is that maybe this would have been in the justification. We should remove the phrase “immediately after the commencement of this Act.” 

MR MUTULUUZA: Madam Speaker, the wording is very clear that “immediately” is in respect of the elections to be held now, but the other elections after it will revert to the old law in respect of the Electoral Commission Act and the other Acts. It is a simple question of interruption and it should not confuse us.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I thought there was an induction course! These are the laws, which are being made, and they will stay. So, you cannot tell me that you are making a law for now, which will not be applicable tomorrow.

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I rise on the point of procedure. Rule 122 provides for recommittal of Bills to the Committee of the whole House and it provides as follows: “If any Member desires to delete or amend any provision contained in a Bill as reported from a Committee of the whole House, he or she may, at any time before a Member moves the third reading of the Bill, move that the Bill be recommitted either wholly or in respect only of some particular amendment or amendments.”  This House has already pronounced itself on the third reading of the Bill –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have not yet put the question.

MRS MWESIGYE: Even then, Madam Chairperson, one needs to move a substantive motion. Is the honourable member procedurally correct to have a mere conversation instead of moving a formal motion?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I actually asked you to move a formal motion.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, you see everything here is in a hurry that we cannot - so I want to move that we recommit this Bill so that we deal with 5(2) so that we delete the words “immediate after”.  I beg to move.

Justification: for purposes of good flow of English, and the law.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has been seconded but hon. Nandala, I think your interest is only in the word “immediately” not in the entire Bill, so you say “partially”. It is not a complete recommittal. Now you are making me do your work. Hon. Minister of Local Government, hon. Nandala objects to the use of the word “immediately” in this law because according to him the law is going to remain in force even for other LC I elections perhaps in 2009 or something like that. So he is objecting to the word “immediately”.

MAJ. GEN. KAHINDA OTAFIIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not accept the amendment. The word “immediately” is for a purpose. It was put here by the draftspersons and considered and it is for a purpose. It should stay.  

The word “immediately” can mean one month, two weeks - if the honourable member can tell me how long is forever, then I would remove this word, but it is necessary for the purposes of this law. So, Madam Speaker, I refuse the amendment.  

MR MUTULUUZA: Madam Speaker, this is very clear. In the proceeding elections we shall not have this Act amended; it will just continue like that so there is no need to remove it for purposes of amending the law. In the elections that will follow we shall not need this word; it will be redundant. Therefore, there is no need to remove it; we are just putting it there for these coming elections only.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, let me put the question. The question is that this amendment be recommitted to the Committee Stage as proposed by hon. Nandala. Let us do this by show of hands.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by show of hands.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have 19 in support of the motion, 46 against and 3 abstentions. The motion is lost.

(Question negatived.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS 
(AMENDMENT NO.2) BILL, 2006

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that the Local Governments (Amendment) Bill No.2, 2006 be read for the third time and do pass –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I agree, but if we total the number, the quorum of this House is a-third –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No this is by simple majority, so I put the question that the Bill be read for the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Title is settled and the Bill passed.

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED 
“THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS 
(AMENDMENT NO.2) ACT, 2006”

5.35
MRS BEATRICE BYENKYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Hoima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to bring to the attention of this House an issue, which is not only of personal concern but a national one and this is the sacrificing of children - the trend that it has taken. I am asking for your permission to make a few comments and bring it up.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Tell us what the problem is.

MRS BYENKYA: The problem is not only for me but all of society. The sacrificing of children has reached alarming stages and before I say much I wish to thank the Police for trying to recover the dead bodies and also to thank the LC officials who report and work together with the Police; and the public for their observance and surveillance. 

It is my concern that the children are now traumatised and stigmatised to the point that some of them, especially those in nursery schools around towns, don’t wish to go to school for fear of  being the next victims –(Interjection)- Madam Speaker, could I be protected from some bickering around?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are protected; please speak.

MRS BYENKYA: Thank you very much. Some children do not wish to go to school especially the baby class ones, and probably the middle class in the nurseries because they feel their security is not guaranteed. They feel that they will be the next victims. Some parents are rather insensitive because for instance when the newspapers show the pictures of some of the victims, the parents tell their children, “If you do not behave well what happened to this one will also happen to you.” And some parents out of desperation are going ahead to scare their children with the belief that if they are scared, they will not fall victims of sacrifice. So the general public is concerned, but what is the Government doing about all this? When the people go to work they have to ensure that their children are protected but are the people they leave at home responsible enough? 

That is where we have to come up as a government. This thing of traditional herbalists, are they really traditional herbalists? We really have to differentiate between a traditional herbalist and a witchdoctor whether they are one and the same or they are two different people. The children are concerned, the young ones, these are the voiceless who cannot talk but we as their guardians and parents should not close our eyes to it. Because next time it might be your nephew or your child and then they will ask you at the end of the day, “What you did as a legislator?” That is the concern I am bringing forward.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of Government Business, I do not know whether you have listened carefully to the questions raised by the Member. She has got a concern about children being sacrificed and, therefore, not being able to go to school.  Also she wants to know what work the herbalists are doing, maybe you could say something.

5.39
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This matter was brought to this august Assembly and the Minister for Youth was directed to handle it but since he is here we can only urge him to expedite his findings and possible solutions. You know, some of these things are intricate. If we hurry we may not do a good job but the Minister for Youth is here. We are all very concerned because this kind of behaviour is terrible and it is criminal. So, the matter is at hand and the Government is addressing it.  

5.39
MR LIVINGSTON OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Madam Speaker, when we commenced sitting here at 2.30 p.m. I expected the Leader of Government Business to come with a statement on this matter. It is a very serious matter of concern to all of us where fortune hunters have killed our young children in the most ghastly manner. Yesterday I could not control my tears when I saw a young kid being exhumed from a grave in the forest. I am concerned that in Uganda we seem to value the lives of animals much more than we value the lives of human beings.  

The Bill we passed here to give Shs 4.5 billion to the Ministry of Agriculture to fight animal diseases should have been preceded by a similar Bill giving the same amount of money to the Police to protect our children. This time round the Police has done a very good job, they should be reinforced. Why don’t we take the loss of lives of human beings as a matter of urgency? But the moment something touches animals we rush here and summon Parliament even when it is on recess to come back and discuss the lives of animals. Do we value animals more than human beings in this country?

MR ODONGA OTTO: On a similar note, we saw a similar ugly headline that 30 people died in a Jinja road accident and both Ministers of Works were here and none of them even made a statement. We only hurry to pass loans for animals and those human beings - God forbid - have died. I am just re-echoing hon. Okello-Okello’s concern and also challenging hon. Byabagambi that people do not have to die on the road to Kashari before a statement is made; they are all Ugandans! So, this Parliament should develop a mechanism of making people who die because of bad road users not just end up like animals. I expected a statement from the House about the over 30 people who died -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, on this matter of castigating the Government for not coming up with a statement, I am the one who called this meeting. I called it for a special purpose and not for any other business.

5.43
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I am not rising on the same matter but under the Rules of Procedure this is a matter of urgent importance since you have called this a special sitting. I have a petition from my constituency, which we shall present when Parliament sits but I want to raise the matter now for the record because I have read it in today’s newspaper that Gen. Salim Saleh is alleged to be grabbing land in Bunyoro. I want to bring it to this House that hon. Salim Saleh is not only grabbing land in Bunyoro, but also in Tororo County. There are 210 acres of land and as I speak now there is a cohort of staff from the Lands Department changing land titles and backdating documents despite the protestation of the people of Tororo County. We have gone to both the IGG and to court but everybody is fearing that the matter is being directed by State House and Gen. Salim Saleh the citizen –(Interruption)

MR OKELLO–OKELLO: Madam Speaker, I thought we had a matter on the Floor?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually I thought he was contributing about the sacrifice. You close on the sacrifice issue.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Madam Speaker, I am most grateful for the information from hon. Odonga Otto -(Interruption) 

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Point of clarification.

MR EKANYA:  Point of procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now how many people are on the Floor?  Yes, hon. Madada.

MR MADADA: Madam Speaker, a statement was made by hon. Byenkya and the Leader of Government Business committed that a statement will be coming to this House. Would it not be appropriate for us to wait for a statement from the Minister such that Parliament would resolve itself with a substantive motion having listening to a statement from the Minister? Are we gaining anything out of this discussion if we do not have a statement, and we are not going to resolve anything?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There was a Member on the Floor. He should be allowed to conclude his matter, and then we go back. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I was saying that I am grateful for the information from hon. Odonga Otto, but the examples are very many. About three months ago there was a cholera outbreak in Kitgum, which it is still ongoing. There have been 981 cases, 13 deaths and there are four new cases as of this week. Not even a single, formal statement has been made on the Floor of this House even to inform the nation -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable member, we have been on recess, no!  You are saying that nobody has said - we have been in committees. I only summoned the House for today, when could they have done all this business? We were in committees! 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I raised this long before we went into committees. I approached the Minister responsible long before we went into committees. I am saying that we should balance our response between the matters of animals and matters of human beings.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: I am very grieved and I would like to make a clarification. Madam Speaker, for a Member of Parliament who knows how government has spent billions of money in the effort first of all to end war in the North, to resettle people - and we have passed money in this House - for him to turn around that because of the outbreak of FMD we have approved money to vaccinate animals and we are not caring for people, is very unfortunate! Because this matter of – to say that government is not concerned with human beings is not correct. 

We have passed money in this House for the problems in Northern Uganda. We have equally passed here money for the Ministry of Health to deal with disasters.  So it is really very unfortunate that a Member can rise on the Floor and say that – and I wanted to clarify that actually government is equally committed to human beings.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker this exactly shows that the Government cares for the human beings more than animals. That is why in the original budget there was no emergency money for animals, we are coming here because it has happened. But for the human beings it was already catered for and that money is there.

Secondly, with due regard to my friend hon. Otto, yes, I agree and I appreciate your concern, really accidents are taking their toll on our people and everybody is concerned. And I have to appreciate the spirit in which you have put the question but my ministry is responsible for the infrastructure and transport, but it is not responsible for accidents. Accidents fall under the Ministry of Internal Affairs, and I am sure the Police – the Inspector General of Police, Kale Kaihura, was at the scene of the accident and is investigating how the accident happened.

MR MUWULIZE: Madam Speaker, when the honourable minister informs this House that his ministry is not concerned about – that the Ministry of Transport is not concerned or is not responsible for accidents, I wish to inform the him that when that fatal accident occurred in Lugazi, I took responsibility and informed the senior minister in that ministry. He said they were going to take steps, so the Minister should sympathize with us who keep vigil at burials of all those people who die on that highway. He should instead expedite whatever means it takes to work together with the Police as some instances actually require infrastructural involvement. So I beseech that government comes up to help these people to take up - or just take heed and we know that the Government is concerned and will be involved. Thank you very much.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I think my words were very selective when I said I am responsible. At the same time I did not say that my ministry cannot work with the Police, I was very clear. I said, “The investigation of how the accident happened is the work of the Police to make the report.” If the Police recommend that there is something wrong with the infrastructure on that very spot, then my ministry is responsible. Therefore, we work together; hand in hand. But in this case it is not my ministry to bring the statement to the House concerning how the accident happened on that road; it is the Ministry of Internal Affairs who should be telling this House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Youth Minister, do you have an indication of when you are likely to come with a report on the child sacrifice matter to the House?

5.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE, YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS (Maj. James Kinobe): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker –(Interruptions)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Madam Speaker, I am –(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you had finished?

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: No, he rose on a point of clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, conclude.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Madam Speaker, I never said that government was doing nothing about human beings. I never said so. I was talking about emergency response and that is all. I am saying that there should be a balance between the manner in which we respond when there are problems with animals and the manner in which we respond when there is a problem with human beings.  

Cholera has broken out. Government should have come to inform the nation that there is a Cholera breakout. Be careful, you are hearing for the first time honourable minister. Thank you very much.  This is what I am saying: I do not want to be misunderstood. I love animals, I love human beings; both must be healthy for the good of both.  I thank you.

MAJ. (RTD) KINOBE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My portfolio is youth and children affairs. I want to thank hon. Byenkya who has raised this matter and all the Members of Parliament who have supplemented her submission. I understand what everybody feels as parents after seeing what was in the papers yesterday and what has been coming out of the papers lately. 

As a ministry you know that some of these matters do not lie squarely on us. You will recall when we were responding to issues raised by Members of Parliament, issues concerning children are in several broad categories. There was the disappearance of children without even tracing where they are being taken. The honourable member had even informed us that some are being sold in markets. Children are also found dead after sacrifices.  

Yesterday there were papers’ reports that there is a racket of people selling each of them at Shs 3.5 million and so on. So these are complex matters, which we are trying to handle with other agencies like the Police so that we do not look at just the symptoms because we feel that what we see may actually be the tip of the iceberg and the complex network has to be unearthed. I sympathise with the bereaved families, but I also want to use this opportunity to ask all the parents and stakeholders to send messages to the education institutions and the parents.  

There is one common factor that has filtered through in all the incidents. The common factor is that all the children who have been reported missing are reportedly taken by people who know them or people who approach them with very kind offers, which the children sometimes accept. So I agree with hon. Byenkya that we need to send a clear message to the schools and the parents to educate our young ones not to accept gifts of sweets, money and so on from strangers or accept any act of kindness from people we do not know. This has been a common factor in all the cases that have been reported where children have been abducted. So honourable members, as you talk to your constituents, as you speak through the media, let us send clear messages to all the parents and the schools to warn our young ones that whenever they see a stranger approaching them with a kind of offer the first thing they should do is to refuse the offer and run away.

Madam Speaker, this specific case which moved tears in my elders’ eyes was a case of a young boy called Muguluma. Muguluma was kidnapped by a neighbour. This young man called Kintu was a neighbour to the father of Muguluma. He lured the boy into the house, gave him a sweet and when the boy got into the house, I think they administered the chloroform. The kid became unconscious, they used a mattress to wrap him up and bundled all other household items as if they were moving out of the house, to ferry the boy out. We got this information and we intensively moved together with the Police and other sympathizers since Friday last week.  

It is true the traditional doctors have been very instrumental in this but I want to inform Members that this time round it was also a traditional doctor who gave us a tip that this young man with his mother had gone to his shrine to get herbs to cleanse himself because he had already committed a crime. So this traditional doctor rang the security agencies; we took there the boy and he managed to identify the boy. We identified the mother and that is how we managed to close in on the boy who led us to the place where he had buried the unfortunate young kid. So I want to use this opportunity to thank the Police this time round for having moved in very fast and spending all the time we worked together, plus the positive traditional healers, because we should not condemn all of them; some of them are not as bad.  

I think at this point in time we need to discuss a way of handling some of the many apparent healers who appear on our streets. I think this goes back to us on the side of government. People are complaining about so many quack traditional healers who are on the streets of this country. Some tribes are not understandable, I am told others are Kikuyu, and they move with medicine and so on. I think this is a challenge to us on the side of government that we should regulate the activities of these traditional healers.  

Honourable members, I promise that within two weeks - after concluding the investigations in the issue that was brought to us about the Katakwi case and other areas - I will come with the comprehensive statement on this matter and I will beg your support so that we can ensure that our children live in a secure environment. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Can you conclude on the land and we go?

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I would like to request that at the earliest time possible you provide me space on the Order Paper to present the petition of these people of Tororo County regarding land grabbing by Gen. Salim Saleh and his partners. 

I want to put it on record that we welcome investment very much and I have sent a message to Gen. Salim Saleh that we are ready to co-operate with him to have the investors secure the land that is available, but the land should be secured at the market rates and according to the law of this country. Even if it requires compulsory acquisition, we are ready to support any investor to get land in Malaba and in any part of the country. But to hoodwink, intimidate and threaten to kill people in order to take their property at a give-away price is criminal; and it is a crime that some of us will stand very firm against. 

So I beg you, I have the documents here; they are not respecting the law, they are not respecting the Inspector General of Government either. Land titles are being altered, letters are being backdated. Everybody in the Lands Department is thoroughly intimidated, and even the District Land Board in Tororo is intimidated. Can you imagine that Gen. Salim Saleh with his team could pay for a whole team of the executive of the Tororo District Land Board to stay in Kampala for four days to forge documents, plan how to make forgeries and grab poor people’s land! Thank you very much. I beg that you give me an opportunity to present the documents.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I hope not to interrupt your committee work again and I expect that you will be able to report starting from the 15th of August when the plenary resumes. So, as soon as we resume we shall find a slot for that business.

6.02
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There are two issues which were raised: one was raised by hon. Nyakaisiki and another by hon. Odonga Otto. I would love the hon. Minister for Transport and Infrastructure to come up with a statement. It is not the first time that people are losing their lives at that spot near Lugazi. There have been so many accidents, almost on a weekly basis. However much the Minister is going to receive a statement from Police, the House would be interested to know how far the Ministry has gone in order to reduce accidents on that spot.  

For us who use that road, we get scared. Everyday there are accidents at that spot and that one goes to the infrastructure, maybe the way the road was made. There is need to redesign the road, otherwise if we wait for the report from the Minister, that would be part of his work. As the House we should get a statement from the Minister such that we can know what steps government has taken in order to reduce – because if the Minister for Youth is going to produce a statement arising from the killing of our children, what about the 30 people who perished just within this week? We need a statement! Madam Speaker, I would love to see to it that government gives this House a statement and the steps it is taking in order to reduce on the number of accidents, especially at that spot at Kitega near Lugazi. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honorable members, I do not know whether the Committee on Works has completed its work, but you could begin there before the repair resumes because you have the ministers available. You could start there and acknowledge the problems at that particular spot. I know the problems of hon. Muwulize and even his predecessor in this House used to talk about them. So we acknowledge that there is a problem, which I think the ministry should address. But first call him quickly in the Committee of Works.

6.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE, WORKS (Mr John Byabagambi): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable member and this time he has directed the question correctly to the infrastructure committee. We have identified what we call black spots on Entebbe road, Jinja road, and on Gulu road; and those black spots have been identified –(Interjection)- we do not have a lot of black spots on Masaka road, the problem on Masaka road is over speeding most of the time. But when you go to Entebbe road, Jinja road and Gulu road, there are black spots, and Lugazi has been also identified as a black spot. However, this entails a lot of work, including getting money. On some roads we need to remove the sharp corners; others are black spots whereby you come on a gentle hill then all of a sudden you go down, so when somebody is overtaking they do not see that there is somebody coming from the opposite direction.  

Then another issue has been the trucks. Some of the trucks that are imported into this country have got exhaust pipes on the wrong side; they have got exhaust pipes on the overtaking side instead of the other side. So they pour carbon emission, which is black smoke, and then somebody risks overtaking even when there is black smoke without noticing that there is another vehicle coming from the other direction.  

It is true our ministry is working expeditiously on rectifying those black spots, which have been identified on those highways; and when you come to Masaka road, that is where you find that most of the road humps are on Masaka road. There is a lot of indiscipline on that road because the highest vehicle density we have is between Kampala and Entebbe, the second is Kampala-Jinja and the third is on that road. We do not know whether it is because the distance is further and they are usually in a hurry. That is why we have tried to put a lot of humps and these rubble strips on the way to Masaka. But we are taking care of the black spots, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Let me invite the Minister for Youth, he wanted to invite you for something; you are inviting us to do something with you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS (Maj. James Kinobe): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I want to use this opportunity - but of course the formal invitations are going to come - to invite hon. Members of this august House to join other youths in the country and from all over the world in Lira on the 12th of August 2006 as we commemorate the International Youth Day.  

We deliberately chose to move up to the North because of the timing and the fact that for all the last eight celebrations we have had, it is the first time we are crossing the Nile.  And to give a new blend to the activities of that week, we decided to have a series of activities that will have debates, visits to internally displaced people’s camps, and we also thought that Members of good heart here can supplement our efforts. We are trying to collect items that you may not need to use in your homes, but which can be useful to our friends in the North. 

So from 07 August 2006 up to the final day, 12 August 2006, we shall have a series of activities including cleaning hospitals and streets. I will submit a detailed programme to the Members through their pigeonholes as we send the invitation cards but I request Members who have some items that they may wish to pass over to us so that we share them with our friends who are disadvantaged in one way or another, to pass them on through the Committee of Gender chaired by hon. Teopista Ssentongo. But if you can access me, that would also be good.  

The theme of this year’s day is: “Tackling poverty, the role of the youth in wealth creation”, and we have invited His Excellency the President to be the guest of honor at that function. It will be very heartening to see all the honourable members here joining the youth of the world and Ugandans in particular as we evaluate the distance we have travelled with the young people and then chart out a way forward. 

But on a light note, you have read in the papers that there were threats of boycotting the youth day because there had been reports of intended actions to disband youth and women councils. This matter just leaked into the papers by default because there is nobody who has sat down to disband anything. But there is a consultative process that is going on as a result of concerns by political players that we have retained individual merit organisations and institutions while we are under multi-party politics. So, I urge the youths and the women and everybody to go and support us in Lira because the rumour that we are undermining that initiative is creating a wrong impression about the whole intention of government. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, I adjourn the House to the 15th of August this year.

(The House rose at 6.10 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 17 August 2006.)
