Tuesday, 2 August 1994

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament Buildings, Kampala.

PRAYERS

The Deputy Vice-Chairman, Mr Joseph Ekemu, in the Chair.

LAYING OF PAPERS

DR TIBERONDWA:  Point of order.  The point of Order I would like to bring to your attention, Mr Chairman, is that we do not make a quorum.  Is it in order for us to proceed when we do not have a quorum? 

THE CHAIRMAN:  I, therefore, adjourn for 15 minutes. 

(The Council adjourned for 15 minutes.)

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Mr Kafumbe Mukasa):  Mr Chairman and hon. Members, according to Article 99 of the Constitution and paragraph 17 (3) (b) of the Uganda Revenue Authority Statute, 1991 - the Auditor General has submitted a copy of the Audit Report.  As the Uganda Revenue is financed by public funds and collects on behalf of government, this report should be laid before Parliament within 14 days when it is in Session or as soon as it convenes as required by Article 99 (3) of the Constitution and Section 28 (2) of the Public Finance Act, Chapter 149.  According to this Law, I am laying on Table the Uganda Revenue Authority Account for the year ended 30th June, 1992 and the Auditor General’s Report and opinion there on. I beg to do so, Sir.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER FOR HEALTH (Dr J. Makumbi) Mr Chairman and hon. Members, you must have noted the growing concern all over the country about this disease malaria. I thought it right that rather than waiting for questions to be asked, I come forward and give a malaria situation statement and -(Applause)- indicate to the hon. Members that they should assist to allow anxiety in the country and also appreciate that government is really of the seriousness of the problem and measures are being taken to address this scourge of malaria.  

Malaria is common all over Uganda.  Traditionally, it has been found in the central, northern parts of the country mainly and other areas have been relatively spared. The early malaria control programme had succeeded in reducing malaria in highlands of Kabale and Western Uganda.  Such situation prevails for a long time because of unfavourable climatic conditions for the malaria vector.  The vector could not tolerate the relatively cold climate in Kabale and surrounding areas and therefore, that area was relatively spared.  

Could I now, say something about the disease burden? Malaria is one of the four commonest causes of hospital admission throughout Uganda.  A demographic survey carried out in 1989 showed that malaria episode was 41 per cent amongst mothers interviewed.  This is a very high incidence.  The demographic survey showed fever prevalence, which varied from 13 per cent in South West Uganda, which was relatively protected to as high as 67 per cent in Eastern Uganda. In many parts of Uganda, malaria is number one cause of ill health and death among children below five years.  In 1988, 20 per cent of out patient department attendees were malaria cases and this was responsible for 9.6 per cent of patient deaths in the hospitals, which were reported.  By 1990, while malaria cases had remained relatively constant at 22 per cent, mortality had gone up to 14.2 per cent.  What does this data illustrate?  It basically illustrates two points. The malaria incident was originally less in the South West Uganda but it is now rising owing to the changing environment. 

Secondly, the burden is of a higher magnitude in other parts of the country previously spared and continues to cause more deaths than before since the population in these relatively non-endemic areas, is very low - they have very low immunity.  It is proven that, the more frequently mosquitoes bite you, the more you build up your resistance.  So, people here in the Eastern and Northern part and Central Uganda have more resistance to malaria than those in the Western area.  Indeed, when we were young students, it used to be one of the cardinal reports in the history illustration from the patient, where the patient happens to come from because this is very important.  

We have noted epidemics of malaria since 1988 to 1993 and these have been noted in Rukiga County of Kabale and Rukungiri District to mention a few. The major reason for the increase identified in the case of South Western Uganda was first of all as I have mentioned, climatic and environmental changes.  It is now much warmer in Kabale, than what it was ten or twenty years ago.  So, it is more favourable for the vector.  

Two, there is excessive and uncontrolled brick making and gold digging.  As you all know, when these holes are dug, they collect stagnant water, which forms a very good breeding ground for the mosquitoes.  The third reason is relative drug resistance of not only the malaria parasite but the vector and the reason for resistance by the malaria parasite is because mainly drug abuse and illicit dispensing of drugs in these drug stores which I have often condemned; which are unfortunately multiplying all over the country.  

So, hon. Members, let me hope that when my inspectors of drugs go around, you will give them maximum support to make sure that it is only legal drug stores -(Applause)- which are dispensing drugs to our citizens.  How about the vector itself? I have already said that the vector and parasite have also adopted means of survival.  The parasite is to some extent, getting more resistant to the standard drugs which have got in place but luckily enough this resistance is still very low but vector - the mosquito has become more aggressive.  

As you may have recalled, for those who come from areas where there are mosquitoes, you normally hear a mosquito when it is coming to bite you but the modern mosquito has adopted methods of combat.  It stops using the winds and literally floats towards the victim and you get a bite even before you hear that a mosquito is approaching.  This is a very well recognised method of survival in the whole animal kingdom.  It is not only us who are trying to survive, even the parasites are doing their best to try and survive.  

The fifth important reason is the population movement.  We are protected from malaria if we are having fewer infected people around because if we increase the load in the population, then the mosquito is more likely to spread the disease from one individual to another.  So, the mere movement of us who happen to be having parasites to Kabale may have caused the problem as well.  The most current epidemic is found in Rukungiri District.  For nearly two months now, about 250 cases of fever very much like malaria have been reported.  Many of these patients were found to be harbouring malaria parasites; so there is no doubt that that is an epidemic of malaria.  

But not all that glitters is gold; I wish to warn people that not every fever is malaria.  About 15 years ago, we had an illness in South Western Ugandan, which was very similar to malaria.  During that period, it took us time to diagnose it because it was difficult to diagnose that particular disease.  We later found that, this was a disease called typhus, which is carried around, by the house-born pageant.  Now, this is quite different and it responds to conventional anti-biotic which we happen to have plentiful in all our health units.  I have therefore, sent three teams to South Western Uganda and this week I am sending another larger task force to make more investigations to rule out any other possible causes of these fevers, which are being reported.  

Allow me to say something more about some resistance. Resistance of malaria to chloroquin has been widely reported in the press.  We undertook a study last year in four districts of Apac, Tororo, Kampala and Rukungiri and the study showed that chloroquin if properly used is still effective against malaria. Only about 10 per cent chloroquin drug resistance was discovered.  Other second line drugs such as fancida are also equally effective.  There should, therefore, be no need for panic at this stage because the drugs we have in the store are still quite effective.  My Ministry has enough stock of basic and secondary drugs for malaria control. We also are trying to ensure quality of drugs imported by having established the National Drug Authority as a watchdog for standards and responsible possession and prescription of drugs by unlicensed persons.  

Mr Chairman, through you I wish to thank the hon. Members for having wholly supported me to have this Bill turned into a Statute.  This, we hope, will reduce the drug resistance on the whole within the country.  Now, Members are likely to ask me what initiatives we have put in place apart from what I have said.  A number of activities have been initiated to restart the control programmes in my ministry.  It is not a secret that, while malaria control was well established as a programme by the Government of Uganda, it fell by the way side during the period of turmoil.  So, we are just having to restart the same strategy that should have protected us from the disease which is now bothering us.  

I wish to commend the Community based projects which are basically right now working on a pilot basis; which are now all over the country and are assisting us to combat this disease.  For instance, effectiveness of pregnancy and primary health care is being carried out in Mubende District, Kakira and Dokho, Apac and Kibimba.  With decentralisation this will be an important demonstration area where I hope hon. Members will take keen interest.  Treatment guidelines have been provided to all health staff.  District training programmes on malaria have been going on for nearly two years now.  How about vector control? Vector Control services which had almost had almost ceased, do exist now and they are being reactivated in the key areas.  The unit at Wandegeya has indeed been rehabilitated, both in terms of equipment and logistics, but this needs to be supported by activities of both local administration and the communities with the guidance of us the political leaders to reduce breeding sites for the vectors.  

My Ministry has now developed a five-year malaria plan. The four basic elements of the strategy are (1) Provide early diagnosis and prompt treatment.  (2) Plan and implement selective and sustainable preventive measures including vector control.  (3) Detect early and contain or prevent epidemics as the case happens to be now.  (4) Reassess regularly the country’s malaria situation in particular the ecological, social and economic determinants of the disease (5) Provide adequate information and education to the communities.  For the programme to succeed, we will need community full participation and an integrated approach.  The effort of other sectors is very critical, as I have already reflected.  In addition, adequate human and financial resources must be mobilised to face this new challenge. I therefore, need more money to cover the entire country, since all the 39 districts are now affected.  

In conclusion, we should realise that malaria is a difficult disease to eliminate.  Indeed, in our language we have now changed - when I first joined the medical profession, 30 years ago, we were talking about malaria eradication but I wish to put it to you that even the big powers which are involved have since realised that we can only control this disease, at best. Malaria will continue to be a major cause of ill health and death for some time.  

Our major focus is on prevention by ensuring prompt diagnosis and early treatment. Patients should therefore, seek medical are; and here I wish to appeal to the hon. Members, that we have a District Medical Officer in every district.  I am surprised to read about out-breaks in the news media as though these are the people who are meant to report disease incidents.  We have radio call facilities in almost all the districts.  But I am surprised to read about outbreaks in newspapers or even get a message from the President’s Office.  

It is us to educate the population and the community in districts that they should use these facilities and some of these epidemics and out-breaks can easily be contained even by the District Medical Officer is they are noted early enough.  In addition I appeal to the public to take personal and community preventive measures to ensure that we contain this epidemic so that is no longer of public health concern.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR OMADI: It is true the episode of malaria is taking quite a number of lives. But 30 years ago before you joined the Ministry we used to have some field staff from the Ministry as assistance to advise people.  But these people have been withdrawn and their services have come to a stand -still.  Not only in the rural areas, but also in the urban areas.  They used to destroy the ponds in which mosquitoes survive.  But all these are now forgotten.  Now, what does the Minister intend to do?  Because the roads in the rural areas - the path are not kept clean because these people are no longer there.  Latrines are never dug, water is everywhere, even the dew in the mornings and in the afternoons, and all these harbour mosquitoes, maize and so on.  What does the Minister intend to do in order to revive the services which used to exist 30 years ago; and possibly 20 years ago.  

DR MAKUMBI:  Mr Chairman, the hon. Member is raising a very pertinent issue, which I, actually, mentioned during my statement.  This is the very strategy, which we are trying to reactivate.  He might be a bit concerned about the retrenchment exercise that took place recently.  We are trying to address that issue with the Ministry of Public Service to ensure that these -(Inaudible)- cadres are actually retained so that we have an effective Vector Control Programme. I however, wish to express some degree of concern when we are embarking on this exercise of decentralization.  It is important that authority from the line Ministry should continue to flow down to the districts, which are incapable at the moment of defending them to make sure that they have effective Vector Control Programme.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR PINTO:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like to pay tribute to the Minster of Health for bringing this information at an appropriate time.  Far too many times it has been the reverse, but I think we should recognise this imitative.  (Applause) I wish we could have more of this on food production and storage.  On high yield crops, I would like to hear some kind of advance report, about rural electrification.  Because I think that is when we are going to determine about functional ministries.  Yes, it is one thing to have a Ministry but is it functioning? More appropriately I am worried about malaria in general, but more specifically today, I do not know whether the Minister can elaborate onto us what action is being taken regarding cholera and dysentery, especially, in view of the refugees getting out of Rwanda; and the movement of traffic between Goma and Uganda, that today when you tune on any radio they talk of out-breaks of cholera and dysentery and the track drivers are carrying them.  Are we in danger, if we are in danger, especially, for Kabale what is being done to prevent this spread into Uganda?

DR MAKUMBI:  Mr Chairman, I appreciate the statement which the hon. Member has put forward.  Let me hope that we continue to interact in this way so that we solve problems  It is not us who carry portfolios who are necessarily any people who can solve these problems  We have to solve them jointly.  Now, the issue raised about cholera is a serious one.  We all know that wee are surrounded by countries, which are already ravaged by cholera.  I have received reports from Kisoro indicating that some refugees from Goma are beginning to arrive in that district. We have set a task force in place right now they must be on their way heading for Kisoro to make sure that we lay the strategies, which we have already laid in Ntungamo.  

For example, we have in Kitwee, we have a very big complex occupied by refugees in number 4500 to about 5000; and this is a demonic population, they are moving to and fro.  But we have already set some strategies out there and we are moving to Kisoro to make sure that we do the same.  We also maintain our hold in Kabarole, which has also had some problems, and I must warn hon. Members that all districts, which happen to be on the border, are potentially threatened.  So, in these areas this is where the District Medical Officer and the Community Leaders and we the political leaders should be very vigilante to make sure that we react at the instance, to make sure that we contain a situation.  

So far the strain of cholera which we have had is lucky enough responsive to very simple antibiotics like tetracyclines.  So, the situation once discovered in time can be contained and we avoid the death, which we have witnessed in Goma and other areas. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR NTIMBA:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  As we all know, Mr Chairman, the spread of malaria is promoted by the presence of stagnant water like ponds and swamps; and there will be a desire for us to get rid of these ponds and swamps, which are stagnant water.  However, on the other hand, the environmentalists would not be happy to see us get rid of these swamps.  I was wondering whether there is liaison between the Ministry of Health on the one hand, and the Ministry of Natural Resources on the other, to ensure that there is no conflict of interest in our desire to get rid of the mosquitoes and at the same time to preserve our environment.  Thank you.

DR MAKUMBI: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  It has been observed that it is stagnant water that causes problems  Lucky enough in our swamps there is relative mobility of the water that makes it less from - to have a breeding cite for the infector - the mosquitoes.  But I also wish to ad that it is not only the stagnant water which is important, we also have to consider we individuals who are infected if you reduce a number of people who are infected in the population that, per say, is good enough to control malaria.  Because not every mosquito bite is infective, it is only infective if the mosquito has beaten someone who has malaria and goes and bites another one who does not have malaria. 

I am glad when you mention about these, which are not in the country, my colleague the Deputy Minister of Local Government is here.  Because as far as that programme of the control of malaria in these areas is concerned, we are working hand in hand.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR OPIO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like the Minister to clarify on the efforts he will try to provide for prisoners up country.  The prisoners up-country used to have attention of some periodic attention of medical staff.  At the moment, especially, up-country you will find that when the prisoners are sick of malaria they were subjected to some pressure to produce funds in order to buy medicine, and you know when you are in prison it is very difficult to provide funds.  So, I would like the Minister to clarify if he has any policy of how to provide medicine to prisoners who are suffering from malaria, especially, upcountry. Thank you very much.

DR MAKUMBI:  Mr Chairman, I do not know whether I should be answering this question because the Minister of Internal Affairs has a fully-fledged medical department to handle medical issue.  I will probably just inform hon. Members that, we in the Ministry of Health are always ready to assist prisons whenever they have epidemics, just as we are assisting schools.  Collection of individuals like schools and prisons actually forms a very favourable environment for epidemics to breakout.  We are monitoring them and doing our best to make sure that we assist our sister Ministry to contain whatever situation that arises.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR KAIJA:  Mr Chairman, I am seeking clarification from the Minister.  The one is that, when some Members are leaving Uganda to go abroad, they are usually tested for HIV - sorry when people are leaving their own countries coming to Uganda they are tested, that way.  But here in Uganda, I do not know whether they are tested or not.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, hon. Member, are you talking about HIV or malaria?

MR KAIJA: For malaria, excuse me; I am still coming to malaria.  These patients normally suffer from some kind of malaria, and when they are here or when we are here and a mosquito bites that particular person, who is health what precautionary measures do we have when most of our hospitals are not well stocked with drugs.  Especially, Kiryandongo Hospital, which hospital has been without drugs for a long time.  Now that you have said there are some drugs, but we lack staff at the same time.  So, there are two things persisting, either we have drug or wee do not have the staff.  We have been operating without a medical doctor for a long time and several people have died.

DR MAKUMBI: Mr Chairman, probably the only comments I would make is that - the significance of HIV with malaria is that it suppresses the immunity and, therefore, these people are more prone to frequent attacks of malaria then other individuals.  As far as testing is concerned I think that is another issue which we can tackle in another forum.  

As far as drugs are concerned in health units, I have often expressed my concern that you do not have absolute luck of drugs.  You have drugs that you do not need and you do not have drugs, which you need.  The only people who can correct this question are those who are actually - the consumers who are using these drugs.  

So, unless we get a constant feed back as to what is required and what is not required.  The same delivery patterns will continue, and therefore, you continue to get drugs, which you do not need.  So, this is a two way system, we have to be assisted as to which drugs are required and every health unit has a management committee which is headed not by doctor but one of us, community leaders.  So, the responsibility is ours to look into these stores and make sure that we have the drugs, which we need, and we do not get those who we do not need.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

BILLS 
 SECOND READING

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that ‘The Non-Performing Assets Recovery Trust Bill 1994’ be read a Second Time.  I would like, through you, Sir, to inform the hon. Members at the Bill now before them is a reprint which reflects the Amendments which will be reported upon by hon. Kanyomozi, who is the chairman of the Sectoral Committee on Parastatal Bodies for the enlarged committee he chaired to make recommendations.  Therefore, as you read this Bill it incorporates the recommendations of the Parliamentary Committee.  

You will recall that since 1992/93 fiscal year we undertook to restructure Uganda Commercial Bank so as to make it a financially, viable Commercial Banking Institution. The restructuring of UCB is necessary, because currently UCB has over 50 per cent of the Commercial Banking Market.  Because of its dormancy, its inefficiency is immediately reflected in the interest rates level.  The reason why interest rates have not fallen to levels, which would like to see, is mainly because of the inefficiency of the Uganda Commercial Bank controlling the biggest percentage of the market.  

Under restructuring the following measures were to be undertaken, Sir.  One, the management of UCB was to be strengthened.  This required us to appoint a new board sign a performance contract with management and give greater autonomy and authority to the management and running its affairs; (b) Recapitalise the bank, (c) Reduce unnecessary expenditures and loses, especially to abolish those branches that were unprofitable, (d) Under the same restructuring plan the amount of bad loans were to be transferred to the non-performing loans recovery trust which is to be established by the Government as a new entity with a recovery or liquidation of bad assets; and (e) Under the same plan we are to prepare UCB for privatization, under the privatization plan Government’s objectives is to sale shares to Ugandans.  However, before we privatize the UCB we have to immediately transfer all non-performing assets estimated at Uganda Shs50, 000,000,000/- off the Uganda Commercial Bank balance sheet.  

As argued above with other measures being undertaken it is envisaged in the short run that UCB operating costs will be reduced thus allowing the Commercial interest rates to case.  It is, therefore, hoped that implementing the above reforms will result in the strengthening of management, in organizational development, modern banking techniques, financial management and administrative development of UCB.  

Furthermore, I should emphasize, Sir, that in order to clean UCB balance sheet it is necessary to transfer all the non-performing assets to Recovery Trust.  This will in turn give us a chance to judge the performance of UCB management and new as it is being put.  Measures taken so far, since early last year we have implemented the following measures in respect to Uganda Commercial Bank Restructuring.  One; a new Board of Directors has already been appointed.  

Two, top management has been restricted.  There, in order to reduce operating costs, the new board has rationalized staff, which in some cases has resulted in reducing numbers, and a number of unprofitable branches have been closed.  What are the impacted of these measures, Sir? The impact of these measures has resulted on reduction of the operating costs at Uganda Commercial Bank, which to great extent has allowed interest rates to fell.

However, Government believes one major reason, why interest rates are still high, is because of the high operating costs still at Uganda Commercial Bank.  We, therefore, believe that more reform measures need to be implemented in order to make UCB profitable.  We therefore, do not believe that measures taken so far are enough to achieve these results as suggested in the NRC Committees. We wish to implement much more imaginative reforms which interlia includes the following; one, we shall soon be signing a performance contract with management of UCB. 

Two, taking stock of the impacted of the measures undertaken, we shall design and implement more reforms necessary to make UCB a viable Commercial Bank.  Three, in the mean time we will request you hon. members to approval the Non-performing Assists Recovery Trust Bill, 1994 so that we transfer all non-performing loans of UCB Balance Sheet; and, lastly, as you are already aware, Sir, as a way of stopping further accumulation of Non-performing Assets that we require the tax payers funds to recapitalise UCB in future, we are going ahead to prepare UCB for privatization. (Interruption)

MISS KADAGA:  Point of order.  The Attorney General is sleeping on the Front Bench?  (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please, hon. Members.  The Attorney General was very close to me; I think he was just contemplating.  (Laughter) Order, please, order hon. Attorney I have already ruled on that matter.  Please, hon. Member you go ahead.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr Chairman, I would like to turn briefly to the provisions of the Bill as amended by agreement with the Sectoral Committee.  Hon. Members on page 6, in part 2, because the earlier one are just definitions, we do not have to go into these discussions.  But the major provisions in Clause 4, on page 6, which seeks discussions.  But the major provisions in Clause 4, on page 6, which seeks to establish the trust; and in Clause 5, we give the objectives - objects of the fund when established and in six we provide for the Board of Trustees of the fund; and on page 8, Members will find there the functions of the board which will be appointed and the administration of the trust, as the trust should be administered. Naturally in order not to tempt members of the boards clause 9 provides for their allowances, sot that they are not attempted to not collect the money seriously.  

Part 3, Sir, provides for the powers and operations of the trust, and in Clause 10, we establish a seeking fund, and then in Clause 11, we provide for the power to transfer the non-performing assets to the trust, for the trust to start having the power to collect the money.  

Any other provision, I would like to draw the attention of the hon. House, Sir, is part 4, about the Non Performing Assets Recovery Tribunal, if Members are aggrieved by the action of the trust, the Members can appeal to the tribunal and from their, we provide for how the tribunal can be appointed. You will find that people who are already involved with no recovery performing assets will not qualify to be members of the tribunal or the trust because they may find the work difficult to take action on themselves.  We will also provide for jurisdiction after the tribunal, some one aggrieved can still appeal to the Supreme Court if he still finds just as far he is concerned has not been done.  So, there is provision for appeal.  

On Clause 18 on page 12, we provide for procedures of the tribunal how it should operate.  In part 4, Sir, on page 14, we provide for the financial on serious provisions on how the management of the funds is going to be conducted.  On page 15, there is some discussion, which we would like to make with Mr Kanyomozi and his committee, about the concept of giving -(Interruption)

BRIG. KYALIGONZA:  Point of order, Mr Chairman, I am standing on a point of order, in relation to last year, the Select Committee was appointed and it make its recommendation, and the recommendation was legating what the minister is trying introduce now, and he has not come up to bring this Bill again for us to approve.  The recommendations read as follows; “The UCB should not divert itself from its responsibilities by relegating its duty to recovery of loans it granted to a different body.  Trust especial, recovery department within UCB should be set up to recover the Shs39.2 billion, the committee, therefore, rejected the idea of setting up a trust.”  I, the Minister, in order to introduce what was already rejected by this House, before we discuss.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister is in order.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr Chairman, these recommendations were made last year, and since last year, the committee is a brief with development, and I was saying in the beginning, that after I have moved the Second Reading, the Chairman of the Parliamentary Committee will make a report to the House, but I must make the Second Reading first for him to make a report.  

So, my dear Matia - on page 15, this Bill as it is reflects the recommendations of the Parliamentary Committee, but we shall, on Clause 26, we shall have to discuss with hon. Kanyomozi’s committee again because in their recommendations which is produced here, there are saying a Statutory Instrument made under sub-section 1, of his section shall not be affective until approved by the legislature.  This defeats the purpose of a Statutory Instrument, because it is an administrative measure.  If the instruments to administer the law cannot be implemented until the legislature approves, then whatever matter, they feel stronger about should be put in the main body of the law, and leave those matters to be handled administratively to the Minister issue a certain instrument, otherwise, administration of this law can be impossible. 

Secondly, Sir, Clause 27 (4) there are Amendment which is incorporated there says the “Minister may by Statutory Order with approval of the legislature amend the schedules.” Now, if there are matters in the schedule, which the hon. Member of the Committee want to be substantive law, they should be shifted to become part of the main law and live in -(Interruption)

CAPT. GASATURA:  Point of order. Mr Chairman, on point of order; is the hon. Minister in order to begin debating and opposing his own Bill which he is presenting at this time?  Rather than move Amendments and circulate them, because he seems to be opposing his own Bill. Is he in order, Mr Chairman?

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member take your time, the hon. Minister is doing his best to inform you before hand.  He is in order.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr Chairman, I want to inform hon. Gasatura that I have been in this Parliament making laws for 15 years, so it is in order - so what I am saying, I am giving you intention that we shall discuss - we shall discuss with the committee about their intention and I am pointing out that, it is contrary - to issue an instrument, it must also come to Parliament.  The other - I am just explaining, I do not see why you get offended.

THE CHAIRMAN: Please, hon. Minister proceed with your revolutions.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr Chairman, apart from these two Amendments which we need to revisit, the Government is in agreement with the Amendments recommended by the committee and that is why we have reproduced this Bill together to make it easy to come up with a Bill acceptable to everybody.  Lastly, Sir, there is just a provision for the first Schedule, the Second Schedule and Third Schedule.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I would like to call your attention, and as you to desist from that murmur, so that the hon. Minister finishes submission of the Second Reading.

MR KAFUMBE MUKASA:  I am praying to the attention of the Members to note the provision of the First Schedule, Second Schedule and Third Schedule as provided in the Bill.  With these remarks, Sir, I beg to move.

MR KANYOMOZI (Kajara County, Bushenyi): Mr Chairman, I would like to support the Bill, and present a report of our committee to which the previous Bill was referred to.

On the 13th April, this year, the Minister of Finance referred the Non-Performing Assets Recovery Trust Bill, 1994, to the NRC Committee o Parastatal Accounts for more detailed examination before its Second Reading. The Bill has not been red the Second Time and I think it is appropriate for us to consider this Bill in detail.  In doing so, I am aware of the previous report to this House which had, actually, rejected the setting up on the Trust.  I am a Member of that committee also. At that time, we thought the size of the Non-Performing Assets was such, that it could be handled internally in the bank.  Things happened, if you read our committee’s report, at that time, the total non-performing assets amounted to Shs 32 million.  

As I speak, the amount collected to the nearest is nearly Shs60 billion and therefore, the impact of such a magnitude cannot be handled internally in the bank without affecting the total financial institution in this country.  It is for this reason, that our committee together with co-opted members from the committee on the economy and sectoral committee on finance and planning, decided that we accept and look at this Bill, with a view to recommending to this House, what should be done, and what is possible without damaging the financial institutions in this country.

Let me first touch on the size and shape of things that UCB handles.  We all know UCB is the largest bank in this country.  It controls over 60 per cent of the total credit in the country, and if it was to fail, the repercussions would be far reaching I would like to convince hon. Members that in going against our previous recommendation, we had the interest of the country and the interest of financial institutions in mind, and that is why we went the way we did.  How did we approach our issues?  First we looked at the size, and we agreed that we need to do something, there was a problem, because the committee wanted to know, actually, who are the Members of this society, who owe money to the UCB.  

At the beginning the banking institution and the Ministry of Finance had refused to avail the list of us.  On the understanding that it was this House, which passed the Financial Institutions Statute, which exclusively allows confidentiality on the dealings between the bank and its customers.  We, however, argued the case that since they had defaulted the issue did not arise, because the mistake was already done, and protection could not be held even in the courts of law, I hope we, therefore, proceeded and with the cooperation of the Ministry we were able to get this document, which we still thought that confidentiality demanded that we restrict it to the co-chairman of these committees and brief our Members accordingly whenever the issues of this nature arose.  The names are many, they are over 50,000 people, but the most important ones are only 2,000, because the last 50, 000 the whole lot are the small scale farmers in peasantry who really as I will in the course of our discussion of my presentation give you.  

We held six meetings and various consultations at all levels with the institutions concerned with the Ministry of Finance, all the three Ministries did attend our meeting with the Attorney General’s Chambers with the Bank of Uganda, and the concerned bank UCB; and we came to the issues, which I am going to touch.  The committee had two issues or two areas of concern.  First, whether there was any justification, since we had seen that there was not before, to set up a trust.  

Second, whether if we had set up a Trust, the Bill, which was presented to us, was able to meet the objects of recovering the money that was borrowed.  We went through in details, and discussed these matters with the organisations that I have mentioned and the Ministry, we required from the Minister of Finance, and to the concerned bodies, why it was necessary to start another parastatal, given the Government policy that we are now selling away parastatals, because we thought this would be a contradiction in terms We were able to get information that we considered adequate.  

We also had an issue which we raised; if the UCB has failed itself to collect these loans, how are we sure that the Trust could do it?  We thought the UCB itself should have done this work, but we realised that there were problems within the UCB itself, which would not allow it to do so.  We also considered, whether if the UCB was strengthened, and it is loan and implementation and monitoring evaluation department given teeth could we not save taxpayers money, and get these loans recovered?  We know very well, that UCB had legal channels to do so; we also knew it has an administrative channels to do so, it had actually taken some people to court, it had taken certain steps but we realised that that process would take such a long time, that in the end we would not be able to achieve the objective of having a sound financial system in this present state of our economy.  We have started on liberation; we want to privatise the bank.  We wanted financial sector to be responsible to the needs of the economy when the economy is liberalised, and we do not think the UCB on its own would do so very quickly.  

Furthermore, the Government had taken certain steps, it had gone and negotiated a loan from the World Bank, to tune of dollars, 8 million.  This loan is intended to assist other financial sector institutions in the country including UDB, the Coop. Bank, the Central Bank, so as to be able to meet the challenge with those liberalised economy.  Given that, we did not think -(Interruption)

BRIG. KYALIGONZA:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I am rather perturbed, and whereas I respect so much the committee that was set up by this House, to review what had previously been passed and with the wisdom of this Sectoral Committee, having come up with recommendation, I am wondering whether this recommendation is not contradicting what had previously been rejected, and at the same time, the committee gave itself some powers that had not been spelt out in its terms of reference. 

I am seeking clarification whether it was not necessary for this committee to have come and recede the previous recommendation of this House. As long as UCB burdened with this colossal amount of money, there is no way -(Inaudible)- and if interest rates do not go down, there is no way you are going to have positive investment because money still remains expensive.  The other reasons which I have explained. 

Furthermore, it is implicitly now proved.  Therefore, given that, what else do we need.  It is that background that made us take the decision hon. Members to recommend what we are going to recommend to you.  

I want now to look at what to do.  Currently, as I said the position or the bad debts, the ones you will find in the report are 52.3 billion.  The objective of the bill, which we are recommending to you, is to remove this 52.3 billion of the balance sheet, clean the UCB balance sheet and place that amount in the trust.  It does not mean we are writing it off and I am going to touch about the issues of writing off, we are putting in the trust so that it can still be collected but we have a clean balance sheet of UCB Now, there have been proposals and suggestions from some Members in the corridor and in the lobbies, if we did that, there are various implications.  First, if we did we clean the balance sheet of UCB by writing those bad debts, we would send bad signal to the banking -(Inaudible)- people would go on borrowing knowing very well that if they fail to pay, part of this money is depositors money.  Who will pay the depositors?  What signal would you send to the people who were encouraged to save?  I would be a negative signal and that is why we are not saying, try to borrow and get a write off.  No, we say borrow and pay back.  But let us pay back when the balance sheet is clean so that the impact or new interests can be paid so that structuring into the financial system is replaced.

We also looked whether we could not use the UCB. We found that the similar staff of UCB who would otherwise have done this work cannot do it.  Why?  Because 3 billion of this money is owned by these very senior people. It is like asking a thief to catch a thief.  (Laughter) So, it would not be possible. In the circumstances, to use the UCB senior staff, to be the very ones to clean when, as the Bible says, when you do not start pointing at the other man’s bad eye when you have a pillar in your eye.  Because they would not be in position to do so and they are not able to do so because their fingers area deeply involved in this very few we are trying to clean. (Interruption)

BRIG. KYALIGONZA:  Point of clarification. Mr Chairman, hon. Kanyomozi has revealed something very serious, that most of these debts owed - Shs3 billion is owed by Members of staff of the Bank.  I am wondering what action of the disciplinary nature has been taken against these people who drained the Bank off its resources.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, since this is a report you will only be convenient that you allow hon. Kanyomozi to exhaust his report.  Please go ahead.  

MR KANYOMOZI: I quote it Mr Chairman, and if you read in body of the report, disciplinary action has already been taken on some of them; and some of us are suggesting even in the schedule, that those who did that will be followed even when they have already left.  So, we are not leaving anything not covered.  They will still be followed wherever they are, if they gave the loans against the set regulations and procedures.  If they acted against the set norms, they will still be followed and that is why we provided those schedules.  

We know that some of them make - there has been a rumour, they may, even have been beneficiaries of those bad loans.  Where they say, you give a loan and as the Manager, you follow it and the man gives you something also.  I think we have heard the recent case in Tororo, where the lady who has money in Tororo said, no, she was not going to take it because the Manager said he had also got the Loan, if there is anybody to pay all of them must pay.  So, we could not then use those same people.  I am not saying the whole of UCB is in that mess. There are some hardworking citizens in UCB. But there are others who abuse their positions of office and, therefore, we need to protect the entire institution without having anything to stop us.

I would now like to see what the Trust is going to do.  We discussed the situation that we make, about the Trust and why this Trust could not cover other Financial Institutions.  Our Committee had already made Uganda Development Bank.  We had also produced the Report.  Somebody is asking us that how do we know.  We have produced the Report, which we have circulated if the hon. Member has not read it, that is very unfortunate.  But are we also going to produce the Report on UDB.  UDB also has a similar problem to UCB. There is also the Coop. Bank.  The Cooperative Bank has similar problems. We looked at those Institutions and why do we have to select UCB alone, and not UDB, Coop. Bank at the same time so that the Trust covers everybody.  The reasons why we did not touch these are known.  I will enumerate them at a later stage.  

There was also a problem when it was ethically right to clean the balance of UCB, while leaving the balance of other banks because they also have non-performing assets.  Why did we particularly choose UCB? In case of UDB, there is no Depositors money involved.  The UDB norms, are lines of credits, borrowed by the Government of Uganda; guaranteed by the Government of Uganda.  The ordinary wanainchi does not deposit money in UDB

Second; more about cooperatives. The Cooperative Bank is a private Bank.  It is a Bank run by cooperators.  They will make their own way of handling their own business. 

Three; what about the other banks.  The other banks ethically can argue that since they have bad debts also, and in most cases debts caused by domestic arrears when they lend money to people, and people supply the goods and services to Government and government fails to pay.  Those domestic arrears are affecting other financial institutions. The macro-economic policies of Government also affect them in the way they are affecting UCB

For competition you would have covered everything.  But the task would be too much for us to handle. That is one.  

Two; as I have already mentioned the size of UCB alone, will 80 per cent of the branch network in this country, with the 60 per cent of Commercial Deposits; we needed first to take one at a time and deal with it, handle it, and put in good state.  Because if we did that, we would have covered 60 per cent of the total commercial deposit, we would have also covered the 80 per cent of the total branch in this country.  And that is the reason why we say, let us start with this big and settle it; tame it so that it can perform.

There are in this grant, provision to handle UCB and there’s going to be provision also to try and assist Cooperative Bank, although not with funding.  The Cooperative Bank will approach brotherly cooperators like they are doing with USAID, to assist them to make the Bank also perform.  We still have a problem bearing in mind that we had known the UCB before.  We should ask ourselves, UCB in the past, was making a profit.  It actually used to make a profit.  It started making losses in 1987.  By 1991, it had reached Shs One billion. What could have happened to UCB? This bank used to be the people’s bank? You were able to identify reasons why the people’s bank did not perform as it used to do and we wanted to put it back to perform.  There were five reasons you could touch on.  

One; as a beneficiary, in getting a branch at Rwashamirwa.  But the way the expansion of the branch system without due respect to the Central Bank overstretched the Bank itself.  The Bank went everywhere without everybody.  (Laughter) So, it stretched the profitability of the bank and it is for this reason that the Bank staff has started forming the branches in order to bring together the system.  

We will also realise that there were other micro-economic issues, which made the bank to be profitable. For example, the monetary system of this country had not developed fully.  If you look at the ratio of broad money as the percentage of GDP in this country, it is below at a certain stage.  The saving ratio has fallen.  People used to save and put money in the bank. 

Unfortunately, again the exercise of 1987 set certain things in Motion. We took 30 per cent as development.  Where it developed we do not know.  A person who had money saved suddenly found his money less by 100 percent and not only that even that he even lost 30 per cent, which was intended for development.  We asked the Minister for Finance where this development programmes of 30 per cent were.  We got a very good smart answer that the money was brought here and we the hon. House, passed it in the Consolidated Fund.  I am saying this because that had an impact on the saving attitudes of the people of Uganda, and if you look at the data of saving ratios, between 1970 and the early 80s and 90s, they are definitely a pointer that the saving ratio has fallen and this has an impact, on hon. Funds.  

I have already mentioned the high rates of inflation and interest charges.  But let me say more about interest charges.  The high interest charges as I have said, are caused by things which I have mentioned.  One; it is a problem caused by lack of the saving for the hon. Funds are not enough.  Two; it is in the earlier years because of high rates of inflation, because of money, was very high.  There was another problem. Despite the peace ushered in since 1986, some areas of our country remained insecure and they have remained insecure and that affects the total aggregates in our economy.

The Bank itself has internal weaknesses, which I have already mentioned.  It was in some departments, which are overstaffed.  If capitalization was very poor, it had poor management and it did not follow loans recovery very efficiently, as accepted in other international financial institutions. I will give you an example. If we normally recommended total theft risk in assets, in most banks)- you see the miserable nature and the state this bank was in. 

Another problem, this country has no long-term mortgage finance.  We do not have mortgage finance.  The little mortgage finance which was started in UCB, ended up financing the very - the senior management of UCB. Therefore, what does that mean? People go in for development progress and construction of houses by borrowing at commercial revenue.  As a result, it becomes compounded with height, and therefore, it becomes a problem to the institution, to the person who has borrowed, you are borrowing money to a put a building - a factory that needs five years for gestation.  You are borrowing to build a house, which you will finish in five years even if you are to rent it, the rent will not come until the fifth year.  And you have bound on a commercial rate which if you are lucky, you have only three months’ grace.  You should start paying, therefore. So, there was no mortgage.  

It is a combination of all these, which has made the bank to be in the position it is in. And, therefore, in this restructuring which we are proposing, by first cleaning this balance sheet and putting them right. You are a committee mindful of what hon. Kyaligonza has said, mindful of the position we had taken a year ago, still felt that may be we could avoid setting up a trust, and we looked at the options what were the options? The options were all very, very unpalatable, and I am going to give them to the hon. House so that they consider them and see why we chose the option in chapter 3.  

First, we would be - we would be liquidating the same.  Liquidating some off the little assets that were remaining and forget about it. But, Sir, if you did that you had 80 per cent of the assets you have liquidated, you had 60 per cent of the deposit board, you had everything, the whole financial system will collapse.

The second option was to look for resources and capitalize UCB to the extent that it would start working.  But if you did capitalization without cleaning the balance the sheets, then you would still have a problem of not making the bank attractive for privatization and private depositors. They also agreed with the government’s proposals that the trust was of the second best in economics they have it. They tried to optimize things but they failed. You look for the second best alternative, and this transit with the second best alternative given the scenario that I have authorized.  

Let us look at what other people have done elsewhere when they face problems like us.  We did get information that similar problems did exist in Ghana, they existed in Gambia, they have existed in Zambia and in our next-door neighbour Tanzania.  And most of them to solve this problem have decided that the best way is to have a trust.  In fact, in Tanzania the trust has been so decided that they would follow you until they recover the money if it meant taking your bed sheet from your bed.  But we hope we will not have to go that far because Ugandans we are considered to be gentlemen, and ladies, and that there were peoples re-responded after this debate, after the passing the trust those who have the little money will sustain that, and that they will when established would be autonomous to perform without any political interference or being “influenced.” Because we do not want these influenced in this trust.  So, the committee thought we should strengthen the trust give it autonomy so that we safeguard the work it is going to do.  

We also thought, and if this House agrees, you can re-enforce what you have suggested, we thought it should be stringent enough to do its work in a once for all, in a period of three years and complete its work. If it does not the extension will be for one year and we think by that time we will have recovered all the money, make apartment on all those securities provided, and then we can move on.  And those securities, which will not be solved, will be handed over to the land commissioners as we have suggested, in the Bill.  

But after putting all these in order, in place, we looked at the restructuring of UCB, the minister has already touched it.  We looked at the restructuring of UCB, and thought that some of the steps already taken are in the right direction.  A new management is in place, a new board is in place, and things are beginning to move, and we can hopefully hope that the performance will be good.  Already, they are trying to utilize the time of the bank.  They are becoming court conscious, and they trying to be as efficient as they possibly can.  The loan administration is being strengthened and the audit department is also being strengthened.  The staff is being encouraged to see a future development of their careers, and they are being highly trying to be highly motivated.  

To enforce this government has decided that it is going to have a performance contract in those on management position.  I have looked at the performance posts, they are some loopholes at the moment which need to be ironed out because the areas are in defined for example, this is the personal opinion, and they say, the party must be profitable.  When you have contracted a performance contract, French times, because the French are the ones who have been best at this and that is how we made it to the Presidency of Senegal; you are given a set target to achieve a decent target alone, and you achieve 20 per cent profit stability.  Maybe you have passed a second attempt, and you have even borrowed.  

The present trust of performance as I have seen it and I have talked to senior managers of the bank, at generalized terms, the banks will be profitable.  That is not enough; you will be passed at the first level.  Because if you are going to hold the man responsible, you must say it will be profitable up to 15, 20, 30 per cent when you achieve 30 per cent will give you a golden chain for an extra words or you -(Inaudible)- something like that.  That one can motivate people because the target is known, and those who are going to achieve them can aim at it.  

So, the rate, I hope the minister has already promised that they are going to review this performance contract to make it streamlined, I know some of us are suggesting the same for some of these utilities like Uganda Electricity Board; re-collection of their bills for example.  You can do the same with UPTC if we do not sell it off.  So that they have a target set, we really achieve this you give them bonus.  If they do not you fire them.  And as I speak, they are accountable, they are responsible, and they are responding.  

So, a performance contract is going to be in place and things should be able to move, and I am only saying my hon. Friend the Minister and the Members on the treasury benches that they need to look at that performance contract give it targets, give it incentives so that it is attractive.  

Members are concerned about their branches being closed; I am actually equally concerned because the one in Rwashamaire was closed.  I had been begging for this branch for years, and I know most of us in our counties, which we represent in this House some of our branches have gone we are concerned and the people are concerned why are they concerned?  Because we want the mandatory system to go elsewhere in the country.  So, we need to do something.  We have both the ministry and the bank-both banks, the Central Bank and Uganda Commercial Bank; what could be done.  

Definitely in this period of competition you do not expect UCB to operate on non-viable premises; or be a loss making because that is the problem we are trying to solve.  The gave up and they said small branches in our counties if they can actually raise funds 100,000,000 shillings in deposit and it is not just one, you put it there even tomorrow you take out, it should be steady and get a trend.  Between 5,000,000 (half million of 200,000,000 (two million) then a branch should be your way.  

We want the bank and the ministry and the Central Bank insists on this, the donors to go and mobilize every saving in our areas, we go and tell our people to bank-in telling them even when we get the a release for allowance whenever it comes, -(Interjection) - so that this thing can be tested and the bank sees that the thing is performing.  I am sure with the undertaking the already - the ministry and the bank have given us, the credibility will be there and they will go back to those branches and re-open them.  

We would like now to turn on technical assistance.  I have already said that the bank has already started functioning, but we have seen the committee was concerned because suddenly out of our discussion we were told that the bank is now full of technical assistance, I know the hon. Members have been concerned here about importation of foreign bodies to run all the institutions.  We need to trust our people; and to give that ability to perform and also be able to do things.  We need to put a talent to them; because we asked whether instead of technical assistance, we would not have achieved the same thing if we had the goods in programme, or trying to scheme these institutions outside.  Where we are weak we stand, a technical assistance personnel has a minimum of 10,000 dollars a month and with 10,000 a month, if we gave our own people 5,000 dollars, and they would work from 8 0’clock to 9 0’clock behind the candle and perform.  Who would not like to get 5,000, 5,000,000/=. If they were facilitated, I think they can cope up, and I think we did give our people that feeling that they can perform.  (Applause) 

But then, there are certain conditionalities, which we have got to fulfill and this is one of them.  But the hon. Minister and the Central Bank assured us that they are going to be determined because when they did it, when they ask for technical assistance it was ten years ago, this thing started early, you can see that last year we already knew the transit was coming.  So, in those days the situation was so bad that they needed somebody from outside.  They have now seen light, and the light is at the end of the cars, some are being seen and they would like to review.  So we gave them, and they gave us an undertaking.  That they are going to review this technical assistance and report to the committee within three months.  And where the technical assistance is not needed, it will definitely be terminated, and it has already been done in PERD, they - when we started talking about PERD, they had twelve technical assistance.  As I speak now I think they have been reduced to barest minimum.  So, the review is possible, and I am trying to summarise. 

I thought I should give this information because I want this thing to pass through; there is the issue of what happened to the bank.  We have cleaned the balances, we have restructured it, and we have made it attractive, for privatization.  Who should take it?  The question of who should take it, there are so many schools of thought about this.  The general feeling in the committee was, the Ugandans should take it.  They should have the priority; after all they are the ones taking the burden of 60 billion.  If they are taking that burden; they should read the cost of their labour.  

We are suggesting that privatization when it comes, it should give first priority to Ugandans, and that we stick to Clause 25 of the PERD Statute of 1993.  And that this parastatal should be given to Ugandans to own so that it is indeed a people’s own back.  There are four options for privatisation, and I think I should touch them so people know what the thinking is.  

The one option is to sell off profitable part of the functions of the bank, to all local banks in this country.  But if we were to do that, the competition between Nile Bank and Barclays Bank, Barclays has a parent Barclays in Europe in the Metropolis, Standard Bank has Bank of America behind it, and Stanbic Bank has Standard Bank of South Africa behind it. The competition would not be on level ground.  Nile Bank, Greenland Bank, would not compete effectively with those banks; that is the problem.  

The second one is Sembule Bank. The other one is to sell part of that Bank to the local banks and privatize the remaining part of UCB when the stock exchange is established.  That is good, but the problem with it is, if the stock exchange delays, then will delay everything, and as we heard from the speech of the hon. Minister of Finance, the external inflows have definitely increased apart from the revenue collection and as I said, the improved marketing.  So, I would like to commend the Ministry and Government for these positive results.  

Having said that, I would like also to recognise that we still have major residual difficulties and the hon. Minister of Finance when presenting the budget did recognise this.  His Excellency the President also in communicating the state of the economy to this House did also recognise this fact.  In the words of the President, he said, although the market economy is doing well, the majority of the people of this economy, the peasants, have not been captured by the market economy.  Later on as the Minister presented the budget, when he was reporting on growth, he did say that growth had deteriorated to 4 per cent but when he broke this down the growth in agriculture was a mere 1.7 percent.  This is the first time since 1986 that growth in agriculture has gone that low. 

Now, Members have been asking the question, how can the economy have grown 5 or 4 per cent and yet we appear to see no progress in the rural areas?  If I take this particular year as a case in point, it will be easy to explain this particular year.  More than 80 per cent of our people live on agriculture.  So, when we have a growth of 4 per cent even if the population growth is 2.6, the question is how is this growth distributed?  And as I said earlier the share of agriculture in this 4 per cent growth was a mere 1.7 and this is where the majority of the people are.  So for this particular year one could easily say that the situation got worse because the population grew ahead of the growth of the economy. 

Secondly, even if at the present rate we continue to grow at 6 or 5 per cent and the population was growing at 2.6 per cent, the question to ask is whether that difference is sufficient to get us from where we have been. The problem with our economy is that we are rehabilitating, but we destroyed our economy.  We had some amount of wealth, which we destroyed and we are trying to grow from there.  So, the question of whether that gap of 2.6 to 5, the gap between there is sufficient to make people feel that they are growing.  It is like putting sugar in a cup of tea, if you are taking two cups, even if you add in one or a half you will not feel the taste and I think the crux of the matter is there.  This rate of growth is it sufficient and how is it distributed in the economy.  (Interruption)  

I beg to continue if my Friend does not mind.  Now, in my view the way really to address this structural imbalance that we have an economy which is market oriented now, which by figures is doing well and I agree that is true, but has not captured the majority of the people of this population, the peasant.  (Interruption)

CAPT. GASATURA:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, I rise on a point of order with all the respect I have for my Friend, hon. Kiyonga, that is he in order to mislead this House whereas knowing that in 1989 the per capita income of this country was 250 dollars plus whereas today we are talking of 170 dollars per capita.  So when he is talking of the percentage differential not being sufficient because we had destroyed our economy, he should understand that already there years into NRM Government we were well ahead.  Is he in order to mislead the nation?

THE CHAIRMAN: The hon. Member has a long explanation to do.  I do not think all the Members had followed.  He is in order, please go ahead.

MR KANYOMOZI:  Mr Chairman and hon. Members of the House, in my view the way of resolving this contradiction, this structural imbalance that still remains, calls for two main things.  One of course, is the question of sufficiency of resources and the second one is the ideological commitment and I will explain as I go down.

Let me start with the issue of ideological commitment.  These development economies can be divided into categories.  There are those who think that development can come about irrespective of the type of population by applying market economy and without doing any intervention.  However, there are those who think even if you are operating a market economy you should deliberately intervene.  Now, in our economy, unless we get most of our economists believing in the second category of classification that we pursue a market economy but we also intervene, we will not succeed unless we get sufficient economists believing in that theory.  

Indeed, this discussion o the 6 billion, the introduction of the 6 billion in the budget is a clear evidence of the dichotomy within the government.  Because we have a development budget here which is over Shs 300 billion but the Shs6 billion was picked out and this is what we are talking about and when you see how it came in, it came in as a drop, it is not explained how it is going to be used.  Meaning that this really this must have been a last minute though and put there because of the ideological dichotomy, different beliefs on how we re going to intervene in the economy to cause development.  So, the fact that now we are saying that let us put in some Shs6 billion is evidence of that fact.

Secondly, on the issue of sufficient of resources, last year the budget provided for development more than what is being provided this financial year and given also that of course, there was some level of inflation that took place, it means effectively the amount of resources we have for development this year through the budget is less.  Effectively, the amount of money we have is not only nominally less but by value is less because there was inflation and when you look at the Shs 6 billion, really what can this do? 

I would like to associate myself with the comment made by hon. Kisamba Mugerwa that 6 billion, if it is distributed to every county will be insufficient and if there is going to be a short of maybe, 30 million for one year and full stop.  If we accept this 6 billion, my proposal would be that we take this as a pilot scheme because as hon. Kisamba Mugerwa said trouble was taken -(Interjection)- I will not take the information.  

Trouble was taken to study the situation in a particular area; this is Luwero, where some infrastructure has been laid down.  People are ready because now they have been opened to the market, they are ready to produce and they are sure that their produce will reach the market.  So if we intervene there now you are likely to get better results because the pattern is well described.  So, the commitment would be that we take this as a pilot scheme and that in the subsequent years we want to see commitment from the government that this kind of approach, which is being done in Luwero, is going to spread to other areas in a planned manner, in a well planned manner and a well structured manner. (Interruption)

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to give the hon. Member holding the Floor and the House and having experienced, extensive experience financially and public matter, and equally myself who was in charge of the Local Authority Loans Fund which was spread throughout the country to develop local governments in this country.  It is wrong to take the Shs6 billion as an experiment for a pilot scheme.  Every country is crying, and every part of the country is crying for development.  It is in politics, in my view, to ill advise the government to make it as a pilot scheme, in order to spread development, and increase rural development.  That the philosophy of the whole budget not concentrating on pricing system based on Kampala, Mbarara and Mbale or Jinja.  This is nonsense, and it is uneconomic.

MR KANYOMOZI:  Thank you very much, hon. Member for that piece of information.  I do not think that there is a disagreement between me and hon. Obwangor.  I have observed that if wee are going to correct the structural imbalance, if we are going to cause development, we need two thing.  Ideological orientation and sufficiency of resources.  I have made that point and I am saying that if you take 6 billion and you spread it all over the whole country now, you will not achieve what we are looking for, the development.  

So, it is on that basis that I am saying we want re-orientation from the government.  Let us have, from now on, planning which believes in intervention, intervening while market forces are going on and we have a case here where Luwero was studied, for whatever reason Luwero was chosen, it was studied and a prescription was made and this money if it is put there we can see the result and from there on we want to see progress from Luwero and to other areas.  But I would like to add -(Interruption)

CAPT BABU: Point of information. Mr Chairman, I would like to thank the hon. Member and the information I want to give the hon. Member, there has been an impression created that this is the only developmental project that we have in this country to alleviate poverty.  That is not true, there are other programmes, which are going on, one of them is PAPSCA and there are other projects which are in the Ministry which are going on in different parts of this country.  It is, therefore, unfair to pick only one particular project and concentrate on that.  I would rather, if we would ask a question and through you, to the Minister to tell us all the projects that are going on in the country so that we can appreciate the entandikwa for a particular area of this country.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MISS BIRABWA KIWANUKA:  Further information. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  May I inform the hon. Members of this House that I am really disappointed with them because ever since the end of the war in 1986 Luwero has not had any viable programme -(Interjection) Mr Chairman, protect me because I am only informing them, I am informing the House because the first money which came for Luwero, like they have been saying, we do not know where it went, we never saw it. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order, please.

MISS BIRABWA KIWANUKA:  I am informing the hon. Members there is nothing in Luwero you can talk of -(Interruption)

LT COL SERWANGA LWANGA:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Member and the Women Representative from Luwero to mislead this House that since the end of the bush war no project has ever started yet, through the PAPSCA programme the War Widows Association of Uganda has taken programmes in the sub-counties of Kamila, in the sub-county of Katikamu, in the sub-county of Nyimbwa and the widows have actually gone ahead to own bicycles, to own cows and by 5th August a new dispensary will be opened in Kamila.  Is it in order for the hon. Member to continue misleading this House?

THE CHAIRMAN: The hon. Member was concerned about the viability of the project and that was her impression so she is in order.

MISS BIRABWA KIWANUKA:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Indeed I was talking about the viable programme and may I inform the hon. Member who gave me a point of order that there are still more widows I think the hon. members here know, more widows in Kapeeka and Nakaseke and they have not been catered for.  My quarrel is that this very money, which is causing a lot of chaos here, I am even surprised that the hon. Minister has added another eleven districts.  So, it is not only going to be Luwero. This is the quarrel from the people of Luwero. We should always get things on individual districts rather than generalising us and the projects just disappear in thin air.  Thank you very much.

MR KANYOMOZI:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Now, although for the time being, what I am saying, let us start where a proper study has been done.  I would like to add quickly that in future in trying to intervene, in trying to our entandikwa in some place, account must be taken of existing projects.  

As the hon. Babu has just said, it is true that there are some other projects intended to alleviate poverty, PAPSCA is a case i point, SWARAP is a case in point, NRP was supposed to also have a component that should help the peasants to alleviate poverty.  So any new initiative coming out should take into account what exists so that we avoid the question of overlap. You have an area, it has a project, then another new project comes, the same area benefit from that project when other areas have not benefited.  So this would have to be a very important qualification. 

In my view, the way we can integrate the peasant into now the well moving market economy requires three actions. One, we should ensure appropriate physical linkage with centres of marketing and the government has been making a lot of efforts to improve feeder roads and even trunk roads.  But my worry, perhaps, later on when we hear the details, with the reduced budget provision over all for development, are we going to see further progress on the feeder roads?  If that does not happen then we are not going to alleviate poverty, even if you take 40 million, you take 6 billion in an area and there is no road those peasants will not get anything because they will not be reached by the market.

Secondly, the peasants need effective extension service in agriculture.  Our people are reported to be dying in the north and northeast parts, and the reason is that we have been defeated by cassava mosaic.  The people there have been wise enough to make sure that they always plant cassava.  Indeed in Kasese we have been receiving cassava from Iganga but these days there is no cassava coming from there.  For us to have failed to control cassava mosaic really is a very serious situation.  Extension service must go to the peasants so that they can be told how to be more productive, so that they can be told how to produce more sustainable because at the same time we have to take care of the environment otherwise, the productivity of land is going down everyday.  

Thirdly, then there is the issue of credit delivery. Credit delivery and I would like to say that the rural farmers scheme was a good start and needed to be built on but a long side credit delivery I think we have to work out mobilisation of the small savings in the villages.  Whatever part of the country you go to, I can almost bet what I have that you will find peasants even if they are starving, they are keeping some hundred, some ten shillings somewhere because it is un-African, it is unheard of that an old man will die and they say he left nothing.  So, when they have their little money, Shs1, 000 or Shs2, 000 they can even starve to make sure that when they die something is found there to tell people that when this man died this is the will he left.  So, along side taking some credit to the villages, if some innovative way can be found to mobilise those savings which are in the mattresses, which are in the pots, this will enhance our capacity to give even more credit to the rural people so that they can take advantage of improved infrastructure and extension service.

Having said that, I would like to make two other final comments. One is on tax on coffee.  The tax on coffee, I have had an opportunity to talk to my hon. Friend, Kafumbe Mukasa, and therefore, I am talking from a point of information.  Over the years we had decided deliberately to relieve the coffee farmers because for example in 1986/87 the coffee farmers provided over 60 per cent of the budget revenue of this country and over the years it has been coming down.  The programme was completely to relieve them and remove export tax and this was achieved last year.  Therefore, I was surprised to find that this year we are bringing back the tax on coffee. 

Now, as if that is not enough, I find the reasons given for bringing back the tax, inconsistent because before, the coffee farmers were suffering, they were not getting enough money from their coffee in order to support the rest of the economy and they kept quiet, now that they are trying to compensate we say we want to take away the money.  It is not inconsistent.  Now, the only way I would accept that line is that now that we have a lot of money, let us take away some money from the coffee farmers but when the prices drop, then we should be ready to compensate them.  (Interjection)  Well, the Treasury will have to make a commitment.  So, either we allow -(Interruption)

MR ONGOM: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to inform the speaker holding the Floor that the line he is following is quite a good line except that perhaps the better way would be to keep away that money that will come from the excess coffee prices in a fund, a stabilisation kind of fund, like it used to be for cotton, because that thing for cotton was withdrawn and now we have seen what has happened to cotton because of the fluctuating prices, there is no more protection, cotton farmers are no longer happy.  They have no security.  

I am recommending to the House that we support the Minister’s proposal.  We have on behalf examined this in detail and the report is therefore, for you to read.  If there are any queries or any questions, Members of the committee and my supporting team from the Sectoral Committee on planning and Finance and the Committee on the Economy will be available to assist and give further information.  I thank you. (Applause)

ADJOURNMENT


THE CHAIRMAN: Order.  Hon. Members, further extensive Debate will follow these submissions tomorrow.  I now adjourn the House accordingly.

(The Council rose at 6.10 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 3 August 1994, at 2.30 p.m.)

