Thursday 9th August, 2001

Parliament met at 10:10 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Ssekandi Edward, in the Chair)

(The House was called to order)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you remember earlier in the week I informed you that one of our colleagues, hon. Mathias Kasamba, Member for Kakuuto County, was involved in an accident. I am happy to note that hon. Kasamba has rejoined us. You are most welcome. (Applause).  

Hon. Members, we have convened this morning, earlier than we usually do, simply because we have to fully constitute the Parliamentary Commission, and at the same time, continue with the debate on the President’s speech, which has to be concluded today. If voting starts now, we will be able to complete it within one hour or so. After one hour or so, we can reconvene so that we start getting contributions. I still have a long list of Members who are interested in making contributions on the motion. Do you think two hours is enough for you to complete this exercise? Are the Members ready?

MRS. ZZIWA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate that most of the Members may not come in on time, not really because they may not have learnt of the sitting this morning, but because of the many other small hiccups which they may have come across. In the event that many others have not come in, what will the situation be like, since we are going to start with the elections? Would the elections remain open until maybe 2.00 p.m.? I would like to find out.  

THE SPEAKER: I am going to use the normal practice. In the normal practice, you declare the time when the elections start and when they close; you do not leave it open-ended.  This is what we did when we were elected. We started at 7.00 a.m. and closed at 5.00 p.m. If I leave it open-ended, then Members may say, ‘I think he is helping this one or the other one’. 

Let us agree; if you think one and a half hours is not enough, I can give you two hours. Certainly, if someone has not turned up within two hours, then I do not know. But participating in this election is free; you either participate or you do not. I quite appreciate your view, but definitely it may not be fair if I leave it open-ended.

MR. EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In order to promote free and fair elections, I propose that we adjust the Order Paper to continue with the debate. Once you feel that all the Members have turned up, then we can vote. Maybe we would vote within 30 minutes or one hour, because if we say we start voting now, maybe up to 11.00 a.m., there will be interference. Some of us who are candidates will be going continuously to lobby while the debate will be going on here. I think it will create noise.  Thank you.

MR. KALULE SSENGO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I imagine that the procedure is by secret ballot.   
If that is the case, do we really need two hours to do the voting? At the same time, I would go along with the proposal of my colleague, that we start with the debate to allow other people to come in. And since the procedure is by secret ballot, once you feel we have enough numbers, we turn to the voting and do it for only one hour, and then resume the normal business.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. AWORI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just request the Speaker to outline the procedure of election. Are we going to have nominations, and then the candidates come forward, then they talk and we interview them? 

THE SPEAKER: The nomination was completed. We have a list of those who volunteered to stand as candidates for these three posts. You will vote on those. There is no further campaigning. I do not think we are going to expect Members to address us. They must have looked for their votes in their own way, and therefore, there is no nomination. We have the list.

MR. AWORI: Mr. Speaker, there are occasions when candidates have professionals to write their manifestos.  So, we would like to have that interaction to know whether these manifestos came from the candidates.

THE SPEAKER: It may not be mandatory for them to have a manifesto. In the first place, the Act itself sets out what the Commission is supposed to do, and this is what you are supposed to do. But you are not prevented from writing a manifesto if you so wish, though it is not a must.  

According to the records I have, the Members of Parliament who qualify to stand for these nominations are: 

Hon. Kazoora John, 
Hon. Guma Gumisiriza 
Hon. Kawoya Anifa 
Hon. Ekanya Godfrey 
Prof. Banzaana Kabwegyere 
Hon. Salaamu Musumba Proscovia 
Hon. Byenkya Nyakaisiki Beatrice 
Hon. Lyomoki Sam 
Hon. Pajobo Bruno Joram 
Hon. Wacha Ben 
Hon. Zziwa Margaret Nantongo.  
We have eleven people vying for three seats. These are the people who have stood. I see people scratching their throats -(Laughter)- they know what it means. But I think this will come after the elections.  

To go back to the other point, a suggestion has been made that since it appears that not many Members have arrived as yet, we should start with the debate and go on for an hour, and then after that, we go on to this matter. We give it one hour, and then we resume the debate, so that as many people as possible can make their contribution to the debate. Is this the consensus?

HON.MEMBERS: Yes.

DEBATE IN REPLY TO THE ADDRESS OF THE STATE OF THE NATION DELIVERED TO PARLIAMENT BY HIS EXCELLENCY, THE PRESIDENT ON THE 27TH JULY 2001

MR.SEBALU MIKE (Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Like my colleagues before, I would like to congratulate everybody upon your respective achievements.  

Secondly, I would like to bring a word of thanks from the people of Wakiso, especially, to the Members of the Sixth Parliament for having granted them a district status.  

I will react to the President’s address in the following terms. Members have talked about the election violence, I am not an expert on the election violence since I was neither a victim nor a beneficiary of the same. Nevertheless, I do condemn it in the strongest terms possible.  

I would now like to make the following observations. First of all, I appreciate the presentation; it was very good. It articulated a wide range of issues and gave us the state of the nation as it stood then. However, some of these ideas need to be highlighted. There is the aspect of the cost of elections, which is a big problem as all Members may be aware. It was almost an encumbrance to our coming to this august House. I believe one of the reasons we have a problem is due to lack of serious service delivery at the Local Government level. 
As Parliament, we need to oversee the operations of Local Governments so that they deliver, and our constituencies or the population feels that Government is near them and they take the benefit of having a Government. Otherwise, when there is no service delivery and the election time comes round, that is the time the people expect to reap out of the electoral process.  

We also lack civic and voter education, which needs to be a continuous process. Money should be voted to the Electoral Commission to make sure that that aspect is a continuous one. Voter education is very important, because, even in this very august House, the few elections we have had, we have ended up with spoilt votes. This means that voter education is a serious aspect which needs to be ensured at that level.  

On the education sub-sector, I appreciate UPE but I believe we need to focus on quality so that we improve on the output of the children. On the issue of secondary schools, especially the idea of having a secondary school per sub-county, is a very welcome idea. But I propose that an enabling environment should be put in place to encourage private investors in the educational sub-sector. The people who have invested in this sub-sector complain about the very high taxes. So there should be a tax regime which encourages the private sector to open up schools because they have done quite well at that level. Most of the secondary schools that are coming up now are from private initiative. So, they need to be encouraged with tax holidays or a tax regime that is competitive.  

We also appreciate that we need vocational and technical institutions to also be put at sub-county level. We have a problem of school dropouts; some of them cannot afford higher education. If we put up these vocational institutions, they will be able to assist some of these students.  

On University education, I appreciate that the number of universities has increased, but some schemes ought to be put in place, especially for private students. Very many of them have even had to abandon studies in the final year due to lack of school fees. I hope that a scheme will be put in place where needy students can borrow and be able to complete their education. Otherwise, some of them will drop out after making it to that level.  

On the rural electrification programme, I propose that we expand on the coverage and also lower on the tariff. This will help us to also protect our environment since if we get wide coverage then the people using electricity will increase. This is also in line with the modernisation aspect of our country, which is part of the President’s Manifesto.  

On land reform, I would like the Minister concerned to take note that there is a problem of eviction. We need to implement the Land Reforms as envisaged in the 1995 Constitution and the Land Act. Otherwise, in my constituency, very many people are being evicted and it is becoming a crisis.  

On the issue of developing districts, we need to get road units so that we can also be able to open up some of our roads. Like other Members have noted, one thing that the President failed to address was the state of corruption in the nation. That issue needed to be addressed. At whatever opportunity, it needs to be addressed so that our people begin to appreciate it.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me an opportunity.

MR. WILLIAM KIWAGAMA (Bunya County West, Mayuge): Thank you Mr. Speaker. I support the motion on the floor, but before I make my contribution, I want to do what everybody has done; to congratulate you, your Deputy and everybody for the ascension to your respective positions. 

The President’s speech was a very good one and I congratulate him for it. Many people have complained that he left out many things. Yes, that is true but he could not have covered everything. Otherwise, we would have needed a week to listen to him talking about every problem that we have in Uganda.  

On the first page, the President speaks about the improvements in the electoral process. This is true, remembering where we started from in the past regimes where we had as many ballot boxes as the candidates and the mal-practice that followed. 

In 1986, we started with lining up, now we have come to one box, but the Electoral Commission leaves a lot to be desired.  They made many mistakes. I am puzzled, because they have been conducting elections for a long time, but the Commission seems not to have gained experience. During the recently concluded elections, they came out with shocking pronouncements of allowing people to vote without voters cards.  I am very worried about the electronic system that they are introducing. If these people don’t improve, we are in for bigger shocks, because this is a sophisticated system that they are introducing. Already people employed to do the photographing have gone on strike, because of not being well remunerated.  

The President spoke of the costs of elections. Not many Members are talking about this, except the honourable that has just spoken; he has addressed it very well. I would like also to say that the cause of this cost is as result of individual merit.  When you have 10 candidates, all of them having the basic merit; that means they belong to the Movement.  The voters cannot assess the merit, so the candidates themselves have got to invent a meritable measure and that is bribing voters.  The system needs to be studied; we have got political students or political experts in this House in the Government, including our beloved Prime Minister. I think we need to devise means of eliminating or have primary elections before we come to the final elections.

I will go to education. UPE is performing well. The people of Bunya West do appreciate the effort Government has taken to recruit the teachers in order to reduce on the student- teacher’s ratio. However the people who are given tenders to construct these classrooms do a shoddy job. They construct buildings that collapse within no time. Thank you very much.

MR. AWORI:  Point of procedure. Mr. Speaker, I have been checking with various organs of the State and I have confirmed that His Excellency the President is away; the Vice President is away; and according to the Constitution, the Speaker shall act in the absence of those two.  I am just wondering what you are doing here? (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, when you raised a question of procedure, I imagined it had something to do with procedure in this House.  If there is a problem on the other side, that will be dealt with.  I think I will give the opportunity to the Member for Butambala; then hon. Member for Rukungiri should prepare his speech. 

MR. AWORI: On the procedure, Sir?
  
THE SPEAKER: There is no problem with the procedure in the House.

MR. AWORI:  But the President, when he is away -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: In any case, there is no problem of Constitutional interpretation.  If there is one, then I will handle it.

MR. AWORI:  But who is our Head of State now?

THE SPEAKER:  I will handle it -(Laughter)- So, hon. Aggrey, there is no procedural question. 

MR. IBRAHIM KADDUNABBI  (Butambala County, Mpigi):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to congratulate you and all my Colleagues for the various achievements so far achieved.  I want to contribute to the President’s State of the Nation Address and I stand to support it.

His Excellency talked of Electoral Commissions.  In as much as I do not condone the omissions and commissions of the Electoral Commission, I do request all those concerned with giving facilities and equipment to the Electoral Commission to do it well in time, so that they can arrange elections that are free and fair.  

His Excellency was worried about the under age voting; it is my conviction that if we have a national register with national identity cards instead of photographic voters cards, his problem will be solved.  I therefore request those who are concerned to work on the national register in order to eliminate under age voting.  

He also talked of the high cost of politics. I think it is the responsibility of Government to educate the masses, so that people don’t buy their way into offices.

On page two, third or fourth paragraph, Mr. Speaker, His Excellency said: “We in the Movement have a lot of faith in elections”. I shouted at the top of my voice and clapped loudly, thinking that I was one of them.  But when I sat back in my chair, I recalled an article in the Sunday Monitor, which talked of Al Haji Kaddunabbi Lubega as a hard-core multipartist. It put me back, but in my conviction I thought I was a strong Movementist. 

May I know Mr. Speaker, from the National Political Commissar or any spokesman of the Movement, why brand Al Haji Kaddunabbi as a multipartist. That statement is attributed to the Deputy Director of Information at the Movement Secretariat, Mr. Ofwono Opondo. 

His Excellency the President advised those defeated or aggrieved to use Courts of Law. To my surprise, those defeated either directly or indirectly have resorted to blackmailing, which I think is unfortunate. I think all those concerned, should take the President’s advice seriously.

His Excellency also talked of the economic growth of 7 percent at times not achieved.  I do request hon. Members and all leaders, to appreciate the role of Insurance in the national development. Here, I am a little concerned about an Insurance Company called, the East African General Insurance Company, which was closed under the disguise of repossession; and up to now the shareholders and the staff of that company have not been paid, nor catered for.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member for Butambala, it is common knowledge that the issue of the East African General Insurance Company is pending in court; therefore, I would advise you to desist from talking about it.  

MR. KADDUNABBI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The people of Butambala are happy with the coffee seedlings promised by His Excellency the President, and are looking forward to getting other seedlings, so that they can continue with their farming. However, they are concerned about the marketing of their ginger -entangawuzi- and for whatever they produce. So, the Government should look into marketing much more seriously. 

My people have requested me to inform the Minister of Education and Sports that, as much as the UPE Program is very good, and they appreciate it, they have noted that although Uganda is a God fearing country, the religious teachers are not paid salaries. It is the concern of the people of Butambala that Uganda may end up producing people without religion. I thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank His Excellency for the work well done. 

MRS.WINFRED.MASIKO (Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to thank you very much, for at long last, I have caught your eye after trying many times. I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate you, upon being elected to that high office. I also congratulate my colleagues, for having made it to this 7th Parliament. 

I would like to concur with other Members who have alluded to the fact that, the President’s address was good. It was elaborate and quite sober. Mr. Speaker, I would like to comment on three issues.  

One of the issues is the vocationalization of the education system. We read in the speech that it is the intention of this country, to make sure that vocational schools are increased in number and also improved upon. I believe that this is a grand idea; and we all agree that, that is the best step, so that the population is equipped with appropriate skills and knowledge. 

I would have liked the speech to show us to what extent is the nation dedicated to employ most of the people who will have finished from these schools? The education system certainly is costly to many people. I imagine that in the short run, the increased output of people with such skills, without an equal strategy to absorb them might be quite dangerous, though of course in the long run, it will be very useful to us. I am afraid in the short run, if we do not quickly put something in place to absorb these students, we are likely to have some negative implications to our country and to our politics.

Looking at the levels of immunization, I think we are all ashamed that the routine immunization levels have gone very low. 
But I think it is also common knowledge that the mobilizers of the communities tend to be the members of the executive of the lower Local Governments, and the smaller Administrative Units. It is true, voluntarism is a virtue, but according to the way we take our strategies of making sure that the private sector is strengthened, and we are all advocating for it, we should know that this voluntary spirit will soon wane away.

MR. BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Whereas I clearly understand that hon. Kabwegyere is one of our good candidates aspiring to become a Commissioner; and whereas I have much respect for him; is it in order, for him to dress the way he is dressed, in this important august House?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kabwegyere would you mind having a neck-tie?  These are requirements. The way you have dressed requires a neck-tie.

MRS. MASIKO: May I continue, Mr. Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, continue.

MRS. MASIKO:  Mr. Speaker, I got an opportunity to visit all the parishes in Rukungiri and Kanungu Districts. And one of the issues that was raised on every campaign meeting, by the members of the executive of the Local Councils was that, they feel that they have voluntarily -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: But sorry, I think this should not be taken as something against hon. Kabwegyere for the post he is standing for; and I hope it was not done with that intention.

MRS. MASIKO: Mr. Speaker, I think the hon. Member who raised the point of order would have been more in order to wait until I first finished my speech, rather than continuously interrupting. 

When I visited all the parishes in Rukungiri and Kanungu Districts, many of the people were complaining that they are doing a lot of work and yet they are not being paid for it. It is a concern, because most of the Government programmes which target the communities, usually advocated for by the members of the lower local government councils, the executive members as well as administrative units –(Interruption)
MR. MWANDHA: Mr. Speaker, is it order for hon. Members of the House to make excessive noise in the corridors when an hon. Member is making a very important maiden speech? 

THE SPEAKER: It is not in order; unfortunately they are not within my view. The Sergeant-At-Arms should go and alert those people that they are disturbing the Proceedings of the House. Proceed.

MRS. MASIKO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My suggestion is that these members of the lower local government, especially the executive members, should also be paid for the work they are doing. If we do not do that, we are likely to have even other programmes that target the communities not working out, as has been shown in the case of reduced levels of immunization. I would have wanted something like that to be mentioned in the speech. What plans do we have for the intensive mobilization, especially in the civil society at the lower levels of the local government?

Another small thing I would like to talk about, is the liberalization and privatisation program that was mentioned in the speech. It would also have made the speech a bit richer if we were shown how we are going to protect the civil society from being over exploited. In the speech, it says that there are some strategic sectors that are going to be looked at and protected from the likely dangers of privatisation and liberalization. But I would have also liked to see something on the deliberate effort the Government will put in place to protect the civil society from being over exploited. We need to know how their rights are going to be protected. If something small was included, I am sure the speech would have been much better. 

Lastly, on page 2, we are advised to bury our differences and work together as a group of leaders in our country. I would also like to add my voice to those who have said that it would be ideal for us to work together as a united body. We need each other in this House for the development of our country. Therefore, I would like to request all those who have developed differences in the past elections, and even in the past years, to work against the divisive politics, because it will not help us to push our country forward.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR. NYENDWOHA MUTITI (Buliisa County, Masindi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, I would like to join the long queue of people to congratulate you and your Deputy, and everybody in this House for the positions you are holding.  

A lot have been said about the election violence. I would not want to repeat what has been said, but I would like to remind everybody here that insecurity does not know political and geographical boundaries. Tomorrow it is in Kashari, the next time it will be in Buliisa. Our concern now should be how to get solutions to this election violence. It is this House which makes election laws. When the time is right for us to make these laws, let us make sure that we make laws which will ensure a democratic electoral process.  

Secondly, let us make laws that will be applicable to everybody in this country. Thirdly, let us make laws that will enhance the peace, democracy and unity that was ushered in by the Movement Government. 

We, in this House, are forming a lot of associations in the form of caucuses, and we are free to do so, and some of the leaders in this House and outside the House –(Interruption)

MR. DOMBO: Thank very much, Mr. Speaker. I just wish to be clarified, because the hon. Member has said that this House should make laws that will be applicable to everybody and that will be enforceable. I wanted to be clarified whether by his inference, he means that there are some people in this country to whom the laws that have been made in this House are not applicable. Thank you very much.

MR. NYENDWOHA:  Thank you, hon. Member. In our debates, it has been said that some Members are not allowed to move to constituencies which are not theirs, to campaign. But we have heard some people complaining that some people from other constituencies or districts went to those constituencies to campaign. I think this is what I mean.

I was saying that some of us in this House -  (Interruption)

MR. ERESU: Mr. Speaker, the hon. Member holding the Floor has just pointed out something that has made me totally confused. Can he clarify to me and to the House which law he is really talking about in the last Parliamentary electoral law and in the Constitution?

MR. NYENDWOHA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Allow me to go ahead. I am saying there are some utterances outside this House that might drag us back to the events of the 1900’s.  

I would like to comment on UPE. I want to commend the Government for this wonderful programme, but I would like to make a professional observation here. We are talking of the quantitative aspect of UPE. I would like to say that we should focus our attention on the qualitative aspect, and if we are to have qualitative UPE, then we must have quality teachers; the teachers will not be got unless they are motivated.  There are situations where teachers have spent a year or six months without being accessed to the pay roll; there are cases where teachers have gone on promotional courses, but they have not been rewarded for those courses.  I mean some people have got a Diploma in Primary Education and others have got Bachelor of Education Degree, but they are getting the salary of a Grade III teacher; teachers are being demotivated.  

Thirdly, I would request the government to accelerate the implementation of teacher-pupil ratio, because there is no effective teaching in schools.  You cannot teach two hundred students - one teacher.  There is no homework and no marking. If we do not improve, then our UPE programme will fail.

I will want to touch on water.  The Minister in-charge of Water did say that there is some money that has been given to the district.   But I want to cite an example in my constituency, and I think this be a special consideration.  First of all, in my constituency, there are people who walk four to five miles in search of water and they come without water; some women spend nights outside looking for water and they come out without water; this has affected our birth rate. -(Laughter)- When the President visited our constituency, he gave us ninety-five boreholes after realising the alarming situation in the constituency. 

So far we have received five; I do not know whether  the ninety have also been sent to the district!  My constituency has requested me to remind the President of the ninety remaining boreholes - they still need them. 

Lastly, I want to say something about tourism.  When we appreciate the importance of tourism in this country, some of us who are bordering the park have problems.  So far, two people have died as a result of the wild animals that come from the park to our homes.  As I talk now, there is one person who is critically ill in Masindi Hospital, knocked down by a Baffalo from the park.  I want to know whether the government will arrange to compensate or meet the medical expenses of these people who are killed and wounded by these animals.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I give the opportunity to the Workers Representative, since we have not heard from him.

MR. BAKKABULINDI: (Workers’ Representative): Thanks you very much, Mr. Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute on this important motion of His Excellency’s address to the nation, which to me after so many years the President was sober to the extent that one could think that His Excellency was on a political platform seeking for another re-election.  Allow me to congratulate my colleagues for having joined us in this august House.  

I have some few observations to make in relation to the Presidential speech.  I will start with page 5 of his address to the nation where His Excellency is talking about “absolute poverty” and he gave an example of “three thousand calories intake per day” and he says that once you acquire that, then for you are okay.  I found it rather interesting to me as a Representative of the Workers. When you are talking about poverty and you give examples of calories that one cannot even know what particular tools to use and decide that one has acquired the necessary calories. I think in future, when His Excellency is talking about issue that are so painful to the citizens of this country, he should use viable examples. When he talks about getting a meal a day or having school fees for your children and having some little money to take you to the hospital, there the mwananchi will understand that we are fighting poverty.   But when we talk about calories and the doctors giving it, remains a theory. 

When I look on page 6 where he says: In our fight against poverty government has ensured that the share of the taxpayer’s money that directly benefits the poor is increasing. Examples in recent years include increased expenditure on Universal primary Education, Heath Care and water sanitation.” 

He concentrated on Universal Primary Education.  Well UPE is good and it has contributed a lot to this country.  I am saying that is not enough. There is nowhere in his speech where he is mentioning about creation of employment.  As we talk now, almost on a monthly basis, many Ugandans are going on the streets; new graduates are floating on the streets, but we have not come up with a viable solution on how to address this issue.  

We have been having a problem of some insurgency in certain areas.  Even though we buy missiles and heavy machinery, this issue will never be solved unless we solve the issue of poverty and create jobs for people who are jobless on the streets.  This is the key factor that contributes to insurgency.  If they have nothing to do, they will find themselves already being recruited to do such activities.  I think this is a very important issue that we in Parliament and the Government at large must address.

Mr. Speaker, on page 8, again he made a good statement.  He said: “Therefore, although we are committed to the liberalisation and privatisation of the economy, government will intervene in some strategic sectors to put our economy on a new pedestal.”  That was a very welcome statement from His Excellency the President.  It is high time he eases some pressures from IMF; somehow we have to forget about them and do what is required by our nation.  So basing on that statement, I would think and encourage His Excellency to also reconsider his position of selling institutions that provide essential services like UEB, Water and our peoples’ bank, the UCB. You have heard what is happening about the electricity tariffs.   As we talk now people are crying. 
We are making noise and we have almost no powers to change things; things are in the hands of private sectors.  We are leaving the control of electricity to the private sectors and at the end of the day, you talk to the wananchi and say, by the year 2005, all corners of Uganda are going to get rural electrification.  I do not know who is going to afford these terrific rates?

MR. LUKYAMUZI: I thank hon. Bakkabulindi for giving way. I would like to inform him that the matter he is articulating related to the high tariffs of electricity is so immense that the people of Lubaga South, whom I represent, are planning a huge demonstration to oppose the high tariffs.

MR. BAKKABULINDI: I thank you, hon. Lukyamuzi, for that intervention. The point is that much as we may look at it as a laughing matter, some of us in Kampala, if we could be sincere, have already switched off some lights. If you have been switching on security lights at night, it is high time you removed some bulbs, because we cannot afford the rates.  If people in Kampala cannot afford those rates, how about our colleagues whom we have been promising and telling that they will benefit from rural electrification?

We welcomed AES recently, and we have been singing that the megawatts have been 140, now we are shooting up to 180.   But who is going to be the beneficiary? Whereas I am talking about electricity, there are already some rumours that even water -(Interruptions)

MR. MUTULUUZA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the hon. Member on the Floor. I wish to inform the House that most of the people of Mpigi have resorted to tadoba. This is a lantern they use just because they have failed to raise the money for electricity for the months of June and July.  We are lucky that hon. Babu and hon. Bbumba enabled us to get power in the village, but most of our people there have now resorted to tadoba because of the high tariffs of electricity. I request the House to be serious on this matter, because it will even hinder the development of the investors. Thank you very much.

MR. BAKKABULINDI: I thank the hon. Member for that information. Do not be surprised in the year 2005 if a litre of drinking water is going to cost higher in Uganda than in Saudi Arabia or in those dry areas, simply because we are giving all these essential services to foreigners. They are going to control our waters. We have got the privilege of having lakes and rivers around, but because we want the foreigners to come and dictate to us, one day we are also going to cry the same way. It will become history that once upon a time, we used to fetch water without buying it. We have to take these things seriously. We are going to be slaves within our country if we are not careful.

I come to page 15 of the speech. On page 15, His Excellency talks about improving the doctor to population ratio from 1:18,000 to 1:10,000. It sounded very nice. That is why I am saying that this speech was so sober, to the extent that one could assume that somebody is on a political platform seeking for more votes. The problem in Uganda is not that we do not have enough doctors, we even have other professionals, but the problem is how we look after them. 

We, the workers’ representatives, have been talking about the minimum wage, and people are just laughing at us. We are saying that there is no living wage, but some people are just laughing at us, and a lot of professionals are leaving this country. We are talking in terms of these good ratios.  They will remain on paper as theories unless we do something. We are crying about doctors, but even engineers will leave this place simply because we are not looking after professionals very well.

His Excellency has given very good ideas about improving the production of things like coffee, tea, livestock, and fish. He even commented on processing, and condemned our nature of selling raw materials so that we end up being cheated. But throughout his speech, much as he said good words about processing, he did not indicate how he is going to start the processing of these items so that we are not cheated by the foreigners. 

The processing remains in theory, and I think it is high time we start generating examples from different districts. We could say if we start processing our coffee in such a form, then we shall not be cheated and the farmers will enjoy. But this business of producing without even having the market for it is making farmers leave that strategy and resorting to what they can benefit from, for a day of problems. I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR. RUHINDI FREDDIE (Nakawa Division, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Since it is also my first time to rise on the Floor of this august House, allow me to congratulate you and your Deputy upon your unanimous election. Allow me also to congratulate the Front Benchers for their double victory.

I will dwell mainly on the State of the Nation address by His Excellency the President. I agree very much with hon. Bakkabulindi, when he says that when you read the speech, it looks like the President was seeking another election. But more fundamentally, I think Uganda is poised for a better political future.

Allow me to go straight to the last page of the President’s speech, and I will only quote one sentence. It says, “I therefore, appeal to you to transcend politics and become statesmen and stateswomen for the sake of our motherland”.  When I reflected a bit more on this statement, and coupled with some reading here and there, I realized that a politician is one who works to get elected at the next election, but a statesman or stateswoman works for posterity. I believe if we could put more strength in building our country as statesmen and stateswomen, to build for posterity rather than simply working to win the next election, we shall leave this country a better place than we found it.

Colleagues have highlighted a few observations made by the President in his speech, particularly the fact that we may have different backgrounds, we may have different political ideologies, and we may have different views, but we should be united in our goals and objectives. We are united by our need to have a united Uganda, a prosperous Uganda and a peaceful Uganda. All these ingredients are mutually inclusive; they move in tandem. One cannot actually exist without the other. With unity, you have peace, and with peace, we shall have development. 

Take an example of peace; we talk about attracting and promoting business in our country but without a peaceful Uganda, you cannot have development; you cannot attract investors. 
Some of us, who have promoted Uganda abroad as the best investment destination, have always been overwhelmed by questions by those we try to attract. Sometimes they say, ‘Oh, you come from Uganda; is it near Rwanda, is it near Congo?’ Therefore, we can talk about incentives, we can talk about benefits to promote business in Uganda but without peace, we cannot have development. Our focal point or the best business incentive is political stability. Without it you cannot do much.

Accordingly, if I may further expound on the issue of security, but with something that may look a bit simple, I urge the responsible Minister to come up with a law to regulate our LDUs in this country. The problem of LDUs lacking a legal framework is as long as our Government itself. We have talked about it many times but the legal framework has never come into being. I consider that to be very important.  

On the issue of a legal framework, I also urge the responsible Minister to come out quickly with a law to regulate micro finance. Micro finance is a very big problem, almost in all our areas.  These business organisations and NGOs charge exorbitant interest rates. As much as interest rates are a menace to business everywhere in the country, in my opinion, micro finance is the worst, with interest rates of about 25 to 30 per cent. And they tell these very poor peasants to pay back that money within about a week’s time!  

On the issue of unemployment, it is also another problem in our midst. Unemployment in rural areas can be reinforced with Entandikwa, supporting people’s projects here and there. I was very happy and gratified with the President’s speech when he talked about vocationalising our education. However, we should vocationalise our education by integrating our training with an industrial base so that people can do apprenticeship in our industrial base.  At the end of the day, they may be employed there, but there should be that integration of vocation institutions in our industrial base. 

We also wonder why internship is not a developed concept in Uganda. Internship is not a matter for Lawyers and Doctors and a few other professions only. It should be for every profession. The Public Service should look into that. People in higher institutions of learning can get access to organised internship to better their skills before they begin work.

Finally, voter education should be a continuous process in Uganda. Like my colleagues have already said, it is a setback to see that the Electoral Commission always wakes up at the time of election. Voter education should be a continuous process. Thank you very much.

MR.KIZIGE: Mr. Speaker, we agreed at the beginning that we would debate for one hour and then proceed with the elections. In view of the fact that we have debated for one hour, is it not prudent that we proceed with the elections? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member for Rukiga, would you make your contribution?

MR.SABIITI (Rukiga county, Kabale): Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I stand to support the Motion moved by hon. Mwandha. On my behalf and that of the people of Rukiga, whom I represent, I salute the President for having presented a paper whose contents were very good. The mode of presentation was equally good. I, therefore, thank him to have delivered such a paper to the nation. However, I have a number of issues that I think I should touch on which were not given detail in the paper. 

He talks of violence but he does not come out clearly to advise how this violence can be stopped. The people of Rukiga know very well that the causes of violence can be categorised under: 
1.	Bribing of voters. 
2.	Lack of clear and articulated voter education. 
3.	The continued use of the under-aged in the electoral process; and 
4.	The intervention of state organs. 

In nearly every constituency where there was violence, there was an intervention of state organs, particularly security organs. This has derailed the electoral process. I, therefore, appeal to Government and those concerned with elections to guard against using the military in the electoral process. We have the Police and they should be empowered to do that job. 

Secondly, we should try very hard to remove the under-aged from the voters register. This caused conflict in constituencies. 
For example, in Rukiga we are 50,000 voters but over 10,000 are ghost voters or under-aged. The Electoral Commission was informed about this matter but it appears they were not bothered about the under-aged and the ghost voters. 

Another area, which I think I should touch, is lack of Government effort to implement some policies that were initiated many years back. Here, I would like to address the human resource in this country. A number of my colleagues have already talked about it but I think unless we identify the human resource as a core factor in development and stability of this country, we shall not be doing much. A civil servant in this country is not looked after very well. If you look at the remuneration of the doctors, the teachers, and the nurses, it is so bad that you do not expect a doctor at Mulago or any other hospital to perform his/her duties well.  I should have expected the President to come out clearly, on the human resource of this country.  

There was a policy of reforming the Public Service. A lot of money was injected in this particular policy; donors gave a lot of money in this area to restructure Public Service. We were told that if half of the Public Service was cut off, the remaining half would be properly remunerated and properly compensated for their work. It is over seven years since this programme was started. But if you look at the compensation package of a civil servant, it is appalling. I therefore, appeal to the Government to look at this factor very seriously.

Very soon we are going to debate the Budget, and we are going to discuss the projects in that Budget. You will see billions and billions of money that will be handled by these civil servants, and yet if you look at the package of their salaries, it is appalling. How will you fight corruption, when a civil servant entrusted with billions of money is underpaid?  So, I find it a problem in this sector, and I request the Government to clearly look at this policy.  

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr. Okumu Ringa):  Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Sabiiti from Rukiga County, for articulating issues regarding remuneration for public servants. My Ministry has over the last seven years, embarked on the Public Service Reform Programme, and this programme has gone a long way in streamlining pay reforms.  For example, on the -(Interruption).

MR. ERESU: May I know from the Member holding the Floor, who is referring to ‘my Ministry,’ which Ministry he is talking about?  

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Speaker, I assumed that the Members are generally informed, but since it is -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: I think the hon. Member is right.  You are assumed to know the portfolios of the Members of the Front Bench. Hon. Members, the Member is a Minister in the Ministry of Public Service. Let me save him that introduction.  

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Much obliged, Mr. Speaker. On the very subject raised by hon. Sabiiti, it has been the wish and the aspiration of the Movement Government to reward civil servants. Indeed a lot of efforts have been put in; and donor funds have been put in the process of this reform programme. 

In terms of remuneration, I would like to inform the House that since 1993 to date, a lot of efforts have been put in to improve on remuneration. For example, a teacher who was getting Shs. 3,700 per month is now getting Shs. 100,000 a month. I know this may not be commensurate but there is a lot of improvement. A Permanent Secretary who was getting Shs. 15,700 per month, today is getting Shs. 1,700,000.  There is an improvement. 

But I would like to agree with the hon. Sabiiti that, a lot should be done and we are working towards the improvement.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. SABIITI: I am happy to hear from the Minister, that more will be done. But I would request that they move fast, so that we combat corruption wherever it is, either in Public Service or in other sectors. 

Another area which I would like to touch on is the mission of the Movement and its principles.  The other day, I read in the newspapers, the Secretariat was categorizing people who are in the Movement and the multipartists. 

The Movementists and other independents. I happen to have been placed in that area, where I am independent and I am sure if you are independent-minded, that is when I would call you a good Movementist.  

The Constitution clearly stated that all of us are movementists; and one to start categorizing, even Members of Parliament, is really dividing the Movement. I would call upon the Secretariat to desist from categorizing people in this great House; and I need a clear explanation from the Secretariat on how they arrived at categorizing a Member of Parliament as a Movementist, a Multi-partyist or an independent person.

THE SPEAKER: I think let us wind up this debate here.  We shall continue with the debate later on. Hon. Members, we agreed in the morning, because there were a few Members and we wanted to conduct elections; now, I think those who are interested to participate in elections are here.  

At this juncture, let us move to that exercise.  Unfortunately, I would have wanted to appoint the non-voting Members to be the presiding officers.  But as I see, none of them is here and because of this, I am going to appoint two of you to do the needful. You will vote but then you will be in charge of the elections. 

I appoint hon. Augustine Ruzindana and hon. Rosemary Seninde, to be in charge of this exercise. To enable you carry out this exercise, proceedings are suspended until 2.00 p.m. this afternoon, when we shall resume with the debate. 

As we agreed before, we must set a time when voting should stop. So, we are starting now and voting will stop at 1.15 p.m

(The proceedings were suspended at 11.37 a.m.)

(On resumption at 2.22p.m_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, earlier in the day, we started on the process of filling vacancies on the Parliamentary Commission, and this exercise has been democratically and transparently carried out under the able supervision of hon. Agustine Ruzindana and hon. Rose Mary Seninde for Wakiso District. Eleven Members of Parliament contested for the three Back Benchers’ seats on the Commission. I think I do not have to go through all the 11 candidates, since we are only interested in the three Commissioners.  

I am happy to announce that hon. Ben Wacha has been elected as one of the Commissioners. Congratulations! I am happy to announce that Maj. John Kazoora has been elected Commissioner. And I am happy to announce, for gender balance, that hon. Margaret Zziwa of Kampala has been elected Commissioner. Congratulations to those who have been elected.  

Hon. Members, the functions of the Commission are well spelt out in the Act that we enacted some three years ago. The role of the Commission is to look after the affairs of this Parliament, and when I say the affairs of this Parliament, it includes both the Members of Parliament and the staff of Parliament. It is this Commission that has to jealously protect the interests of Members of Parliament and the staff who also help us to carry out our work.  

Another function of the Commission is to look after your welfare. Now that the Commission has been set up, there is a chairperson, a secretary, the Minister of Finance, and the Prime Minister, we shall embark on our duties. Your worries, which have been handled on ad-hoc arrangements, will be handled by this fully constituted organ. Thank you very much. 

The Member for Kampala wanted to say something. I will give her the opportunity. Any other Member is free to say something.

MRS. ZZIWA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is not a maiden speech, but I wanted to take the opportunity and honour to thank the hon. Members for the confidence they have shown in me. I know, certainly, that my constituency, Kampala, will feel very glad to realise that their choice for Member of Parliament has been acknowledged by the whole House, by giving her another responsibility as a Commissioner of the Parliament of Uganda. I want to pledge before the House that I will serve the hon. Members diligently, without fear or favour, and I will live up to the expectations of the House, and more so, for the welfare and development of the Parliament of Uganda. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much.  Hon. Ben Wacha.

MR. BEN WACHA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also wish to state that I am overwhelmed by the support that this House gave to my candidature. I just want to state that I will do my very best, and I will try not to let you down. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Unfortunately, the other candidate is not here.  I want to draw your attention to the visitors we have in the Gallery.  We have some school children who have come to see what is going on. You are welcome. We continue with our debate.  

MR. WAGONDA MUGULI (Buikwe North, Mukono): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand to support the motion moved by hon. Mwandha. I wish to pay tribute to His Excellency the President, for the very well thought-out speech that he gave us at the opening of the First Session of the Seventh Parliament.  I wish, however, to make a few remarks arising out of that speech.  

I represent Buikwe North, and Buikwe North is mainly an agricultural area. Much as the President was talking about the 300 coffee trees in this country, my area is hit by the coffee wilt disease; a disease that has led to the drying out of coffee trees. This has virtually deprived some farmers of their only source of income. Something has to be done to avoid creating a new class of poor people.   

Besides that, I represent people who are industrial workers and plantation workers.  As we fight poverty, there are people who are condemned to remain in abject poverty because they earn 700 Shillings per day; and if you work it out, it is below a dollar. When you talk about each Ugandan being able to earn a dollar a day, then by virtue of their employment there are certain sections of people in this country who will remain below the poverty line.  

I was happy to note the progress made in the export of fish and the fish industry. My constituency happens to be one of those with quite a number of fishing villages. I wish to report that these fishing villages however lack a lot of facilities. The approach roads to these villages are in a poor state; many of these villages do not have toilet facilities to the extent that fishermen have to help themselves right in the water where they go for fishing. These villages have therefore been victims of cholera. They lack power and they cannot have ice to preserve their fish. We have learnt that fish has a center stage in earning us foreign exchange. I think the services I am asking for will not be too much for Government to afford -(Interruption)  

MR. LUKYAMUZI: I would like to thank the member holding the Floor for giving way.  The information I want to give is related to fish production. If Government is thinking about improving the fish export, they must provide quality in the sustainable aspect of fish production.  It is a pity that Government is planning to destroy the natural forest in Bugala to replace it with palm trees.  When this is done, the natural generation of rain along the lake will be affected; the natural provision of algae on which fish depend will be affected and the water levels will reduce!  

THE SPEAKER: Is it an opinion or a scientific statement? 

MR. LUKYAMUZI: I was giving information. I am saying that his statement is true but if nothing is done fish production in Uganda will cease to be sustainable in terms of the environment. 

MR. MUTEBI KITYO: Mr. Speaker, I wanted to inform hon. Lukyamuzi that palm oil is produced from palm trees, and what is going to happen in Bugala is that, we are going to remove trees and replace them with palm oil trees. 

THE SPEAKER: So, proceed hon. Member for Buikwe North.

MR. WAGONDA MUGULI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I said that Buikwe North was essentially an agricultural area. The President ably talked about Uganda joining the global market.  

I think there has to be deliberate effort made at creating an export certification system for our produce. Considerable progress has been made in the certification of fish, and this has been mainly due to the demands of the recipients in the country. 

I think that on our own we have a responsibility to set up a certification system for other produce, to be able to take advantage of the emerging markets. Some of the exporters have had the problem of getting low prices for their exports because the importers re-pack and label them as being produced from those countries that have acceptable certification systems.  

A lot has been said about election violence. This is a matter that should not be swept under the carpet.  I think this august House must condemn political violence. There are lessons to be drawn from the experience we have just gone through during the last election.  One of the things we should avoid in future elections is changing the rules of the game. I am talking about the attempt by some people to violate Article 70 of the Constitution, which clearly talks about individual merit as one of the ways to conduct elections.  

If Government wants to conduct elections in a particular way, then guidelines should be given in good time, but not to wait for the candidates to declare their intentions and then demand for them to agree on a sole candidate.  I wish to report to you that Buikwe North conducted her elections peacefully. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

CAPT. MATOVU D.: (Kooki County Rakai): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  First and foremost, I want to congratulate the people of Kooki for having elected me to this honourable House.  I support the motion attributed to His Excellency the President in his address to the nation.  However, I want to make a few remarks. 

One is in the area of health. Many of you know that Rakai way back in 1982 experienced the problem of AIDS. It is true the rate is going down, however, there is now an outcry which is about to replace AIDS in my constituency. That is the problem of mosquitoes. Kooki has about eight sub-counties and all of them border two lakes. I want to appeal to the Ministry of Health and Government to come to the rescue of our people. 
In his speech, the President talked about the declining immunisation coverage. It is true there is poor performance in almost all antigens. However, to me, three factors are responsible: One, the illiterate population: People do not know the value of immunisation.  

I think the other factor is how we apply the Children Statute. If one refuses to immunise the child, what do you do with him or her? I participated in this exercise some time back and it almost cost me votes. They said, ‘you people harassed us, you people forced us to immunise our children’. When you go to seek Police assistance, they tell you this is a minor offence. So, I think Government should come in to strengthen the law. 

I think also the other aspect is politics, both at national and local level. Some of these exercises are de-campaigned.

On education, it is true there is an improvement under UPE and we hail that exercise; but there now is a problem of dropouts.  Children are going out of school. Still, this is maybe because of the weak laws. Most of the politicians are shy to confront a parent who does not want to take his child to school because we fear to lose votes. There is also another danger. Children are not going to school, but it looks as if there is a problem of enforcement.  

Then the other one is the Inspectorate Department. I am glad the hon. Minister is here. In the absence of inspection in schools, I think we are in trouble, the standards tend to go down. We have inspectors at the districts, but they are handicapped in terms of facilitation. Still under education, I request the Ministry to consider taking on more private primary and secondary schools so that at least every Ugandan has access to education.

On Graduated tax, it is good now the Government has revisited the grades, but there is a problem of harassing our taxpayers. It is a very big problem in the villages; the rights of our taxpayers are abused.  

Lastly, I will comment on the high interest rates in banks. We are talking about the private sector leading the economy; but the interest rates in banks are very prohibitive. I request Government to revisit this area. 

I want also to use this chance to inform the House that much as we are talking about violence, I come from a constituency where we stood with two soldiers - a Major and a Captain and other colleagues - but we managed to go through peacefully. So, on violence, there may be several factors of the individuals, the patience, the control, the exercise is very, very important. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. BADRU KATONGOLE (Kyaka County, Kyenjojo): Mr. Speaker, I beg to support the motion. I would like to draw the attention of the House to the reminder echoed by the President on page 2. “You should remember that you work for the whole country and not only for your respective constituencies”. I find this reminder very relevant, particularly so, because I represent a constituency that is one of the least developed areas in this nation. To set a few examples of under development, I will point out the issue of water.  

While in his manifesto of 2001, the President indicated that safe water coverage in rural areas is at 60 per cent, unfortunately for my constituency, safe water coverage is at about five per cent. For example, if you go to one of the dry areas in Mpara sub-county, in Karwenyi parish, you get a bore hole of 1958, it is out of service and yet it is the only one supposed to serve the whole area of over 10,000 residents. 

The other area that has contributed to a lot of under development in Kyaka is lack of water for cattle. While in other areas valley dams and valley tanks are being constructed, in Kyaka we have got valley dams and valley tanks that were constructed over 30 years ago, which have got silted up and there are hardly any efforts to de-silt them.

When you turn to the plight of the herdsmen, the President’s speech indicates that almost 7,000,000 of litres of milk are being collected. In my place, milk is just poured away.  About two years ago, some cooling plant was sent to our area from Government, but unfortunately it was junk. It has never operated ever since it was installed.   

Another problem in my constituency is lack of feeder roads. Farmers that are at a distance of 16 to 17 kilometres off the main roads have no feeder roads to connect them to the main roads to enable them market their produce. An example I have is an area called Kigolani in Kakabala sub-county. There is hardly any road to connect these farmers to the markets. 

On education, the situation is also appalling. Children are still studying under trees and where there are structures, on the main part, they are incomplete structures and the children are not protected from the harsh weather.

As I wind up, I want to talk about the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture. One problem that I have got in my constituency is that the seeds these farmers are growing are as old as the history of farming. They can no longer bring the returns to these farmers. The clonal coffee that has been distributed to these farmers is that, at an economic level, it gets a farmer five to six bushes. 

In light of this, I would like to advise Government to set up a development audit authority that on most part should play an advisory role to Government and point out areas that have seriously suffered from imbalance in development and lack of equitable distribution of resources.

My appeal also goes to the Government to set up a political supervision, so that we can have balanced development. My other appeal is that, apart from the Government availing road units to newly created districts, to enable them to open up feeder roads, the Government should set up special rehabilitation programs for such areas that have lagged behind in development. I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR.BIRIMUMAASO (Bukoto County West, Masaka): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to take this opportunity to congratulate you and the hon. Members of Parliament for all the achievements that have come your way. I stand here to support the motion and to thank His Excellency the President for a very wonderful address to the Nation. 

There is one component which the President did not address in his capacity as the Chairman of the Movement. He was very silent on the future of the Movement. It is not good, when members, much as it is healthy for individuals, to come up with different statements to the nation, as when the Movement will turn into a political party and it will take which course. I think as the Chairman of the Movement, it is time for the president to initiate a very serious debate regarding the future of the Movement. 

It is unfortunate that another forum, which was supposed to sit today postponed; it is where I would have addressed this matter. But we should not leave the people guessing and doubting. Some of us are very committed with our people who elected us, they want to see the Movement continuing; but when they see senior cadres doubting its existence, they get confused.  

Still on that point, a good idea is initiated by an individual or individuals; but when it is good, it is taken up by the majority. So, I would advise strongly some senior cadres of the Movement to accept that the Movement is for all, and for its good, they should be prepared to leave it behind and it continues. 

On the election violence, some of us are to blame, especially some of the Government officials. In my constituency, I wondered. Candidates had problems in their constituencies, but had time to come to my constituency.  Like hon. Matembe - unfortunately, she is not here. She came and addressed the people, telling them not to vote for me, that I had a case in court. 

Really, I just excused her because - it was unfortunate, for someone in charge of Ethics to come to talk on a matter which is before court - really, it is not good.  I have had a private discussion with the hon. Member; but it is not good for Members to take it upon themselves to think that they will determine the destiny of others. They will get embarrassed, because some of us have very strong roots which they cannot tamper with.  

I will just advise Members who want to extend their tentacles to other constituencies to think twice, because it is not good really.  
We are here again, and I would not like to talk much. But I will do so at an appropriate time and forum - I will do it.

There is a problem that must be tackled - that is transparency.  The sell of UCB, I have seen it on an agenda in a certain forum, but there are questions which were being asked.  For a year and a half, UCB’s accounts are not audited; or if they were audited, they are nowhere to be seen. We are here Members representing people, we are expected to take very serious decisions, but we cannot even look at the audited accounts of UCB; and then some people take it upon themselves to push you in a corner and lecture to you. I think this is not correct. This is a public institution, and its accounts must be availed. We must look at them so that we take informed decisions. At an appropriate time, I will be in position to -(Interruption)

MR. AWORI:  I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that, the Chairman of the Movement has got those records, and he could avail them to him.

MR. BIRIMUMAASO:  Mr. Speaker, thank you.

MR.NSHIMYE  (Mityana County South, Mubende): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have already congratulated you, and your Deputy and my fellow hon. Members. I also wish to support the motion. I wish to congratulate His Excellency the President, for his well considered speech. 

However, I have some comments to make in particular, I would wish to refer to page 6, paragraph 2, where he says that “ in our fight against poverty, Government has ensured - I wish to emphasize this word ‘ensured’ - “that the share of the taxpayers money that directly benefits the poor is increasing”.  And then he gives examples, which I agree with Universal Primary Education, Primary Health Care, and then he tackles water and sanitation. 

I wish to point out that the people I represent in particular, people from Mityana town have not benefited from this program. The President for the last 10 years has been promising water to Mityana town, from the time when my predecessor, hon. Besweri Mulondo, was in this House and he left this House without water. 

Then he promised them water during the time of my immediate predecessor hon. Arthur Bagunywa. He has also left this House without water in Mityana. The growth of Mityana has always been equated to the growth of Mukono town. At least the Mukono people are lucky that the President this time promised to give them water. I wish to request the Government to include Mityana on this list, because lack of water has hampered the efforts of the developers who are putting up modern buildings. I hope the ten-year-old promise will be fulfilled this time –(Interruption)

MR. BYABAGAMBI: I want the hon. Member to clarify to us whether the people of Mukono are lucky, like the Mityana ones, after receiving the same promise 

MR. NSHIMYE: Well, I am saying they are lucky, because it is a recent promise. I also want to comment on the very good ideas of the President that appeared on page 8 and 9 of his speech. He highlights areas where this country can make more foreign earnings coffee, fish and cotton.  He gives an example that if we were to produce 1 million bales of cotton we would be able to earn 2.7 billion dollars, and he suggests that we need about half a million acres, and that if we had 500 large farmers, each one with 1000 acres, we would be able to achieve this target, but unfortunately he leaves this idea hanging. I expected him to go further to invite people with big chunks of land who are willing to participate to be assisted, say by getting easy credit or getting bush clearing machines that would enable us to achieve this.  That idea is left hanging like that.

Secondly, there is where he deals with coffee and he suggests that if we were to rehabilitate and get about 214,000,000 trees of coffee, we would be able to achieve a target of 1000 million bags of coffee, and that if this coffee is processed in powder form, then we would be able to produce more money, but then he leaves it there without suggesting whether Government is engaging into a joint venture with the investors, whereby this coffee would be processed here and we sell it in powder form.

I am glad that he deals with the issue of fish very well. He said that a whole Minister was allocated to do this, but he laments that although our fish is of better quality, it is fetching less money and yet fish which is  -(Mr Woneka rose_) - Mr. Speaker, if I am to be compensated -(Interruption) 

MS.  WONEKA:    Mr. Speaker, while agreeing with the speaker on the Floor; I would like to give him further information about cotton. We have learnt from the Cotton Development Authority that if you sold 100 bales of raw cotton today, you will get 30 million dollars.  100 bales of yarn, we would get three times that amount, that is 90 million dollars. If we go a little further and we get gray cloth out of those 100,000 bales of cotton, we would get 150 million dollars. 100,000 bales of textile, we would get 210 million U.S. Dollars.  If we get that same cotton to fine garment, we would get 300 million U.S. dollars.  My question is; why can’t we get someone to get us that money?  Is Government failing to attract somebody in the private sector to give us this money? What is happening?  What is the Ministry concerned doing with these beautiful figures? Thank you, Mr. Speaker 

MR. NSHIMYE: Thank you hon. Member.  I think you are agreeing with me that some effort has to be made to achieve these objectives.  

I would have expected from his speech a special treatment to a group of people who have sustained the administration and the mobilization of this country; and these are the LC.1s and LC.11s who are giving a free service without any allowance or salary.  I appreciate the budgetary constraints of the country, but I would have expected that Government thinks of a programme where these people can be motivated for the work they have put in for the last 15 years.  For example, under the Entandikwa programme, a certain percentage would be put aside to be accessed by LC officials. Only that when we get this money, we feel shy to access it lest the people they lead would accuse them of misusing their office or their powers.  So I am urging this hon. House and the Government to see to it that we attend to these people who have done tremendous work for this country for a very long time without any reward.

Lastly, about the election violence, I would suggest to this House that in future when we are making the law, we reduce on time of campaign.  For example, we have been having four weeks; we could reduce to three so that if we are very busy, we might not be redundant and think of violence because it has worked for the hon. Lady Members who have had to traverse very big areas, covering big districts. So we can campaign, be in one parish in the morning, and be in another parish in the afternoon.  This could reduce on incidents of violence.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MRS. ALISEMERA  BABIHA  (Women Representative, Bundibugyo):   Mr. Speaker, let me take this opportunity to congratulate you and your Deputy on your election to that high position.  I would also like to congratulate the other Members of Parliament for having gone through the elections successfully.

On the President’s Address on the state of nation, I would like on behalf of the people of Bundibugyo to support the motion. I would like to take this opportunity also to thank Government for the tireless efforts they have put in place in Bundibugyo to  reduce the insurgency  there.  I would also like to thank His Excellency on behalf of the people of Bundibugyo on his elaborate address to the nation.  However, the people Bundibugyo have a lot of problems, but I am going to dwell on three.

Bundibugyo has a communication problem.  This is know to every person in this House.  Communication in Bundibugyo has contributed a lot to the absolute poverty in the District.  You know what communication can do. Without a communication network, you lack development. Bundibugyo has been lagging behind other districts because of lack of a communication network, be it in a road network, telephone lines or others. 

Bundibugyo has a lot of natural resources. We have petroleum, cattle, fish, and in the agricultural sector, we produce coffee, vanilla, cocoa, pyrethrum and so many other resources. We have all that in the district, but Bundibugyo has lagged behind other districts. 

For the last fifteen years, the President has been coming to the district and has been promising to at least work on the road, but we have not had the road network put in place. They have just been grading the roads - but this is not enough. 

The other areas where the fish industry – (Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, COMMUNICATIONS (Mr. Werikhe):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for giving way.  With regard to the road, there have been several attempts to re-gravel that road. In fact, if it was not due to the re-gravelling, I think there would be no vehicle going to Bundibugyo. We should also appreciate the terrain. Nevertheless, under the ten-year road sector programme, Bundibugyo is one of the priority cases. Actually, in the next three to four years, I think we will have the road going to Bundibugyo as one of those areas for bituminising.  

With regard to the telecommunications, UTL is now making arrangements to move there. So, these are programmes that are laid down, and soon communication will be in place to access Bundibugyo. Thank you.

MRS. ALISEMERA BABIHA: Thank you, hon. Minister. I am happy to hear that. However, I am speaking from the experience I went through during my campaigns.  Rwebisenge was impassable! And this is the area where we had the largest number of cattle in the former Toro Kingdom.  This is where we have plenty of cattle.

On the fishing industry, you cannot get fish and take it to Fort-Portal or take it to Bundibugyo to the market. By the time you reach there, the fish is rotten, and it cannot be eaten.  So, you can imagine!  These people have the resources, but they cannot access markets. (Interruption)  

MR. RWAMIRAMA KANYANTOLE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May I get clarification from the hon. Member as to whether she is referring to the former Kingdom of Toro? To my understanding, the Kingdom of Toro exists.  

MRS. ALISEMERA:  I am referring to the former Toro, and Bundibugyo used to be former Toro, if you know the history of Toro. I hope you were there when Toro existed.  

Communication has been a problem in Bundibugyo, and everybody has known this. I am happy to note that the Minister has put Bundibugyo on the priority programme.  

We also have another problem. The people of Bundibugyo have sent me to request Government to start a programme on rehabilitation. These people are still living in camps, but they want to form small camps near their villages so that they can start cultivating. So, we are requesting Government to send more soldiers to Bundibugyo so that these people can be kept near their villages other than in the bigger camps in the district.

I would also like to thank the Sixth Parliament for the tireless effort they made to give Bundibugyo a third county called Bugyendera County. But I would like to put a question to Government; I would like them to let us know when this county will start being active. I mean active in terms of constituency standards, whereby we shall have another Member of Parliament from that constituency.  Thank you very much, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: For that question, read the relevant provision of the Constitution, I think it deals with that kind of situation. But you shall be informed.

MR. ANYOLO SAMUEL (Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Whereas I fully support the motion, I have a few issues that I want this House to know about, most of which relate to my constituency. 

UPE is a programme that I have personally benefited from. In my constituency, it has given Government some good image, and I appreciate it.  But the problem that still exists is distances to schools. Whereas there is the SFG programme that caters for additional classrooms, I am told that it is terribly difficult to get codes for the schools. I want to know about this from the responsible Minister. I hope at the end of the day I will get the answer to that problem.

Secondly, regarding transport, my constituency is bisected by a railway line, which indeed interfered with the road network, and the service is now dead. People are wondering what they should do with these rails. If the Government is failing to restore the trains, let them get rid of the rails and compensate them by giving them roads. It is a serious matter. It is logic that a railway line cannot move alongside the road, and therefore, since the service has gone down, a road network should then be restored to compensate for that.  

Thirdly, I would like to comment on the issue of pensions. Even before I came to this House, each time I went home, early in the morning I would find old people ganging around my house trying to get answers, but of course I would stammer. Now that I read in the Policy Statement of the Ministry of Public Service that there is a deliberate attempt to reform it. I hope the reformation will include opening up efficient and effective offices at district level such that these issues can be handled in time.

Another issue I read from the policy statement is restocking. It is a very healthy programme, but I will not be shy to talk about this. Mr. Speaker, you promised to avail us a day when we should sort our differences with our neighbours. I think I will take this opportunity to remind you that let that day not be years from now. It should be within weeks because the situation back home is terrible. People are already looking for alternative means but we have told them to let us try to exhaust what we are pursuing. So, the issue is as serious as that. Our Karimojong brothers should realise that they have caused pain to these areas. I will not shy away from repeating it. I think it would be better if you promised us a day to sort those differences.

Another issue is the valley dams. I happen to have about six in my constituency. The restocking programme could look into this because most of them are already eaten up by sewerage and the banks have already burst. So I think they should include that in it.  

I know for this other matter, I do not have to open up experiences down there. I have personally laid down people killed by these brothers of ours. I think give us that opportunity so that we tell them exactly what is happening down there. Already people are organising to have alternative means, which I do not want to pre-empt. I will patiently sit down to wait for that opportune time. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
MR.KAYONGO (Lubaga North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On page 5, the President in his State of the Nation Address says, “Unfortunately poverty in the Northern region has risen from 60 per cent to 66”. I would be surprised if it was the reverse because what contributes to development is not insecurity. There must be security in the area so that production goes on. But for several years, the North has been destabilised and certainly this affects production. In fact, I wonder how they manage to use –(Interruption)

MRS.MUGERWA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am glad that the issue of poverty in Northern Uganda has been raised again. It was raised on Tuesday and I stood up hoping to comment on it, but unfortunately I did not get the opportunity. Since then I have been feeling uncomfortable to know that this House was supporting the production of tobacco which has been a problem internationally.  In Uganda we have an anti-tobacco group which is campaigning and there is scientific evidence that tobacco is very dangerous to our health and to our economy. So, I wanted our records not to indicate that the House is supporting the production of tobacco in the North. I would like to submit that the North is getting poorer and poorer because there are fewer people now buying tobacco. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Should I take it that you want people in the North to stop production of tobacco?

MRS.MUGERWA: Yes!

THE SPEAKER: Fine.

MR.ANANG-ODUR: Mr. Speaker, it is in fact true that insecurity affects production and economic activities. It is also true that for many years there has been insecurity in the North, but in the last three or so years, there has been relative security in many parts of the North. In fact in Lango, in most of the southern parts of Acholi and even in West Nile, there has been sufficient security for production and economic activities. It is within those three years that we note that poverty in the North has risen by 60 per cent or so.  So, I think the information is that it seems there is something more than insecurity, which contributes to the poverty in the North. 

To me, it is inadequate allocation of resources in the North, and I think that should be addressed very quickly.

MR.KAYONGO: Thank you for that information, but, Mr. Speaker, it is common knowledge that where there is security, production and other services will be going on.  In fact, there is sufficient security in the South and West, which have progressed. Here in the South or Central, we had Itongwa, and of recent, we have had ADF in the West, and in the Northeast we had FOBA, but the leaders joined hands with security agencies and these elements were defeated. So, if the North is to develop, the leaders themselves must embrace peace. 

There have been echoes from Karamoja and the neighbouring districts of the conflicts there. About ten years ago, the people were more than the animals. Today the animals have over-stricken the population in Karamoja, not because their cows are producing more, but of course these are animals rustled from neighbouring districts. This is a terrible thing. I do not know how the Government will handle this, because if you remove the guns from the Karimojong, that population will be wiped out.  So, the Government must move cautiously and yet the Karimojong are destabilising the rest of the districts.

MS.AKECH: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would have wanted to rise on a point of order, especially about the leadership of Northern Uganda not really coming together or even joining hands with Government to ensure that there is security. The leaders of Northern Uganda, of which I am one, and I am in Government, have actually always tried to work with Government, including the leaders at the local level. But the dimension of the problems that we have is beyond the leaders of Northern Uganda. It is not a local problem but it is a national problem. We require that actually both the leaders at the local level, as well as the Government of Uganda, pay more serious attention to this problem. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. TOM KAYONGO (Lubaga North,Kampala): Mr. Speaker, while addressing poverty, the Government in 1994 borrowed Shs.13billion from African Development Bank under PAP, and now it is getting Shs.80 billion under PAP but revised to RMSP. I am glad that the Government has quite ably put this money to use, and the women have benefited a lot. 

Out of this lot, the women do enjoy 60 percent, the youth 20 percent, and the others 20 percent. So, I would like to appeal to the youth to take their share, which they always leave to the women to grab. The men also must come up and take their share, so that they do not cry of poverty when the funds are available.  

I would like the office of the Prime Minister, who is responsible for this to address the term ‘LIBA’, LIBA I think, is an Islam term – (Interruption) 

MR. ERESU: The Member holding the Floor has said that the Government, borrowed money and this money is available.  May I know the intermediaries through, which people can access these funds?

MR. KAYONGO: You can access these funds through the Prime Minister’s Office -(Laughter).  

Mr. Speaker, LIBA is the interest charged on the money borrowed. The Moslems are not comfortable with this condition, and yet, I understand some of the money is borrowed from Islamic banks. When they lend us money, they charge interest. I wonder how the Moslems in Uganda expect to access these funds without really paying interest. The IES who are dispersing this money face problems with Islam community.  

Coming to Lubaga – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think you are about to wind up.

MR. KAYONGO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, but let me wind up with this one, because the Minister in charge of Water is here.  In Lubaga because of poor planning, City Council failed to plan for that area and people built without plans. They sank toilets everywhere, and the protected streams are all with human waste. So, I would like to appeal to the Ministry concerned, to make sure that it avails piped water other than depending on water from the so called protected wells, which are all contaminated. (Mrs Mutagamba rose_)


THE SPEAKER:  No, I would rather leave this issue, because he has completed his time, and I think I will give the Ministers time to respond, so that we get debates and conclude because we have to conclude today.

MS.WINNIE. BYANYIMA (Mbarara Municipality): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to begin by congratulating the three colleagues, who have been elected on our Parliamentary Commission. I wish them success in their work. I hope that in addition to taking care of our welfare, they will place special attention to the development of our staff. I think an independent Parliament needs a very professional staff; and this being a relatively new staff, we need to invest a lot in developing them for our Parliament and for the future Parliaments. 

I also hope that, they will draw up a plan for us to have a new Chamber as soon as possible.  Because, Mr. Speaker, I will not be wrong to say that, we are stuffed like sardines here. The environment is not very conducive for a good debate, when we do not have sufficient space. 

 The President’s speech began by some explanation about the electoral process. While agreeing with many of his remarks, particularly the fact that, the electoral process has degenerated; for someone who has participated in three elections since 1994, I am aware that the management of these elections has been slipping. It is high time we paid a lot of attention here, because elections are the heart of our democratic process.  

I would like to comment about the violence in the elections. Whereas it seems that the President was focusing on violence reported in the press, as having been perpetrated by particular candidates, but in fact, most of the violence in the last elections was actually State inspired.  

In my opinion, this violence came from certain people with power to command soldiers, and people who are armed to engage in acts of indiscipline. Therefore, I take the issue right back to the President, and ask him to refrain from the use of the armed forces in elections.  

Also still talking about violence in elections, some forces have emerged that are clearly anti-democratic, and that they are armed and that they are reminiscent of past similar groups in previous regimes. I am talking about units such as that of Maj. Kakooza Mutale. This kind of unit that moves around, intimidating people, bullying people, arresting people arbitrarily, which the police is afraid of responding to, which is answerable to nobody expect the President himself. It is bad for our democracy. 

I am very happy to tell you, that Maj. Kakooza Mutale who visited my constituency found a very assertive population that told him off and sent him packing.  But in other Constituencies, he did a lot of damage. Many people suffered at his hands. My own family as well as my campaigners were tortured, and imprisoned by him and his forces. So, I speak with a lot of pain, and I know many other Members here were victims of those undemocratic forces.  

Then I ask, when is the Army supposed to be neutral, and when are they allowed to be partisan?  Several times in this House, the President himself has come and told us that, even these ten soldiers who sit here representing the Army, are not supposed to say anything. That they are listening posts; that they are observation posts; that they are not supposed to take sides on any controversial issue. But when a Maj. Gen. Tumwine - I wish he was sitting here now - comes and camps in a constituency and takes a clear side, and even uses the armed forces to try to impose his will on the people – (Interruptions)- I am glad he is here now, I believe he was hearing me. I want a clarification from the President himself. He must tell us whether this kind of partisanship as shown by Maj Gen. Tumwine in my constituency where he camped for six months -and I believe at Government expense - in the top hotel of the town, using soldiers to bully my voters to try to get them to vote for his chosen candidate, is accepted in our democracy - (Interruption).

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: Mr. Speaker, the Constitution is very clear on the rights of citizens. Once you are a soldier, you do not lose your citizenship rights. There is no law in this country which denies any soldier from going to any constituency and residing there as long as he or she wants. Secondly, there is no law that deprives a soldier from exercising his citizenship rights. Thirdly, there is no evidence that Maj. Gen. Tumwine, wherever he goes, goes on Government expense.  
Is the hon. Member in order to assume that once you are a soldier you have no right to express your individual rights against a candidate whom you think is not fit to stand? Is that right taken away?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I entirely agree with you that by becoming a soldier, you do not lose your citizenship rights.   But at the same time, the contribution on this issue has been brought about because we are addressing the issue of the President’s speech. And according to her, I do not know whether it is right or wrong, the President has said that Members of Parliament who are representing the UPDF in this House should not say anything, and that they should not be engaged in controversial matters. I was not aware of this, but that is her statement. Those are the premises under which she has made that conclusion. 

Since we are dealing with the President’s speech, I think she is attacking it and saying that maybe it is not true, because incidents before have indicated that soldiers have involved themselves in controversial matters. But this depends on whether what the hon. Member from Mbarara Municipality has said about soldiers not being involved in controversial matters is true or not. Therefore, I am not in position to rule over that.

MS. BYANYIMA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for your wise ruling. The Member should understand that I am talking about the President indeed, and that he should not elevate himself. I just see him as an agent of the President in my constituency; he did not have any choice on this matter.   He was deployed, and he burnt his fingers there, and I think he has learnt his lessons there - (Laughter).


I welcome the President’s statement that people should reconcile, because we need to do our work in a spirit of fairness and forgiveness.  I agree with him, and I want to say before this House that I am ready to forgive him for interfering in my constituency, and I am also ready to forgive all those people he deployed, such as Maj. Gen. Tumwine, and work with them for the good of our country - (Applause). 

I am concerned that the President did not talk about the future of the Movement in his speech, just like hon. Birimumaaso said. I think it was important because these next five years are important years of ending a very long transition. For the President to omit this in his speech makes me wonder whether he thinks it is not important for Parliament to discuss the future of the Movement and democracy, or whether he is planning another time for us to address this very important matter.  

On the economy, I want to thank my hon. colleagues who voted for me in my absence on the Budget Committee. I notice that this economy that has been growing steadily is now plateauing. It seems there is a slowing down, and there may be a reversal. My own feeling is that stagnation is coming from the fact that there are very many people in Government who do not believe in what they are doing. They are filled with cynicism, and they are undermining the wonderful economic reforms which look wonderful on paper, but which are continuously undermining practice. This is why I am a reform supporter because I believe that there is need for revival within the Movement, if indeed the economic reforms are to be implemented. 

I take the example of UCB. We wrote a report on it, and we were condemned for having written it.  In fact now, everything that we tabled here in Parliament is coming out before the courts.  I wish our advice had been taken at that material time.

On the issue of poverty, I put it before this House that urban poverty is hard hitting, and that urban decay is in itself a constraint to - (Interruptions) - Mr. Speaker, I am winding up on this poverty issue. Because we are going to attract foreign direct investment, we must look attractive to face the investor whom we want. We have already said that he may not invest in the rural areas because we went and wrote a Constitution which makes it literally impossible, at least at the moment, for an investor to go and invest on the land. 

So, the place for them to invest is in the urban areas in industry, in manufacturing.  But when the urban areas are decaying like they are, when we cannot deal with waste disposal, when the streets have gone from tarmac to dust, when there is no street lighting, when all these problems face the urban areas, how can anybody with money reasonably want to put their money in our towns? So, there is cause to work on improving the infrastructure in urban areas, if at all our towns are going to be attractive to investors.  

I have just returned from Malaysia where I found that their city is permanently lit at night as if it was Christmas everyday. That is only for the purposes of attracting investors! So, we need to follow suit and learn some lessons.   

The President did not give us a list of upcoming Bills as he normally does. We are in the dark about the business the Government wants to bring before the Parliament. I hope that this list will come out very soon, and on that list I would like to see the Equal Opportunities Commission, which has been delayed for five years, and the Domestic Relations Bill. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. AWORI: Mr. Speaker, thank you very much for giving me this opportunity.  Many of my colleagues on the Floor have repeatedly mentioned Kakooza Mutale as a compound of confusion in our elections.  Yesterday the hon. Minister of Parliamentary Affairs promised us a statement from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister on the matter of Kakooza Mutale.  Now that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister is here with us this afternoon, do we expect any statement from him on this notorious character?  (Laughter).

THE SPEAKER: I think the position as stated by the Minister yesterday still stands, and as you appreciate, the Prime Minister has just entered.   In due course, I will give the Prime Minister an opportunity to make a statement.  Can we proceed?

MR. SAIDI OKUTI (Aura Municipality, Aura): Mr. Speaker, thank you for giving me the opportunity to add my voice to the many voices that have thanked the President, and the motion moved by hon. Mwandha on the State of the Nation Address.  I would like to take this opportunity, this being my first time in this august House to speak, to congratulate you and your Deputy for being elected to this high office of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker respectively.  In the same light, I also wish to thank our colleagues who are on the Front Bench for having caught the attention of the President to be appointed in their respective offices.  I will use the same opportunity to thank all the Members of Parliament for having been successfully elected to this august House, despite the intense violence that characterized the Parliamentary elections.  What we have heard from Members who have contributed is not a simple matter.  It is not a joke, but a sad event, because this waters down the effort of our gallant sons and daughters who fought to restore peace in this country.  

The President talked about election violence; some of us are living under this fear.  In our case in West Nile, the election violence did not start with the last Presidential election, but started way back in 1994 during the Constituent Assembly.  Many people were dumped in Luzira on treason charges, simply because they supported different candidates. Recently in the Parliamentary election, a lot of funds were used to destabilize some of us, and these funds didn’t come from individual pockets, but from State House. It is high time the President stopped these agents who are directly employed in his office from harassing the citizens.  Otherwise we are losing the meaning of elections in Uganda, and people will lose confidence in the election process.  

In his speech, the President observed correctly the rise in poverty level in Northern region and attributed it to the insurgency that is on going in the North.  In the West Nile and Arua district the reverse is true, because in 1986 when the NRA, now UPDF, entered that region there was no single bullet fired.  The Second Deputy Prime Minister made sure that the people of West Nile received NRA without any fighting, and there was no resistance towards that good force; the people who were still in exile in 1986 had to come back and settle in Arua.  Hon. Maj. Gen. Tinyefuza can bear witness, because he was the first officer to address people in West Nile.    

The President talked of the NAP project in West Nile; we heard about it in the North, but I think it was confined in the Central North, and according to what I heard from my brothers from Central North, it was stopped. In the West Nile, they created a sub-component called CAP, which was put in place intentionally to bridge the absence of NAP in that area. In order to get some Government programmes, instead of bridging the gap, CAP created a wider gap between our areas and those that benefited from NAP.  So, when the Sudanese came, with their fake promise of giving employment to our boys, promising them 500 dollars to go and fight, most of them resorted to the war as a source of employment - that is why we had insurgency.  

So, it is not correct to say that the insurgency is the cause of poverty in West Nile, but it is a result of the biting poverty in Arua.  

His Excellency also touched on the issue of forces in the Democratic Republic of Congo.  This has been a very contentious issue.  A lot of voices have been raised against the deployment, and I want to accept that the deployment did not follow the constitutional provision. The overall objective of the deployment of our forces in Congo has been very healthy and genuine.  For us in West Nile we have really supported the deployment, because it has given us relief; at least we have got some time to do constructive things than before our forces were there.  

It surprises me to hear my colleague, hon. Aggrey Awori, giving the cost of maintaining our soldiers in Congo; forgetting the value of the Lugbaras being killed each day; forgetting the value of the Kakwas being killed in West Nile.  If it can cost 50 billion to maintain our forces in Congo and save a single life of a Lugbara, then let it be, because the purpose of our soldiers is to safeguard the sovereign integrity of our country.  

In conclusion l must inform you that in Arua, we were losing people daily; we are losing Government properties; immunization has come to a standstill; Government extension services are not being implemented, because of the negative forces in Congo who are harassing us. But because of the deployment, today the district has achieved a lot. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Member for Kalungu. And to balance up, because there was a statement that the UPDF is not allowed to say anything here, I will allow Maj. Gen. Tumwine, before I shift to Bugiri.

MR. ANTHONY YIGA (Kalungu County West, Masaka): Thank you Mr. Speaker for giving me this opportunity to say a few words. I have noted with concern that I have been standing for the last four days since the debate begun, but I was not catching your eye. 
This made me wonder what tricks we, the new Members should play, so that we are also able to get audience.  

I stand here to support the motion, and I thank the President for his good State of the Nation Address. I also bring greetings from the people of Kalungu County West who have asked me to thank the government for the good it has done to uplift the standard of living of the ordinary Ugandans, especially the rural people. They however asked me to raise the following issues. 

The people of Kalungu West constituency are concerned about the falling prices of coffee. Coffee is one of the major income earners for the people of Kalungu West constituency, but its price is falling. In fact, the farmers are now demoralised and I do not know whether they will continue planting coffee as they are being called upon to do by Government every now and then.  

As I talk now, many families cannot afford the basic necessities of life, and many of them cannot even send their children to school, especially those ones in secondary schools and other tertiary institutions. They are calling upon the Government that in the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture, attention should be put to the marketing of, not only coffee, but also the other produce which the Government and other agencies have been urging the farmers to increase production of.  

Kalungu West constituency is known even by the President to be one of the constituencies with the worst feeder roads in this country. In 1996 during the presidential campaigns, the President visited Kalungu, and he moved around and sympathised with the people there, and promised that one of the major roads, the one from Villa to Kalungu to Kyamulibwa to Katonga, would be rehabilitated after the elections. The elections took place in 1996 and that road was never rehabilitated. This year, during the presidential campaigns, the President once again came to my constituency to canvas for votes and raised the same issue. This time the roads were even worse than he found them in 1996. He again promised that he would work on those roads. The people are now waiting to see when these promises are going to mature.  

The people of Kalungu West appreciate the Government policy of decentralisation, but they are saying it has to be guided. Yesterday I was listening attentively to some of the answers given by the hon. Ministers. They were saying that we have decentralised, we have given districts conditional grants, so MPs should go to the districts and find out what they are going to do for their people. 

I am saying that Government should also take an interest to follow up, otherwise you will find that some constituencies are marginalised. For example, Kalungu West in Masaka district is marginalised. This is a constituency which does not even have a health centre, yet other constituencies have such facilities. It has 16 parishes and out of them only two parishes have got health centres. One wonders what the rest of the people should do.  They do not have access to such facilities. So we request the Ministry concerned to take this issue seriously. 

Government should ensure that it gives guidance to the Local Governments; it should monitor them and also guide them in planning and resource allocation so that those areas that are marginalised can also get a chance to access the development funds -(Interruption). 

MR.BYABAGAMBI: Mr. Speaker, I am very much surprised that Kalungu West has also got bad roads and that it is marginalised.  The First Prime Minister of this country, and a historical Member of the Movement was from there. So, what happened?

MR.YIGA: Thank you for your information. In fact, it has also been baffling me why –(Laugher)- because the former Prime Minister comes from Kalungu. We also had the chance of having an MP who was a Minister of Finance, but nothing was done on the ground. These people served Uganda and they forgot Kalungu constituency. Now we are requesting Government to come and rescue these people, otherwise the situation is bad. 

I have also been asked to inform this House that the people are also concerned about the recent hike in the electricity charges. Right now the farmers find a problem to raise money to mill their maize because the charges have also increased accordingly. For example, a sack of 100 kilograms which used to cost Shs.5,000 to mill now costs Shs.7500. So now you can imagine where we are going. We request the Government to address this issue; otherwise the situation is not good on the ground. 

We also have another project, which is going to become a white elephant in my constituency. Government had assisted the community to extend power from Kaliro to Nabutwonga. It is now coming to two years but this project is not yet complete. We see electricity being extended to other small trading centres with only three shops. So, we request Government to consider finalising this project, otherwise the people are getting concerned and are also wondering what is happening. They also see it in another way of marginalising them. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MAJ.GEN.TUMWINE (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The officers and combatants of the UPDF congratulate all of you and say that they are happy that the democracy in Uganda for which they sacrificed their lives in the past, and are still sacrificing, is continuing –(Interruption).

MR.AWORI: Mr. Speaker, I am fully aware that the hon. Member on the Floor is a Major General, retired Commander of the NRA, and an accomplished Designer in various types of attire. But, while I am aware that officers of the UPDF normally go to work in proper uniforms, is he in order to come in, to perform his duties in this House, as an officer of UPDF representing men and women of UPDF wearing a beach wear?

THE SPEAKER: Well, hon. Members, you may be aware of those rules, but maybe the Members of UPDF are deployed for different services, and maybe the services carry different uniforms - (Laughter).
  
MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I was telling you that the UPDF is composed of your sons, daughters, and your relatives; and they would really like to enjoy the rights of every citizen in Uganda. One of the rights that they fought for is freedom of expression, creativity, and originality; and doing things which will liberate Uganda. 

It is in that spirit, that I have struggled to try and liberate Ugandans, from the discomforts in the suits and wears that I strongly oppose.  It is not a rule that when you are serving - and for hon. Aggrey Awori’s information, I am not retired, I am still very active -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Since we have already ruled on this, why do you not proceed on the others?

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: I am proceeding, Mr. Speaker. It is important to know that I am still active, I am not retired and I am free to dress like a civilian or wear a uniform.  

One of the reasons, why UPDF is represented in this House, is to keep the harmony between the politicians and the soldiers. 

The main reason I wanted to speak on the President’s Address, as I support the motion, was in reference to the violence that he referred to in his speech, and which has been talked about very much in this House. I would like to make it clear that, all disciplined UPDF officers and combatants are opposed to violence against innocent citizens. It is the main reason for which we went to the bush, to fight against State inspired violence. That principle still stands.

However, what has been said here has indicated that, people are not differentiating between two issues. There are institutional matters, and individual matters. There are issues that affect an institution or are done by an institution, and those that are done by individuals.  

I want to inform this House that orders of the Army are given in messages, in instructions, on radios, written and they are very clear. I want to inform this House that there was no single message, or order involving a unit of the Army or an individual, or an order from a senior officer, instructing any unit or any individual to go and cause violence against innocent citizens - it was not there.  

What happened, if there was individual indiscipline, if there was indiscipline by an individual soldier -(Interruption)


MR. OGWEL LOOTE: Mr. Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from the representative of UPDF. When he says that there was nobody that they supported - in Matheniko County, that is where I happen to be born, one particular candidate was given - and escorted by military police; and he was also armed. 

Secondly, when the petition was in the court of Moroto, which is recent, my voters in the Municipality - when the APCs were put around, the supporters of the other candidates were also rounding up the town, putting my voters at stake.  Where did that power come from? The candidate was escorted by the military police throughout!

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: I had allowed the clarification but if that time will be given to me, I will take the information, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  No, I will not give you that time.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Okay.  If the time is not -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I will give you half a minute.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Okay. 

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr. Speaker, I want clarification from the hon. Member from –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the person who has the Floor is Maj. Gen. Tumwine, so if the clarification is not for him, you will reserve it for some other time.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Okay, point of clarification.  It is for hon. Elly Tumwine representative of UPDF.

THE SPEAKER: But you cannot change, you have said it was for the Member for Moroto Municipality.

DR. OKULO EPAK: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank hon. Tumwine. If I heard him correctly, he said that no single order came from any unit of UPDF anywhere with respect to deployment during election times. I was contesting in Oyam County South, and on Saturday before the voting day, LDUs under the command of a UPDF officer in Minakulu Unit were deployed all over. That was a proper deployment; and I may also inform him that I happened to access the communications for that deployment.  Does that not constitute a UPDF action, in contravention of the laws of the elections we were using?  

As a matter of fact, an officer from Bombo was eventually dispatched; the officer then was ordered to recall all his men back to the barracks by midnight. In which way would I classify that one? Was it a UPDF action or an arbitrary individual action?  Thank you.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think I need to clarify those since you have promised to add to my time. All the deployment that they are talking about could have been -(Interruption)

MS. BYANYIMA: Mr. Speaker, is it in order for the hon. Member holding the Floor to mislead this House that there was no deployment or commanding of soldiers to disrupt elections and cause violence? In fact, he knows very well, and many others know very well, that on the 25th of June, the eve of elections, two companies of the 77th Battalion were ordered to leave the barracks at Makenke to board some lorries and travel at night to a place called Kanyatorogo in Kinkizi, in order to cause havoc, beat up people, and help one honourable Member of this House to win an election. This matter is in fact a subject of the courts. 

Is it in order for him to say that soldiers were not used, when in fact Maj. Kakooza Mutale himself, when asked by the Press why he was arresting relatives and campaigners of a candidate in Mbarara Municipality, he said that he was there on the orders of the President himself, and this was published widely in the Press? Is he now in order to mislead this House that orders were not given to soldiers, when he was there himself and he participated in those orders sometimes?  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the problem being generated from this debate is that some people are trying to answer matters that would be answered by other persons. I do not know whether Maj.Gen. Elly Tumwine is assuming that he is going to answer everything that happened in Uganda, allegedly done by the UPDF. Soon I will end the debate from the Members here, and I will give an opportunity to people with responsibility to answer certain matters raised by you.  The Prime Minister, who is Leader of Government Business in Parliament, is here. The Minister of Defence is here, and the Minister of Education is here. 

In order not to degenerate what is going on, I advise Members to concentrate on matters that are within their known knowledge or within their portfolio. Otherwise, if you stray into matters that are not within your portfolio, then these clarifications may come to you when you are not in position to authoritatively respond. 

I do not have to really rule on the point of order raised by the hon. Member for Mbarara Municipality, but I am cautioning us to restrict ourselves to matters within our knowledge, instead of speculations.

MAJ.GEN.TUMWINE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As I told you, I represent the UPDF. What I was telling you is standard formula.  And while there was deployment, I said specifically that nobody was deployed to cause violence against innocent citizens. What was done in some cases and what has always been done, and I can give you a number of examples, there are areas where there was threat of violence and there was deployment for the protection and defence of the people and property in those areas. That is the reason why the army in some cases has been taken to some areas to protect the citizens, which is one of the roles of the army in that respect -(Interruption).

MS. BYANYIMA: Mr. Speaker, I am sorry to rise again on a point of order, but I am finding it very painful to accept that when you have already ruled on this matter, the hon. Member should insist on giving us explanations. And these explanations cannot tell me why my sisters had to be beaten up, made to eat their shoes, put in a jail which is not even at the police station; and he tells me that this is because they were protecting the security of people in Mbarara Municipality? 

I ask you to rule again, that if it is a matter for the Ministry of Defence, he gives us an explanation. But is it in order for him to continue misleading the House that the torture that we were put through was in the interest of peace anywhere? 

THE SPEAKER: Well, I cautioned Members generally, but if a Member feels he is competent to answer some of the queries, then I cannot stop him. But he should be competent.  Otherwise, it is going to cause many queries, which I do not think are necessary. 

Anyway, you have five minutes, Major General, so wind up your position, and then we proceed.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: Mr. Speaker, I am competent to speak on army matters and that is why I was elected here. I was saying that any Member here is free. If there is a soldier, if there is an officer who committed a crime, according to the laws of Uganda you are all free to go and report them to the relevant authorities for action. That is a right of every citizen –(Interjection)- I am not allowing the information because of time - (Laughter).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, let me explain. The problem I am going to find here is that, as you are addressing this issue generally, you will find somebody coming from Kotido to narrate an incident that happened there or somebody narrating an incident that happened in Buvuma Islands or in Kapchorwa. So you will have a problem. Will you have the necessary information to explain all these incidents that were scattered all over the country?  That is why I said, maybe the Minister of Defence will be able to explain because he should know what happened. That is the only caution I gave.  But if you feel that you can, you proceed, but you have very limited time. Now you have about three minutes. The Minister of state for Ethics is here, I do not know whether she wanted to give information.

MAJ. GEN.TUMWINE:  No, Mr. Speaker, if it is information I do not have time.

THE SPEAKER: He has declined, and that is his right.

MAJ. GEN.TUMWINE:  I have declined  - (Laughter).  Mr. Speaker, all of us would like to have an army that we love. Those of us who belong to the army would like to be an Army of the people.  We sacrificed to establish a new type of Army.  So, I wanted to address those who are blaming the Army generally. If a Commander in a particular area made a mistake, you have the right  - I am encouraging you, let these matters be brought out so that they can be followed and action will be taken where there was a violation of the law.  What I wanted to bring out, Mr. Speaker, is that it will be wrong to wholesomely say that the Army is doing violence, violence! If it did, it was those few individuals who were doing it; either they were undisciplined or they were not following the right orders.

I would like to encourage Members here to know that there is a lot to gain by having a good relationship with the Army, especially for politics.  One of the reasons for which we feel proud to be here is so that you openly criticize us as you are doing, so that you openly tell us what you feel, so that we can go back and correct them.  It is that reason which gave the wanainchi of Uganda the freedom to say “we can accuse a soldier”, to the extent of abusing Generals and so on, knowing that they are protected.

The President made a statement on the effort of putting the Army under the control of civilian authority.  In the president’s speech he mentioned that point.  I would like to encourage Members here that you do not have an enemy Army in place.  You have a friendly people’s Army in place, and we would like to jointly work together in making this Army a better Army and make a better Uganda. But when it looks as if all the politicians are there to pour all the dirt on the Army without following the proper procedure, where the politicians themselves are indisciplined  -(Interruption) 

MR. AWORI:  On a point of order, Mr. Speaker, I know very well that my hon. Colleague on the Floor representing the UPDF does not appear in the Command structure for UPDF at all.  Is he in order to continue misleading this House talking about matters where he is not even competent, and abusing us politicians?


THE SPEAKER: Again you are calling upon me to make a ruling on that, and this presupposes that I know the facts relating to the issue. Since I do not, I will decline to make a ruling.
MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: Mr. Speaker, this is the reason I would like to inform this House. Some Members here are misinformed.  Hon. Aggrey Awori says I am not in command.  I am a Member of the High Command; I am the Chairman of the Historical Command; I am the Chairman of the Army Representatives in this House, and I am an active soldier.  So, Mr. Speaker, that is the reason why it is necessary for the Members and the public to get to know about this.  

There is a lot of indiscipline, Mr. Speaker and intolerance when we are correcting others -  ((Interruption).  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, for the sake of really saving time and winding up this business, hon. Maj. Gen. Tumwine, would you wind up in just half a minute.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: Mr. Speaker, you should see that the difference is that while we are tolerating and keeping quiet for people to contribute - this is exactly what I am talking about.  We need tolerance on all sides.  

I am winding up by saying this, there are many avenues that are open which we should use to redress all these wrongs that have taken place in an election; and that includes bettering the Army, that includes bettering the electoral process, that includes bettering the registration, that includes all other things and we should follow those methods.  So I would not like to cause division between individuals or organs of State and the public where there are ways and fora in which we could solve the problems.  

Let us encourage open criticism; let us respect each other and move forward knowing that there is nothing that we cannot solve in this country.  We can solve any problem that comes here and that is why we struggled, and some of us are committed to that struggle to the end, when the people of Uganda will finally say we have gone from the past and we are moving forward. And the UPDF will always be on the vanguard of defending the people of Uganda.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR. MULENGANI:  On a point of procedure, Mr. Speaker, in the interest of the Minister being awarded to talk, and given that everybody would wish to say something, I am just proposing that there be a limit on the points of order that are issued to a particular person.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Now hon. Members, what I have in mind is this.  So many people are still interested in making a contribution to this debate, but unfortunately we programmed this debate to end today. 

However, there will be a similar debate for six days starting Tuesday; and as I promised, I have records of all Members who have made their contribution during this debate, and next Tuesday, when we start the debate on the Budget, which also involves Government Policy, I will start only with those Members that have not made their contribution during this debate..  

What I was intending to do is to give opportunity to the Member representing Bugiri District to make her contribution.  After that, because we need to know what Government is going to say about issues that have been raised - you raised many issues; there is a burning issue of Katakwi and Karamoja, there is a burning issue of Kakooza Mutale’s statements; all these have to be answered and I have told the Prime Minister, because he was not here, that these matters were raised. I expect some statements from him or relevant Ministers.  So I think let us end this general debate by having hon. Kasule, and then I call upon the Government to organize itself and make a statement, then we wind up this debate, taking into account that next week, those who have not contributed will be the ones to start the debate.

MR. EKANYA: Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. On a point of procedure, Mr. Speaker, I would like to bring to your notice that at the end of the debate, I would like to move a motion that Government establishes a Judicial Commission of Inquiry into the election violence.  Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, I do not know whether you gave me notice of that, but if you did not, I do not know how you are going to bring it because you cannot bring such a motion without notice. 
If you had briefed me about it, I would have decided whether it is very important or not.  Is it a matter that really requires immediate action?  So make your notice of the motion; we shall consider it. But since you did not comply with Rule 42, I do not see how you can bring a Motion without notice.  Proceed.

MRS. KASULE (Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My comment about the President’s address will go to UPE. The President always talks about extra vacancies for forty thousand teachers. He has said this several times, but there is a problem on the ground. 

The President will always say there are vacancies. The districts receive communications from the Ministry of Education to recruit more teachers, but then when these teachers are recruited and the pay change report forms are filled and brought to the Ministry of Public Service, these teachers do not access the pay roll. I say this as a former Education Officer who was handling the payrol in Bugiri District about one month ago. When we forward forms to the Ministry of Public Service, these forms are handled after one, three, or four months, and when these teachers claim arrears, the Ministry does not respond. They do not even write back to the CAO to say that they are not in position to pay the teachers’ arrears.

About UPE, we have a problem. People with disabilities have a problem. Whenever they construct these classrooms, those who try to put the ramps for the disabled make them too steep. It becomes difficult for the disabled children to enter the classroom with their wheel chairs. 

The President missed a point in his address, when he did not tell the nation when Universal Secondary Education is taking off. I would think that before Universal Secondary Education takes off, we should first handle what we have. We have secondary schools in some of our places, and these secondary schools, especially in rural areas, have vacancies; but it is very difficult for these secondary school teachers to get posting instructions from the Ministry of Education. There are vacancies in schools, but getting a posting instruction from the Ministry of Education is very difficult. I say this as one of the teachers who completely failed to get a posting instruction from the Ministry of Education. As we talk about unemployment, the vacancies are there, but getting posting instructions is also a problem. (Interruption)

MS. NAMUYANGU: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to inform my colleague that many of the secondary school teachers have resorted to teaching in primary schools.

MRS. KASULE: If these teachers have resorted to teaching in primary schools, yet they are trained in secondary methods, this is a sign that they have failed to get employment in secondary schools.

The President said that by the year 2003, we shall have at least 141 sub-counties without secondary schools.   But why should we have that by that year? I am of the view that the Ministry should say that by the year 2003, all sub-counties will have secondary schools, because what happens in those sub-counties where there are no secondary schools? Now we are promoting UPE, but at the same time we are aware that there are sub-counties without Government-aided secondary schools. That means that we are not ready to have the UPE children accommodated, if there are no Government-aided secondary schools in some of these sub-counties.

When the President was addressing us, he talked about violence during elections, and some hon. Members here are trying to answer for this. I do not think that only one person can answer for what happened all over Uganda, unless that person is in position to get information from all places. My people in Bugiri have told me about what happened during the elections, and I also witnessed it. You may say that the army was not ordered, but what happened is that the army was on the ground and they really tortured us. 

In my sub-county, Muterere Sub-county, under the leadership of the RDC of Bugiri District, the army and the RDC got logs of wood with nails and started hitting people. People are there nursing wounds -(Interruption)

MR. MULENGANI: Thank you very much, hon. Kasule, for giving way. I would like to inform this House that what hon. Kasule is talking about is one hundred per cent correct. I say this because an hon. Minister then, in the names of Fred Mukisa, could even command the army illegally. The Electoral Commission stated properly in the papers that RDCs were not supposed to intervene, but Naava, the RDC, came out properly and beat my own brother who comes after me. They thought I was the one. This young man, up to date, has a fractured rib. There is a person who was beaten and his leg was broken in some area. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I thought that these are all criminal acts which are subject to penalties. Were reports made to Police? Were complaints made? Definitely, there should be redress on these issues, but we have taken note of that.

MRS. KASULE: Thank you for that information. Mr. Speaker, when the President was talking about education, he said we have twelve Universities in Uganda; two are public and the rest are private. But it seems that the more we get Universities, the more University education is becoming very expensive. It seems my people in Bugiri will never go to the University. I was there last, and yet I would like to have more people coming after me. So, I suggest that as we move on and get more Universities, the Government should also come up with a method of reducing the fees, so that even people in Bugiri can be able to go and be private students in public universities after selling their coffee, maize and cassava.  

When the President was talking about the programme for modernising agriculture, he said that they want to process our products, so that we can access markets. But there is a problem down here; it may seem small, but it is costing us a lot. People who buy these agricultural products in our villages have weighing scales which they buy at 50,000/=. But for one to use your weighing scale or machine, one has to get a stamp from Uganda National Bureau of Standards at 40,000/= a year. If one is buying a machine at 50,000/= but has to get a stamp to authenticate it at 40,000/=, is that really economical and viable to our local people, and yet we want to help my mother in the village who cannot access a bigger buyer? So, I also suggest that the Ministry concerned, though it looks small, looks into this. 

On transport, especially water transport, the Ministry always concentrates on Kalangala and forgets that there are other islands in this country. For example, as I talk now, Sigulu Island is more populated than Kalangala, but whatever comes goes to Kalangala. What happens to the people in Sigulu? Moreover, they are next to Kenya! The Government of Uganda has to have more impact there so that these people do not run to Kenya. It should show its presence in Sigulu above what the district is offering. We need some transport for our voters in Sigulu so that we stop the problem of drowning and losing our voters. Thank you Mr. Speaker.

DR.OKULO EPAK (Oyam County, South): I am sorry to come in at this moment, Mr. Speaker, but some of us consider the President’s State of the Nation Address as being very, very important. We also think it provides us with the opportunity to have an input to his policy measures.  I do not know whether this is a constitutional procedure or a procedure according to our rules, but sometimes the way we handle the President’s State of the Nation Address does not appear, at least to me, to lead to a definite input towards that policy.
 
It would be even more difficult in future if we have Government and then the Opposition side. I suggest, if it is not too much, that in future we might think or preferring tabling the President’s State of the Nation Address and referring it to the appropriate committee in which it will be fully examined. Since committees are open ended, Members would go there and make very specific inputs. 

For instance, I had very interesting inputs to make on the President’s concern for cotton development, but obviously, I have not put it here and I do not know whether I will do it better under the sector for agriculture. But those are now ministerial policy statements, not presidential policy statements.  

When do we dissect a presidential policy statement, which this address constitutes, so that we can have definite recommendations that the President receives and then we can later challenge him? Because, towards the end of his State of the Nation Address, he is saying that there should be amicable co-operation towards the implementation of Government programmes between Members of Parliament and himself. We can later say, ‘we have made this input towards the implementation of your programme, as an indication of our level of co-operation, how much of it did you absorb?’ I do not know. Maybe I am asking for too much. But I thought I would seek this clarification.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the President’s statement, first of all, reflects the performance in the past and the vision for the future. It is that statement that gives the basis of the Budget. The Budget is drawn in such a way so as to implement what was stated in the policy statement in the vision for the future. Therefore, when you are considering the Budget Speech and various estimates, you will be able to improve on these policies. 

That is where you will also give criticism of failures of Ministries. Because after all, what do we want from the President’s speech? We want it for various sectors of Government. What are the various sectors of Government going to do? And that is why you heard hon. Winnie Byanyima, Member for Mbarara Municipality saying that even in this address, that is where the legislative programme should be stated so that we know that during this year, we are going to do this and this in order to promote this and the other. 

I think by not participating fully in dealing with this one – and again, since it will be a repetition in policies of Government, I think the various committees will have an opportunity to improve on this, criticise and suggest reforms. I think this is the cure. But we start with it so as to understand where the budget is made, then we go to the Budget Speech.

PROF.KAMUNTU: In light of your explanation, Mr. Speaker, and in response to the issue raised and the responses to the President’s address to the nation, do we have analysts? The President has been giving these addresses every beginning of a financial year. Do we have, for instance, analysts of what results have come out of his address on the state of the nation to give us an indication, that indeed the responses, the improvements, the inputs are getting the desired purpose? Is the State of the Nation Address achieving the purpose for which it was intended or is it becoming ritualistic, to just come here and talk and you do not have results?
I have been noting the Ministers who have been attending these sessions. I think this is the highest attendance. Only about one third have been listening to what has been said on the Floor.  Would it not be required for the Ministers to be listening to the debates, particularly the State of the Nation Address by the President when it is being debated in the House? I am seeking your clarification, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, I think the question you are asking is, whether what we say here is followed. You will find out whether it is followed when you look at the policies that will come before you. It will depend on how these policy statements have been written and reports which the Committees will write. 

I envisage that when writing a policy statement of the Ministry - and there was a matter that was raised the previous year, that there should be a comment on what has been done towards improving on it.  

The Committee concerned, because it will have the record of its report of the previous year, may have to report to us that although last year we said this and that and recommended that this be done, we have found that it was done or it was not done. Then it will be up to the House to debate it and grill the person concerned as to why what was recommended last year was not done. I think that is how we do it.

As for the Ministers, we expect by our rules that Ministers attend so that they are able to answer the queries that may be raised in the House. The purpose of having more than one Minister is that they draw their own schedule as to who will attend that particular day and then may be go back and exchange notes to be able to prepare to answer at an appropriate time.

MR. OGOLA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In response to the statement of the President, there are issues which may be in general terms, not very urgent. But there may be issues where the statement of the President touches on a matter which is urgent, and where action is already being taken by the Government but which in my view requires clarification both in law and in politics. 

Much as I would like to wait, may I be guided as to whether the issue can be presented? So that the country gets to know that, in my view this is an urgent matter.

THE SPEAKER: There is no problem about that. If as a result of what we have debated here, you find that there is a matter that requires urgent action or special treatment you are free to do so. You may move another motion some time, that arising from what was debated, this is an urgent matter, and I move that this be done. It has been done and if you have one, please, look at the rules. You will be able to move a motion, which shall be treated in the way it should be treated. 

And arising from what the Ministers are going to say- because they are going to say something- you will have to ask them if you are not satisfied with the action, which they are proposing. Again you will be free to suggest a remedy by a motion, which we shall debate and then decide upon it.

MR. OGOLA: In additional, Mr. Speaker, I am requesting to be specific. This is the question concerning the activities of the Electoral Commission right now, and these follow the statement of His Excellency the President. The Electoral Commission is proceeding to photo register prospective voters; and yet this action seems to contravene the Constitution. Article 16 of the Constitution gives the authority of registering citizens to the National Citizenship and Immigration Board – (Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: No, Mr. Ogola, I think there are two things.   The Electoral Commission is a constitutional Body, with functions stated in the Constitution itself, and in another enabling law that constituted the Electoral Commission.  You should also know that the Electoral Commission is an independent body, which does not receive commands from any other person. 

Should you feel that the Electoral Commission is violating the Constitution, the other forum will not be the House; it will be the court of law to challenge the unconstitutional acts of the Commission. 

But the Electoral Commission falls under the Legal & Parliamentary Affairs Committee, which will be considering its matters. Should you have a pressing matter to consider, you are free to go and attend the proceedings of the Legal & Parliamentary Affairs Committee, which will call the Commission and point out this. 

Should you feel that really a matter, which is unconstitutional, is being carried out by the Electoral Commission, you are free to even advise the Commission without eroding their independence; and draw their attention to this particular Act.

However, what the Electoral Commission is doing, is not registering citizens of Uganda. It is registering voters, people who want to vote and participate in the exercise over which the Electoral Commission has power. And for me, speaking off record, I do not think there is anything unconstitutional about what the Commission is trying to do.

We proceed. I understand the Ministers have arranged themselves to answer queries raised here. Can we hear from the Minister of Education?

THE MINISTER OF STATE (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Mrs. Bitamazire): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for giving my Ministry this opportunity to respond to some of the queries, or issues that have been raised on the Floor – (Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: I think the Ministers should not have an open-ended time. Please try to be very brief. Are eight minutes enough?

MRS. BITAMAZIRE: About that Mr. Speaker.  However, I must express my gratitude on behalf of the Ministry, that the hon. Members have almost commented on the education sector policies and programmes. I am particularly encouraged by the comments on the new innovative programme, that is the Universal Primary Education (UPE). This is an indication that the programmes of education, especially UPE, have already gained a lot support and consideration from our Members of Parliament. 

Quite a number of comments have been made, but I am grouping them. Let me first of all answer generally, and later on, those issues and comments which are specific on UPE. Quite a number of comments have been on quality. Many Members have expressed their disappointment about the quality of UPE. We are all aware that this is a new programme, a massive programme, and a countrywide programme. Therefore, if the quality has not yet been attained and the expectations, we are only praying that the support given by the Members of Parliament and the society at large, will help us to achieve the quality in the near future. 

The Government has the following programmes in place to enhance quality of education under the UPE: - The classroom construction programme. That one is massive and is in the medium term framework Budget. We have sufficient money to make sure that, we reduce the classroom pupil ratio to what can be manageable.  

The second programme is training and recruitment of teachers, which also includes management of the teachers.  Comments have been made about the teachers’ salaries, and I am sure the Minister of Public Service will have something to say.   But I can say here that, we are all focusing on teachers as the key actors in the education sector, especially at primary level. We are intending to recruit and we are already busy recruiting more and more teachers to make sure that the teacher/pupil ratio comes down.  

The Government is also supplying instructional materials to all Government-Aided primary schools; and Members will soon get a rosta of how much money, and how many books have been distributed to each district.

Furthermore, the curriculum of the primary education sector has been reviewed.  The first volume is a knowledge base volume, Social studies, Science, English, and Mathematics. The second volume, which we are about to launch, is a vocational primary education curriculum. That one will give the necessary practical and technical skills to our children.  

There is a lot of cash flowing to the schools. Many hon. Members have written in papers saying that this money is not yet being used properly. I want to inform the Members of Parliament that each Government-aided primary school gets cash for 8 months every year, to help them facilitate the teaching and learning process in the classroom.So, this money is equitably distributed.   

As I said earlier on, every child in the country is getting the same amount of money, but I must emphasize that the use of that money is not yet satisfactory. We are working out mechanisms to ensure that the money is put to the right use. We shall appreciate support on this matter.

On sanitation, schools are getting water tanks, new toilets and the rest. We are building up this infrastructure to make the primary schools environment friendly.  Furthermore, the Government is encouraging community mobilization and sensitisation. We have volunteers in each district who help us to sensitise the people. Government has also put in place capacity building for the planners, the stakeholders, and the key players, so that they acquire the necessary skills to implement the programme.  

We are now looking at three critical ratios to achieve quality. We have the teacher to pupil ratio, which admittedly is still high, but in the medium term, we think we shall acquire a ratio where we shall have one teacher to 55 children.  There is the pupil to classroom ratio, which is also very high. Some schools have as many as 120 pupils in one room, but we are working towards lowering the ratio to one classroom for 55 children. That will be achieved in the medium term, by about 2004. Then we also have the pupil to book ratio.  Many books are going down to the schools so that we bring the ratio to one book for three children. I thought I should just comment generally on that, because most of the comments were around that area.

On post primary education, we appreciate your concern on what happens after Primary Leaving Examinations, when the UPE children go to the other end. I would like to inform the Members of Parliament that as a Ministry, we have already embarked on planning and preparing for that budget.  We are anticipating that one million children will sit for PLE in the year 2003. So, Government is already taking the necessary steps.  We are constructing one secondary school per sub-county, but this is over a medium period. It may not happen this year or next year, but in the next three or four years, we shall have secondary schools in each sub-county.  
We are also looking at vocational schools per sub-county.  We intend to put up a vocational technical post primary institution in each sub-county, and this financial year we have already lined up some of the areas where this project will start.  We have also identified regional comprehensive secondary schools where students will go to acquire the knowledge base and practical vocational skills. 

We are reviewing the capitation grants. One Member mentioned that the capitation grants at secondary level are low. Yes they are, but we are reviewing that according to the revenue and resources that will be available.  

A question has also been raised about Universal Secondary Education. Let me say that probably it is a matter of prudence to consolidate Universal Primary Education first, learn the lessons, and then be able to embark on Universal Secondary Education when we have prepared for it. Several Members have mentioned the implementation strategies - (Interruption) 

MR. LUBOWA: I would like to seek clarification from the Minister. In the past, Government used to take over secondary schools started by the initiative of parents.  What is going to be the case, now that they are coming up with the programme of a secondary school in every sub-county?  Can’t they, in the mean time, take up schools that have been started on parents’ initiatives until that time?  

MRS. BITAMIAZIRE: Thank you very much, hon. Member. I am looking at the implementation that covers both primary and secondary education, and we are looking at the expansion, as I have said, by coding schools. This financial year, we are planning to grant aid to originally community and private secondary schools so that we can expand the accessibility at that level. 90 secondary schools have been identified for this current financial year, and the same is being done for primary schools.  

Members might want to know that for the financial year 1999-2000, 740 schools that belonged to communities and private individuals were granted aid in an effort to expand accessibility to primary schools. We are doing the same for secondary schools. 

Finally, for primary education, we are implementing the programmes through a decentralization process. We have decentralized governance, and therefore, primary education programmes are implemented through the local councils and local governments. To facilitate that process, capacity-building programmes on policy analysis, planning, management, monitoring accountability, inspection and school mapping are going on. 

Still under the implementation, we have a major programme on monitoring and inspection. That one is also going on, and we are appealing to Members of Parliament to participate in the monitoring activities of the programme. 

On crosscutting issues, the girl-child education is a crosscutting issue that is being handled properly and very many of you will be invited to programmes dealing with that.  

There are many programmes on children with disabilities and disadvantaged groups. We have ABEK in Karamoja, we have the UPA in Kampala, and we have programmes which are non formal, but catering for the disadvantaged children.  

As I said earlier on, the teachers’ salaries and welfare are all being catered for, starting with this financial year. A 10 per cent increment was made on the salary, and the teachers’ housing scheme has also started.  

We have put some background information on this in the pigeonholes of Members of Parliament. I appeal to them to read that information and get a little bit more on this.  I would like to call upon my colleague, the Minister of State for Higher Education, to say one or two things about the University programmes.

MR. AWORI: Mr. Speaker, I beg your indulgence. Aware that we have got 21 substantive Cabinet Ministers and aware of the fact that we have run out of time, could the Rt. hon. Prime Minister summarise the views of his colleagues so that we get on with other matters?  

THE SPEAKER: No, these Ministers have been given a few minutes. The Prime Minister will definitely wind up on behalf of Government, but there are a few issues that were raised which the Ministers are trying to respond to; maybe they are more competent to do so instead of leaving it to the Prime Minister.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HIGHER EDUCATION (Mrs. Akech Okullo): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank my acting Minister for giving me opportunity to say something about higher education.  

Questions were raised on the quality of higher education and I would like to respond thus. That the Sixth Parliament passed the University and other Tertiary Institutions Act, which was assented to by the President in March of 2001.  One of the key features of that Act was the formation of the National Council for Higher Education. This is a body which is charged with the responsibility of looking after quality assurance and to look at the future establishment of other tertiary institutions and universities and accreditation. Therefore, the question of quality is going to be handled. We are already in the process of forming the National Council for Higher Education. We have written to the bodies supposed to form this -(Interruption)

CAPT.GUMA: Mr. Speaker, I want the Minister of State for Higher Education to explain the Government policy of retaining Headteachers in Secondary schools for more than 15-20 years. Some of these teachers have become stale, corrupt, and behave as if these schools are personal institutions. When I was growing up and at school, primary and secondary school teachers used to be transferred. So, I want the Minister, especially for higher education, to explain because I have a problem in some of the secondary schools in my constituency, of longevity of some of the Headteachers. They have spent long in some of these schools.

THE SPEAKER: But do you not see, hon. Member, that this is again a matter that should be handled when you are dealing specifically with the Ministry of Education in the appropriate Sessional Committee? I think let us reserve this because this was incidental. There are matters that were raised here during the debate and the Minister has just come to explain. But that is a policy matter which I think the Committee will be able to deal with. I would rather advise that we leave such details that require detailed policy explanation.
MRS.AKECH OKULLO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for your wise guidance. We will definitely handle the question raised at a later stage. I was just saying that we are now in the process of forming the National Council for Higher Education and that within the next few weeks we should be able to inaugurate them. 

Another question was raised on the distribution of universities in Uganda. I would like to say that currently we have two public universities, that is, Makerere University and Mbarara University. But we have also already appointed a team to work on the establishment of two other universities, that is, the University of Agriculture and Environmental Science in Gulu and Kyambogo University.  These are already in process and we want them to start this academic year, 2001/2002. But we are also trying to establish what we call the Open University of Uganda, which we wish to have four satellite centres which will be established in the East, in the North, in Western Uganda and in the centre. Therefore, I think the question of distribution is being handled. When we also establish the National Council for Higher Education, they will also be looking at the feasibility of establishing other universities as and when the need arises.  

Government Sponsorship: This year’s intake has been increased from 2000 students to 4000 students starting this academic year, fully sponsored by Government. Government is also sponsoring full time students in PTCs, and is also going to sponsor students in NTCs and other tertiary institutions, but not in full; that will vary, and this will be operational in 2002/2003. 

Questions like the Northern problem and insecurity vis-à-vis admissions to universities is also being addressed. But other factors have to be taken into consideration, and these are factors of poverty, gender, performance and geographical distribution. The intake will begin 2002/2003. 

These were the questions I thought were very pertinent and I had to respond to them, but we will give you detailed policy statements and we will also be available to answer some of your questions when we discuss those policy statements.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR.AACHILLA: Mr. Speaker, aware that we have a bulky Cabinet of about 66 Ministers, and aware that we have been here for the last two weeks and that we have timed these discussions to end, I have seen that only two Ministers have taken about 20 minutes. I would like to pray your indulgence that you allow each Minister to summarise so that we can have time. Otherwise, we shall spend here five hours thirty minutes other than spending one hour forty five minutes. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Members are tired? Okay, let me call upon the Prime Minister to make his statement.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Nsibambi Apolo): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  First of all, under rule 37 of our procedures, I would like to request to make a statement concerning Major Kakooza Mutale. Secondly, there is a problem of disarming the people of Karamoja and with your permission, I shall ask you to allow the Minister of State for Internal Affairs, to make a statement on that burning issue before I proceed with my responses. I thank you.

Maj. Kakoza Mutale is reported to have said that hon. Kahinda Otafire, hon. Sam Kutesa and hon. Salim Saleh protect wrongdoers. This is a very serious statement. I have accordingly, requested the Minister in charge of the Presidency to investigate this matter.

Since this matter has appeared on the Floor of Parliament, it is fair that the results of this investigation, and any measures which maybe required to cure the problem are reported to Parliament by the Minister by 28th of August 2001.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms. Kiyingi Namusoke): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have been requested to make a statement on Karamoja. The problem of cattle raiding within Karamoja, and the neighboring districts is being addressed by the Government. 

The Government policy on addressing the problem of Karamoja is contained in the document entitled, ‘The Karamoja Mobilization Program’. This program entails, among others, disarmament, food relief, modern agricultural production, water sources, communication, infrastructure, and disease control. Sector Ministries are already on the ground, although progress has been hindered by the shortage of funds.

In February 2001, Her Excellency the Vice President officially launched the disarmament program in Moroto and Kotido Districts. As of now, the security forces have secured the borders, and have reduced tremendously the mass movement of the Karimojong into the neighboring districts; although there is still movement of the Karimojong in groups of three, and four that is still rampant. 

Depending on the availability of funds which are being awaited, actual disarmament by force will begin when sector Ministries have carried out the sensitization exercise.  For the moment, it is voluntary disarmament that is being implemented; the guns are handed over to the Army.  But it is also our intention that, when the program is in full gear, these guns will be handed over at sub-county headquarters, where the individuals will receive certificates of acknowledgement, that they have handed over their guns. 

With regard to the displaced people in Katakwi District, the department of Disaster Preparedness is on the ground, and resettlement of the displaced persons has started. The Second Deputy Prime Minister, who is also the Minister for Disaster Preparedness will on Saturday 11th August 2001, lead a team of Ministers and officials to Karamoja to carry out an on spot assessment.  

That is what so far I can tell the House in brief. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MS. ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the statement presented by the Minister of State for Internal Affairs. But I am seeking clarification; and probably also wishing to express the fact that, I am a bit dissatisfied by that particular statement, on the basis of the fact that, it seems the Government position is at the usual pace of go there, monitor, assess, come back, and do other things, promise to disarm and all that. 
I want to bring to the attention of this House the fact that, in only the last three days, the number of displaced persons in Katakwi District has gone up to a third of the total population. Only yesterday in the morning, the district at its own level proposed to declare what they call a state of emergency. They have no food; the district does not have the capacity whatsoever to contain the number of internally displaced persons. 

Last weekend, we the Members of Parliament from Teso went to Katakwi. Somehow we tried to bring into this House our findings yesterday. We felt it would be in the right direction if the Government moved in, and try to state its position. But from what I have heard now, it seems the Government perceives this problem in a traditional way. 

Mr. Speaker, I am seeking for clarification, probably guidance now. If it is possible for me on behalf of the people of Teso, to move a motion in this House, seeking Government to immediately intervene; not in terms of disarmament, not in terms of what, but to address the issue.  

My thinking is that, three days from now, people would be dead. What will they be eating?  Where are the medical supplies? They have no shelter. The situation is out of hand. Mr. Speaker, please guide me if I can move that motion.

THE SPEAKER: My understanding from the statement of the Minister in particular to the situation in Katakwi, is that immediate action is going to be taken. Funds will be availed to the Minister of Disaster Preparedness to travel with other Ministers, to solve that particular problem.

Whether we move a motion now, and promise that they are going the following day, I do not know. I think it is the Minister to explain why they are going. Is it to look at the people or they are taking them food?

THE MINISTER OF STATE (INTERNAL AFFAIRS) (Ms. Kiyingi Namusoke ): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said, I tried to outline what is being done, because we know very well that the problem facing the people of Teso in general, is caused by the group that is coming from Karamoja. That is why I outlined what is being done in the entire program. 
As far as the displaced people are concerned, I have said that the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness is underground and it is trying to do its best. I know it is not enough, but we also know that the people keep coming. Every time people feel threatened, they will keep coming. Therefore, we cannot say that what we have done is enough. My sister would be a good resource to tell us what exactly they think must be done at the moment, because as far as we are concerned, the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness is doing their best to resettle the people.  The reason of going to Teso is, because we have head a lot of stories, and we don’t want to sit and think that everything is okay when we have not been on the ground. I am sure hon. Members will appreciate the fact that Government is giving that problem the highest level of attention. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  I think the Minister should report what has been done to the House on Tuesday. I also ask Members from these districts to advise us on what to do.  

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  Thank you, Mr. speaker, and I want to thank Members of Parliament for raising so many important issues.  I beg to support the motion concerning the State of the Nation Address by His Excellency the President.

It was our arrangement that Ministers respond to these issues, because they have internalised them. You are tired; we are not going to have all the Ministries; we have identified seven Ministers to respond to your complaints. I will deal with inter-ministerial issues. 

Let me begin with the role of His Excellency the President in the Parliamentary elections.  There was concern that the Head of State should not have gone to the constituencies to campaign for candidates who were going to assist the Movement Political System.  In the Referendum, it was agreed that Uganda would be spearheaded under a Movement Political System.  It was common knowledge that some people were campaigning for candidates of other political systems. It was not wrong for the President to urge the population to vote for people who would facilitate the flowering of the Movement Political System.  I don’t see any problem.


The second point is that violence was State inspired; it implies that Clause 208 was violated, because Article 208 says this, 208(2)

 “The Uganda People’s Defence Forces shall be non- partisan, national in character, patriotic, professional, disciplined, productive and subordinate to the civilian authority as established under this Constitution.” 
 So, my statement is simple.  If people feel that violence was State inspired, they should produce evidence and take us to court; because the court is the best arbiter - we are saying violence was not State inspired.  

Hon. Maj. Gen. Tumwine, who is extremely well versed with matters to do with UPDF, made it clear that when you have an institution, you are likely to have individual wrong doers; but this is not an institutional matter.  I must put it to you that even we Members of Parliament and Ministers make mistakes, but this is not an institutional matter. I can only say that where people had evidence, the course of action was to go to courts of law, because they are impartial arbiters.  

I want again to make it clear that this is a matter that must be carefully examined, because if you don’t diagnose properly, you cannot prescribe correctly.  It may be true that there are some individuals who actually caused violence. The State was essentially using the police to handle this question, and from time to time, the police was assisted by UPDF.  

We are yet to carry out a systematic appraisal of the causes of violence, but we would like to suggest that the following might have facilitated it.  I want to refer to facilitators and inhibitors of violence; but let me deal with facilitators.  One of them is obviously commercialisation of politics.  When you commercialise politics, the stakes are so high that they tend to lead to violence.  Can we de-commercialise our politics?  

The second one is the capacity of the Police itself to handle a very intricate phenomenon, the electoral process.  I want to pay tribute to them because they tried their best, but like all of us, they require re-skilling and more infrastructures. Those are some of the remedies, which we intend to put in place. 

The question of disarmament of Karamoja: As you know, there has been a statement, but I also feel that I have to deal with it. First of all, we want to apologise for the displacement of so many people, especially in Katakwi district. It is very sad. This matter of disarming the people of Karamoja is so high on the agenda that it is now handled by no other than the Vice President. But as you all know, the Vice President is abroad getting treatment.  Under the circumstances, I handled the matter. Even today, I held an inter-ministerial meeting where there arose the question of Finance. The scarcity of finance is a ubiquitous matter but when you have a crisis on your hands, you have to try to get the money -(Interruption).

MR.ERESU: Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of clarification on a very pertinent issue of the disarmament of the Karimojong. The Prime Minister has said it is now a priority matter of Government, being handled in the office of the Vice President. I agree, but Mr. Speaker, when the Prime Minister tells us that finance is a problem, I get concerned because we have a report from the Auditor General’s office which states that the money which was allocated for the disarmament of Karamoja was diverted.  Can he clarify?

THE SPEAKER: You see, the way he was going to conclude, I think he was going to be in your favour. I think he said, “when you do not have money, but you have such a crisis…” I thought he was going to say that he would try to find the money.  Was he not going to say that? I think that is how he was going to end. Why do you not leave him to end and then you seek clarification?

MR.ETONU: Mr. Speaker, can I give the Prime Minister information?

PROF.NSIBAMBI: Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. With regard to that information, I would need facts. And as you know, if they are wrongdoers, curative measures will be adopted. But I cannot speculate on such a matter because those in charge of the program are required to account; and I refer specifically to the accounting officers under Article 174 and 164. I mean they will be skilfully handled, together with any other people who may have carried out anything wrong with regard, not only to that money, but also to any other money.But I cannot answer that kind of question.

MR.ERESU: Mr. Speaker, I have information.

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Eresu. It may not really serve any useful purpose for you to read a report and maybe the hon. Prime Minister has not read the report - nobody is disputing the Auditor General’s report. What we are really concerned with currently, is how do you solve the current problem?  Whether money was embezzled, so what? We want to find the money and we go and solve the problem. I think that is our immediate concern, but we shall address the Auditor General’s report at an appropriate forum.

PROF.NSIBAMBI: I thank you, Mr. Speaker. And as I said -(Interruption)

MR.ETONU: The information I want to give the Prime Minister is vital. Can I give the Prime Minister information?

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR.ETONU: I thank you, Mr. Speaker and the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister for allowing me to give him this information. I do agree that the Second Deputy Prime Minister is going to get a team of Ministers to verify what is on the ground, but it is not only food or medicine that the people in Katakwi require now; they require security. 

Two days ago, a bus was ambushed between Katakwi and Moroto and a Manager of Uganda Commercial Bank of Moroto was injured. Right now he is lying in Soroti Hospital. And again, a citizen in Magoro County was ambushed on the way and shot. He is also lying in Soroti Hospital. The Minister of State for Internal Affairs has said that a few Karimojong now come in a group of three to four. When they come, even if it is only one, he is destructive and people die. What security can be given to the people to make their lives secure? They may die before they get the food.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  When I chaired the inter-ministerial meeting, high placed people from UPDF were there, but as you know, when you are dealing with security you do not disclose all your cards because that itself may breed further insecurity. You just act, and in some cases, you have to act very ruthlessly without saying so. So I cannot disclose to you the details, but we met this morning and I want to assure you that, that matter is being handled in terms of security and money. 

I want also to point out that it has been a larger issue, involving sensitisation of the people of Karamoja, having that radio so that you do not use force unless it is necessary. We wanted to use political means until it becomes inevitable and force is used. As you know, the problem of Karamoja has been multifaceted. 

You had, for example, to handle the water question. That is why we had to handle the question of dams at Kurudong, Kalong, Kyaga, Nadung, Puru and Okutot. I have learnt that the Kalong dam has some problems, and I have even talked to those concerned to ensure that it is repaired. Again, part of the problem is people having cattle when they do not have water. It facilitates improper transhumance if you will, improved seeds - cassava cuttings, potato vines and so on. We felt that instead of feeding Karamoja from January to January, World Food Programme (WFP) must be thanked for having helped us - people had to be assisted with planting materials. But sometimes the weather itself was not nice, so again we need water for production.  

All these are multifaceted approaches to tackle that question. You must have known that the Ministry of Health has gone there, to deal with the health question. The Minister in Charge of Disaster, who is none other than the Second Deputy Prime Minister, is handling the matter expeditiously. We are much concerned, because if any part of Uganda is suffering, the entire polity is bound to suffer. It cannot be a distant question.

There was the issue of employment. That is a very important question and there have been many approaches to it. But I wanted to inform you that, there is the Africa Growth Opportunity Act (AGOA) 2000, which gives Sub-Saharan Africa opportunities to access the markets in America. This is a great opportunity, because we shall be able to take as many as 1800 different products, including textiles, apples, fish, leather, flowers, fruits, handcrafts, honey, processed coffee and so on.

However, there are challenges and opportunities, and the challenge is: shall we provide the necessary quantities, and the necessary quality at the right time? That is our challenge; and we have plans to answer this challenge.  The plans include, water for production, use of machinery, animal production and so on, and so forth. The various Ministries will be articulating the details –(Interruption).

MRS. MUGERWA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and the hon. Prime Minister for giving way. I do not know whether we should really think about quality and quantity at the moment. I think the challenge we have is whether the Government can protect its infant industry like Nytil, because Uganda has become a dumping place for shoes, second-hand clothing, and I do not think that those industries are going to produce competitively when we are getting very cheap substitutes for new products. Thank you very much.  

PROF. NSIBAMBI: I thank you. That is a challenge; but you know we are having a global market. You cannot liberalize and at the same time protect. But there are cases where again that matter will be addressed by the line Ministry. That is an important matter, but I wanted also to inform the hon. Members that America is concerned, that some wrong doers may have illegal trans-shipment of their goods through Uganda, and those other countries which have been given the opportunity to market goods and services in America. 

Therefore, they require us to have stiff punishments for such wrong doers. In order to do so, we have a Customs Management Bill, which is to handle that matter; and it is before Parliament.  I tabled it when the relevant Minister had not sworn in, because it was urgent. Hence, I want to entreat you to treat it as an urgent matter, because some countries like Kenya are already partaking of the great opportunity. We should have been in business yesterday! That is yet another challenge and an opportunity as well – (Interruption).


MR. OGOLA: Mr. Speaker, I was fascinated by the statement of the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister about the world trade. Most of these countries in Europe and America are still subsidising their producers and investors but they are telling us we should not subsidise.  In a situation where the cost of production is very high, how are we going to manage to compete when our hands are tied behind our back, and we are called in the ring?  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: I happen to be a farmer, I also believe we should have subsidised our farmers but our partners facilitate 52 percent of our capital budget. If you are being given subsidies, where do you get money to subsidise?  A person being subsidised has no capacity to subsidise; where do you get that money?  That is question number one.

MR. ERESU: Mr. Speaker, the Prime Minister intrigues me with his argument.  He is saying we cannot subsidise because we don’t have the funds to subsidise.  The hon. Member Ogola said the developed countries subsidise their farmers.  The question is, if we do not subsidise and the other people subsidise, then why is it that our cost of production is very high? Can the Prime Minister tell me where we are heading with our economic planning policies?  Are we heading for doom or progress?  Will this economy be vibrant?  We need to be self-sustaining if we are to compete against those economies that are subsidising and progressing with low costs. 

THE SPEAKER: How do you subsidise?  Where are the resources?  I think that is the question he is trying to answer.  Can you tell us how we can subsidise? What are you advocating for?  Are you saying that because we cannot subsidise we should not take our goods to the market? We give up?  I think these are the questions that you have to consider.

MR. ERESU: Mr. Speaker, my question is, if other goods are definitely expensive on the World Market, how shall we compete?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: We have got the following approaches to that problem, because we are disaster prepared: One, we have globally put pressure on those countries to cease subsidising so that there is parity of treatment between the farmer in Atlanta and the farmer in Teso land. Recently when I went abroad - again handling this question - I said that the illiterate farmer of America is subsidised and yet the same illiterate farmer in Africa is not subsidised.  Where is the parity of treatment?  

I felt a little ashamed and the matter is on the drawing board. But we do have some advantages. For example, our labour is relatively cheap; that is why you find Americans having their things done outside America. Their labour is very expensive.  We do have the advantage of cheap labour but we don’t exploit it.  

Secondly, we must practise organic agriculture where you don’t use fertilisers, and when you do so, it will have high yields.  As I told you I am a farmer. I am producing maize and matooke using cow dung and urine. That is organic agriculture. By the way, you can even use peoples urine - (Laughter).

MR. AWORI:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister for giving way.  However, when he talks about organic farming, I do agree with him.  It is wonderful!  What do you have to say about our phosphates in Tororo that we are trying to exploit?  Do you prefer urine or phosphates? (Laughter)

MR. KAKOOZA:  I thank the Prime Minister for giving way.  Is he saying that we have a liberalised economy where some industries are not protected?   When you go to Chapter 54 of the Finance Act on textiles, you find that there is a part inserted to protect some industries.  How is one going to compete with the industry that is protected? 

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Now you see, from time to time you have interim barriers, it must be for a given period. This is a matter that we shall discuss with the relevant Ministry. I may not have intended to be versatile; there are a number of issues where I will need a back up.  

Let me also say something about phosphates. Those who use organic agriculture can do it, and it is paying. There are those who are going to engage in non-organic agriculture. These people can use phosphates; it may also be used for other purposes. We may have to rethink because as the President said, there will be strategic intervention. We call upon Parliament to assist us to rectify some of the assumptions that are no longer pertinent, because we are living in a dynamic world.  

THE SPEAKER:  Rt. Prime Minister, I want you to wind up within five minutes.  

PROF. NSIBAMBI: He is saying, “don’t be liberal to allow many interventions.” I take your message - (Laughter)

There was a statement that the President did not focus on corruption. But I want to make it clear that it is not possible to deal with everything in a statement. But there are institutions in place to handle corruption, a Minister, the IGG, who under the Constitution has special powers to act more efficaciously. So, that is a very important issue  which the state is handling and there are institutions in place. They are even improving financing of these institutions so that they may be efficacious.  

There were a number of questions on restocking. This is a very precious exercise; it is restoring the cattle culture which was destroyed during the war. The animals themselves are going to create employment, dowry and so on. They are extremely important and we get the money in the Prime Minister’s Office, but the money is given to districts, which buy the animals. So, this is a very important scheme, and if there is any wrong doing, let us know.  

Since April 2000, Shs.9,448,671,520 has been released to the office of the Prime Minister for onward disbursement to the districts, and out of these funds, 17,401 cows, 1,700 bulls, 2,803 goats, 418 pigs, 11,139 ox-ploughs, 305 spray pumps have been secured.  

But let me quickly go to the Northern question. There have been issues concerning security and poverty in the North.  We have programmes in place like NURP 1 under which there is provision of water, construction of schools, urban roads, markets, and I wanted to inform you that there is also NURP 2. It is called Northern Uganda Social Action where we shall focus on schools, health, rural roads and money will go directly to the districts.

We agree that unless we have security, these activities may be destroyed. That is why the question of security is being handled. LDUs have been re-skilled, and also there is the external factor regarding our neighbours, and as a Prime Minister, I am supposed to be diplomatic. Perhaps I should not mention that neighbour. We realised that until that neighbour ceases giving sanctuary to wrongdoers, the northern question will be paramount.  

I am happy to inform you that I do research and that I have a project on problems of national integration, which I am upgrading. But I discovered that despite all the problems in the North, no body wanted to secede from Uganda. That is a very significant finding. It shows you that our task is to embrace each other. The alienation is not excessive.  So, we have all this responsibility to deal with that question and there are programmes on the ground.

But as you know, I am a good keeper of time and you gave me five minutes. I want to thank you for your contribution and I beg to support the motion.

MR.MWANDHA: Thank you Mr. Speaker. In view of the fact that all of us are very tired after two weeks of debate, I do not intend to give my full-scale response by way of winding up this debate. What remains for me to do is to sincerely thank hon. Members for the overwhelming support they gave to my motion. At least almost all Members spoke in favour of the motion, and I congratulate the President in very encouraging words for the speech.  

There are some major issues, which still remain.   But as you have advised, many of these issues are going to be discussed in committees, particularly during the time when Ministers will be submitting their policy statements. So even issues relating to problems of Karamoja, there will be a report from the Karamoja Ministry and this will be discussed, and at the end of it, the Committee will be proposing specific resolutions for adoption by Parliament.  

On elections, it is a pity that there was not much time for Ministers to respond, because there were a number of comments made about the Electoral Commission. But I am sure when it comes to discussing the report of the Minister responsible for the Electoral Commission, all the issues will come up and we shall also have some resolutions.

On the electoral violence, having listened to everybody’s speech for two weeks, I think this matter needs to be addressed further. I think it may not be out of place even to have a Judicial Commission to look into the issue of electoral violence. This will be important, even to heal wounds between people who have been involved in these conflicts. And also when the report comes out, we shall learn from the investigations. 

Once again, I want to thank the hon. Members for the support they gave to my motion. I want also to thank the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister and the Ministers who were able to address the House this afternoon, for responding to some of the issues that were raised by Members in this House. With these comments, Mr. Speaker, I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is that “Thanks of Parliament be recorded for the clear and precise exposition of Government policy contained in the address on the state of the nation by His Excellency the President to this Parliament on Friday, 27th July 2001”. Now I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.  

MR.AWORI: Mr. Speaker, I thank you for your indulgence once again. There was this matter of Kakooza Mutale. You recall yesterday, you gave the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs mandate to investigate the man. Now, today, we get a statement from the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister that the particular Minister is also going to investigate him.  Are we going to carry on these two investigations simultaneously or one pre-empts the other? 

On top of that, while the Minister is investigating this person, do I assume they are going to put him on a leash until such a time when they will come up with the findings?

THE SPEAKER: I cannot answer for the decision of the Executive; I can only answer for the decision of Parliament; and the two have important roles to play. We have a committee charged with a certain responsibility. It is free to carry out this responsibility of making its own report and its own findings in as far as Kakooza Mutale’s statement might have affected the work of the Members of Parliament. I see no contradiction in this.  
In fact, I have already spoken to the chairman of the appropriate committee who is going to discuss this matter with the Members and then they will find a way out.

With this we come to the end of the today’s business. The House is adjourned until Tuesday next week at 2:30p.m.

(The House rose at 6:11p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 14th August 2001 at 2:30p.m.)

