Tuesday, 3 August, 2010

Parliament met at 11.18 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

 (The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this sitting and hope that you have been able to accomplish the work we agreed to do when we adjourned the plenary some days ago. I want to appeal to the Members to work more expeditiously so that we can complete the State of the Nation Address and the Budget by the 12th August.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE UGANDA NATIONAL METEOROLOGICAL AUTHORITY BILL, 2010

11.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER: (Ms Jennifer Namuyangu): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda National Meteorological Authority Bill, 2010”, be read for the first time. Attached is a copy of the certificate of financial implications. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill is committed to the Committee on Natural Resources for perusal and report back.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

11.22
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Madam Speaker, the Minister of Finance is on the way. She must have had some problems in the office. But I want to suggest that she be given the opportunity to make this presentation later. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Items ii, iii and iv have not been mentioned. I think for the completeness of our record, they should be mentioned before we go to iv. Thank you, Madam Speaker

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But the Minister of Finance is not here – are the Bills available for the first reading? [Members: “No”] Let us to go to the next item.

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY H.E. THE PRESIDENT TO THIS PARLIAMENT ON WEDNESDAY 2ND JUNE 2010

11.24
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Youth): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, In conformity with Rule 43 of our Rules of Procedure, I beg to move a motion that thanks of Parliament be recorded for the clear and precise exposition of Government policy contained in the address on the state of the nation by H.E. the President to Parliament on Wednesday, 2 June 2010. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Seconded.

MR OBUA: Madam Speaker and hon. Members, 

WHEREAS Article 101, Clause 1 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995, as amended, requires the President to deliver to Parliament an address on the state of the nation; 

AND WHEREAS H.E. the President, Gen. Y.K. Museveni in compliance with the constitutional obligation delivered to Parliament the above address on 2 June 2010;

AWARE THAT this address on the state of the nation gave a broader projection on areas of strategic significance to Uganda’s domestic and foreign affairs;

COGNISANT of the fact that in his address, the President brought to the limelight key Government priorities including the state of the economy, investment climate, agriculture, roads, energy, water and environment sectors, the social sector, peace, security, justice, law and order, the legislature, regional and international matters, among others,

NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved by the august House on this 3 day of August 2010 as follows:

1.	That Parliament of Uganda expresses its gratitude to H.E. the President for the clear and precise exposition of the State of the Nation Address.

2.	That this Parliament commits itself to the promotion of the great ideals, values and policies cherished by the President in his address in the State of the Nation Address.

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move. (Ms Kabanda rose_) 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I think the mover should first speak on the motion.

MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, I know that after presenting the written text, I have to sit and come back and justify the motion. That is the basis upon which I did it. 

Madam Speaker, when H.E. the President fulfilled his constitutional duty and obligation as required by Article 101, Clause 1, of delivering to Parliament an address on the state of the nation, we, the high priests in this legislative temple, are left with the option of scrutinising, analysing and examining this address. This is the spirit with which the motion I have just read is moved.

The state opening of the Fifth Session of the Eighth Parliament of the Republic of Uganda marked the end of a long march to the five-year tenure of this Parliament, which, in my considered opinion, was punctuated by peaks and valleys. Definitely, the next State of the Nation Address will be held or will be delivered in the next Parliament. So, this is, in my opinion, the last one in the tenure of this Parliament. 

This address by the President exposed a visionary Government policy loaded with determination and commitment towards overcoming the challenges of poverty, education, health, employment-creation, defence and national security, infrastructural development and modernisation of agriculture, among others. 

The address further highlighted the state of our beloved nation Uganda, the challenges we face and the roadmap towards overcoming the challenges or problems that this country is still facing.

Let me highlight about four areas and give the opportunity to the seconders of this motion to proceed with the others.

On education, the President’s speech seeks to change our policy perception regarding the twenty-first millennium Uganda. It seeks to improve technical, vocational, science education and promote a practical-based approach in our schooling system. Gone are the days when we would go to school to read in order to get white-collar jobs; the approach must now change to practical skills.

On agriculture, the President recognises the fact that this sector still remains the backbone of our economy and the basis for our development in the nearby future. Using existing Government programmes, emphasis was made by the President that agriculture in rural areas should be transformed from the traditional subsistence to commercial-based such that we can improve household incomes of our people in the countryside.

On poverty and the economy, the President reported substantial strides in the fight against poverty, but recognised the challenges that still lie ahead of us. In reference to his speech, the war against poverty requires, in my opinion, a mass movement based on messages of transformation, hope as well as collaborative and democratic processes. We must build a national movement for social transformation of our country as well as economic empowerment of our people if we are to fight poverty using a conventional approach.

The fight to end poverty in this country must come from all of us; for we are all part of the solution. The solution should not be left to an individual or a group of people. We are all part of the solution.

Under peace and security with specific reference to Northern Uganda as highlighted by the President on page 49 of his address; the days when lawlessness reigned are history. What we witness now is calm and peace, which is reigning in the North.

In the North, guns have gone silent. All bullets are loaded back into the magazines and I think 99 per cent or 100 per cent of our IDPs have returned home. We are witnessing a peaceful atmosphere. Our prayer is that the peace we are witnessing should not be jeopardised; it must be sustained. 

On this note, I would like to thank the UPDF alongside militia groups like Amuka, Arrow Boys and the Frontier Guards who struggled so hard to ensure that peace returns to the North. 

I also thank those who participated in the government peace talks that were held in Juba. At least the two parties made sure that Northern Uganda sees some bit of peace.

Much as we do not see fighting between the two forces; what remains a big challenge is the war in the minds of our people. I must say that psychologically, the bullets are still sounding loud and clear in the minds of our people. I think we must go an extra mile through specialised Government programmes that are being monitored by the Office of the Prime Minister to ensure that the war in the minds of the people is fought. There is need for psycho-social support for a number of our people because trauma cases are on the rise in Northern Uganda.

With this, I urge Members to support this motion and ensure that the great ideals that were cherished and that should work for this country are supported by Members of Parliament and we act as ambassadors and disciples in delivering and ensuring that action is taken on critical areas that affect our people in our respective constituencies.

Madam Speaker, I ask Members to support this motion. And finally, I beg to move and say that all this I have said is in the name of my God and my country Uganda. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

11.34
MS ROSE NAMAYANJA NSEREKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakaseke): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. I rise to second the motion by hon. Obua and also urge other Members to support it.

I first want to quote one statement made by the President in the State of the Nation Address. My entire submission will hinge on the same. He said that, “Uganda is undelayable. Uganda is unstoppable.” Indeed, when you go through the entire State of the Nation Address; the strategies he put forward for the next year and the years to come - because he also hinted on the strategies for the years to come and where we have come from - you realise that Uganda is undelayable and unstoppable.

I will also hint on a few sectors – I know other Members will also contribute. I will start with agriculture. He said “inadequacy in agricultural growth is due to reliance on rain-fed agriculture.” We all know that in the 12 months of the year, we only have four months of rainfall. First of all, as a country, we are lucky to have two seasons and those are only four months and the production in those four months is what is used to feed us during the entire year. 

To me, that would mean that if we had irrigation to support the rainfall, Uganda would be a hub for food security. I want to support the President when he says the government is trying to walk the talk because when he talks about – on page 26 when you look at water for production, areas which are almost 90 percent complete – he talks about the districts of Moroto, Kaabong, Isingiro, Abim and Lira. I believe if that is enhanced, enlarged or increased, our people will not only be food secure but also, income security will be enhanced.

On page 6, the President talked about increasing remuneration of science-related fields close to international levels. To me that is curbing brain drain, but it also brings out one aspect that that initiative shows the resilience, the consistency, and the determination of the National Resistance Movement Government in as far as human resource development is concerned. 

Madam Speaker, this goes in line with the introduction of compulsory science subjects at secondary level education. It is true that UPE was introduced, but making sciences compulsory at secondary level education was a great step and if you follow the speech, you will realise that there has also been construction of laboratories in a number of schools. That shows that the programme of making sciences compulsory was well thought-out to encourage many of our students to take sciences and this is motivation by way of increasing the remuneration close to international levels, hence curbing brain drain. 

Madam Speaker, the other aspect is on revenue collection. After the President’s State of the Nation Address, I heard comments by some of the critics and the argument was that, “You do not have to take us to the 1986 era. We have seen this for a long time.” Yes, you have seen it for a long time, but those of us who are Christians and I believe even other religious sects do read the Bible quite often and that does not mean that we should not even recite it in other fora or at different times. 

To me, increasing our revenue collection by 1,000 times is a phenomenon and like I said in the beginning, it shows that Uganda is unstoppable and if others have heard about it – because we have been talking about it from 1986 throughout the subsequent years and finally to 2009 - that is phenomenal growth; and in the opening statements of the President, he actually said that we want to move Uganda from the third world to the first world. We have not yet reached there, but I am sure these are some of the steps. It is a great step forward for us to move there.

The other aspect on page 10 is job creation. This is something that we will need the government to follow-up. According to the Uganda Investment Authority, we have improved; that there was investment of over US$ 1.3 million and, therefore, creating over 69,000 jobs. Madam Speaker, that is a great sign that we just have to follow up and see its progress at the end of the year. 

One of the biggest problems that we have is unemployment. The rates are so high, but we really want to see whether these 69,000 jobs were created and if so, in what areas were these jobs created, such that we put it in line with our education planning –(Interruption)

Finally, I also want to thank the President for his address in as far as security is concerned. Of course, his address was before we had the bomb blasts. I know there are other challenges coming up, but I want to thank the Police Force. 

I sit on the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs and I want to agree with the President when he says that the Uganda Police Force has improved at both strategic and operational levels. Even the image of the Police has improved; we are also having systematic recruitments so that in a particular year, we know how many we are supposed to recruit. 

Secondly, we are also following the quota system which has been introduced in the Police Force, but this was only in the Army. So, to have the quota system being introduced in the Police recruitment system, I think is a great step forward. 

Also, the introduction of the public private partnership project in the Police Force - of course we shall learn more about it – it is a great initiative, if handled properly. Madam Speaker, I beg to support the motion. Thank you so much. 

11.44
MS PHERRY KABANDA SABANO (NRM, Woman Representative, Budaka): Thank you. I also rise to support the motion and to thank the President for a well articulated State of the Nation Address. Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the President informed the House of a number of investments. It is gratifying to know that a number of local investors took up the challenge, and it is also important to note that Uganda survived the credit crunch because of these local investors. While the foreign investors packed their bags when things got rough, the local investors stayed and kept the country and the economy afloat.

I would also like to thank Government for maintaining a conducive environment for foreign direct investment. There are four cardinal issues that investors consider before investing in a country: Peace and security; low costs of production mainly labour; availability of raw materials; and an enabling environment. Those are policies, and I congratulate the NRM Government for providing all the four. 

On agriculture, I congratulate the NRM Government for turning Namulonge Research Station or Namulonge National Crops Research Institute into a centre of excellence. It is even more gratifying to learn that the crops that have been selected - rice, wheat and cassava - are those most grown in Uganda. This, I am sure, will transform our rural economy. 

The Kalangala vegetable oil project is another achievement for the NRM Government. The project has already started producing raw materials for production of vegetable oil and soap. Besides, it has provided employment for all Ugandans. 

On peace and security, Madam Speaker, as Chairperson of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development, I would like to congratulate the President for restoring peace in Northern Uganda. We all know how women and children in Northern Uganda suffered as soft targets for Kony during the LRA war. We also know how they travelled long distances to grow crops in order to fend for their families. I know of an NGO that used to provide seedlings to these women. So, these women risked their lives and walked 25 kilometres to their villages to produce food for their families. They risked their lives, risked being abducted, raped or killed. They risked the lives of their children as well because they had to leave their children unattended to go and cultivate. 

Now that we have peace in the region, the government has provided support through PRDP. I would like us, as leaders, to support these women by making available high yielding seeds. Namulonge is currently multiplying cassava resistance stems in Gulu with the help of FAO. Please, let us take advantage of that programme and get our people out of poverty. Cassava, apart from being a famine crop, can generate income. The value chain includes owners of bakeries, production of starch for industrial and domestic use, Gari for Southern Sudan; cassava stems for the whole of East Africa and the peelings will feed animals for those who rear them. Nothing of the cassava crop is wasted. That will not only eradicate poverty, but it will also sustain peace and both human and food security in the region. We all know that a hungry man or woman is an angry man or woman. Long live His Excellency, the President. Long live NRM. I thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Members. 

11.48
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I rise to make a statement in reply to the State of the Nation Address made by His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the President of the Republic of Uganda, at the opening of the fifth session of the Eighth Parliament of Uganda on 2 June 2010.

I would like to thank the mover and seconder of the motion for their attempt to beef up what the President said. Madam Speaker, I am slightly indisposed, but I hope I can present formally. Copies of the statement are available and they are going to be given to Members here, but also put in the pigeon holes. 

Madam Speaker, Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, and hon. Members, I am once again most honoured and privileged to present on behalf of the Opposition, this statement in reply to the State of the Nation Address that was delivered by His Excellency, President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, on 2 June 2010 at the commencement of the fifth and last session of the Eighth Parliament of Uganda. 

Let me start by placing on record my deep gratitude for the kind words of welcome expressed that day by the Speaker on my return to the House, following the terrible motor accident that I suffered on 11 October last year. 

Let me also acknowledge the warm applause of honourable members that day and the kind words of welcome expressed from both sides when I addressed the House on Tuesday, 9 June 2010. Madam Speaker and honourable members, I and my family were most moved and humbled by your kind disposition and we thank you all from the bottom of our hearts.

During the six months when I was out of Parliament, the rude hand of death took away from our midst, three colleagues: The late hon. Henry Balikowa, Member of Parliament for Budiope who died in a fatal road accident; the late hon. Samuel Byanagwa, Member of Parliament for Rukiga, and hon. David Ringe Chan, Member of Parliament for Padyere, both of whom died from natural causes. In that period, His Excellency the Vice President, Prof. Gilbert Bukenya, and our former colleague hon. Dr Kisamba Mugerwa also lost beloved sons in motor accidents. 

Over the last year, many other Ugandans, too, lost their loved ones in road carnages. Unexpectedly, and very tragically, the massive landslides of Bududa also buried and killed many innocent people and rendered families homeless and landless. 

Madam Speaker, I join His Excellency, the President, in expressing sincere condolences and deep sympathies over the loss of our three colleagues and in commiserating with all Ugandans who lost loved ones over the last one year. 

Since the President’s address, tragically and most painfully, on the night of Sunday 11 July 2010, when Ugandans of all walks of life joined the whole world to watch the 2010 Football World Cup final in South Africa and to celebrate the great success of that very first African World Cup, the evil hands of the Al-Shabaab terrorists detonated bombs in Kampala at Kyadondo Rugby Football Grounds and at the Ethiopian Village, Kabalagala, in the midst of innocent Ugandans and foreign football revellers. These devilish, inhuman and truly barbaric terrorists killed over 80 people, more than 65 of them young Ugandans, but also including at least seven Ethiopians, three Eritreans, one Kenyan, one Irish man, one Bangladeshi and one USA citizen. The bombs also injured over 50 others and caused damage to property. 

Once again, we join Ugandans and the whole world in unreservedly condemning this insane and cowardly attack, and in rejecting all attempts by the terrorists to intimidate us.

We also reaffirm our resolve to work together as a country to confront this despicable lot. We convey our deep condolences and sorrow to all the families, friends and relatives who lost loved ones in that tragedy and pray for the speedy recovery of the injured. May the Almighty God grant the deceased eternal peace.

Madam Speaker, as it has become a feature of our State of the Nation Address, the President’s delivery was punctuated by active engagement with us the Opposition. Without a doubt, these engagements were mutually stimulating and within the bounds of our Rules of Procedure and were made in utmost recognition of the authority of the President and the honour and dignity of his office. 

Nevertheless, the fact that the Opposition did not stand to acknowledge the President’s address was a cause for some concern although that was not the first time. We assure the House and the whole country that we did not intend any disrespect for the President.

You see, hon. Members, in an election period such as we are in now, every single thing we do, even our clothing and body look, are critically analysed and used for campaigns. The President, having said many things that we did not agree with, some to decampaign the Opposition, and even some said with mischief, honestly, it would have been very sad for the Opposition to stand and join the NRM in applauding his address.

Quite obviously too, the highly partisan nature of the President’s address differs most distinctly from those delivered by the presidents of the United States of America during the State of the Union Addresses to Congress. Therefore, any progress towards the American Congressional decorum will require significant adjustments on both sides.

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, as in the previous four years, we the Opposition have keenly analysed the nature and purpose of the President’s address and we said, when he said, “This speech is deliberate; there is nothing accidental here,” although he partly meant it as a threat, we could not agree with him more on its deliberateness. 

Clearly, the focus of the President’s address was the 2011 general election and the need for him to: (i) portray the NRM Government as highly successful while hiding all its failures; (ii) generate hope and a feel-good mood among Ugandan voters; (iii) personally own whatever had been done or promised; and (iv) connect with various Ugandan communities, many in Opposition strongholds, so as to link their appreciation of whatever has been done or promised, to his person and candidature.

To achieve the above, the President made a strategically long and winding address that ensured that the interests of the various sectors of Ugandan society were touched and positive messages passed for them, but with the whole speech being too lengthy and mixed up to be meaningfully scrutinised by ordinary people. In the end, although he promised that the Minister of Finance would be giving more detail about the economy, his own address was in fact as detailed as that of a Minister of Finance. 

Hon. Members, recognising the value of personal contact, the President in his address also sought to draw the direct attention of those communities that he is critically targeting for political change of heart and support in the coming elections.

Talking about inputs provided to farmers, for example, whereas he spoke generally of Central and Western regions, in the same paragraph on page 11, he specifically mentioned the sub-regions of Acholi four times, Busoga and Bunyoro twice and Lango once. A similar repetition with strong sentiments was also later made by the President in the case of Acholi, Teso and Lango when he responded to David Pulkol’s criticism of his government’s handling of the Karamoja question.

When referring to the Japanese rice project on page 12, the President also again specifically mentioned, sentimentally, names of Busoga, Bukedi, Bugisu, Teso and West Nile sub-regions. Even the nomenclature for new public universities has become community specific with the President making references to the starting of Teso University and West Nile University. 

To top it all, he lays all this with quotes in the local languages of the targeted communities. The community focus was clearly meant to generate strong emotions and positive sentiments that can hopefully be nurtured into political support amongst these people.

Although the President painted a very rosy picture of his government’s performance with some undoubted successes, and also made huge promises that were enticing and hard not to be attracted to, he was betrayed by his many lieutenants and foot soldiers who by dosing off with so much impunity under public scrutiny revealed the true nature of the address; they were saying, “We have heard it before” and of his government; a tired regime that Ugandans cannot rely upon to deliver the very many promises made in the address.

The Redpepper newspaper that is ordinarily notorious for sex exposé and scandalous reporting, had a field day with mass photographs of NRM leaders from the Vice President downwards enjoying their sleep in Parliament in the presence of diplomats and distinguished Ugandans as the President delivered his address.

If these leaders of ours can sleep in full public glare, how much sleeping are they doing in the private of their offices? (Laughter) Should Ugandans then be surprised that Government’s promises in this country are hardly fulfilled in time and as planned, and that officials have free hands stealing public funds under their watch?

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, let me now turn to the specific elements of the President’s address. I will start by disposing off a foremost matter which means responding to the President in a near reverse order of his presentation.

Elections slated for 2011

As we draw towards the 2011 general elections, Ugandans are singularly pre-occupied with whether those elections will be held in a free and peaceful environment, and whether we will uphold democracy and stability. Right from our first response in July 2006, we have pledged and consistently struggled in this august House and outside for political freedom and fair play and have done so within the law. We have also consistently welcomed the President’s assurances on democracy while urging him to walk the talk.

Take the question of the Electoral Commission, for instance. We had enough time to resolve the issue of its composition to bring assurances to our electoral processes, but we did not, even with the Supreme Court declarations on their conduct of the 2006 elections.

In the Parliament, the invitations to vet the Electoral commissioners were sent out to members of the Appointments Committee only the evening before the vetting. Even when we pleaded for time to consult, to seek views of stakeholders and to build consensus, this opportunity was denied to us, a situation that forced the only two Opposition Members then present to leave the committee. These commissioners were approved in a very short time without due consideration to the various concerns and court rulings and only by NRM Members of the committee acting in the absence of the Opposition.

Secondly, whereas in his address the President offered to dialogue with the Opposition, of what value is his word? Before re-appointing Electoral Commission Chairman Kiggundu and his commissioners, the President passed word to us through the very diplomats he was dismissing that he would consult with the Opposition on the appointments to the Electoral Commission. While we trusted his word, he unfortunately did not honour that promise.

Our concern about the Electoral Commission is real. We remind this House of the findings of the Parliamentary Select Committee on Election Violence of the Seventh Parliament on the 2001 elections that regrettably never saw the Floor of this house. We also remind this house of the findings of the Supreme Court of Uganda on voter disfranchisement by the Electoral Commission during 2006 elections, and on the way the Electoral Commission allowed security agents to freely interfere with the elections then.

We must also consider the way the Electoral Commission handled the most recent registration process. Why did the Commission allow the NRM to register members when the national voter registration exercise was ongoing? How come that some of the NRM functionaries even used commission materials in their activities? How about the figure of 15 million voters supposedly registered by the Electoral Commission that is obviously inconsistent with the demographic realities of this country? What do all these bode for the sanctity of the coming general elections when the falsification of the official voter registers has been a key basis of election rigging in this country?

When words are not kept and concerns raised are not heeded to, what option do we then have left other than showing our outrage through peaceful and legal means?

Madam Speaker, we know that freedom and democracy have never come without sacrifices, but this does not mean that we must deliberately generate crisis. As amply demonstrated by Ms Ingrid Turinawe and her women league colleagues who have been brutally beaten by the Police and the kiboko squad goons and bundled to cells and courts without their resolves breaking, we the Opposition will, while welcoming dialogue, pay any price to ensure that freedom reigns and multiparty democracy flourishes in our beloved country. We must also clearly warn the Electoral Commissioners that Ugandans will hold them individually and collectively responsible for whatever will arise from a botched up election in 2011.

Peace and security

Hon. Members, as in the previous years, we acknowledge progress made by Government in the maintenance of peace and security in the country. For without peace and security, our desire to progress as a people can never be fulfilled.

We also commend the peace now prevailing in the LRA affected areas of Northern Uganda that has enabled our people to return to their homes to live in dignity. We thank the humanitarian agencies who sustained the people during the most difficult time in the internally displaced peoples’ camps, and truly commend the development partners - USA, UK, EU, Denmark, Ireland, Netherlands, Germany, Norway and all others, who through support to the Peace, Recovery and Development Plan for Northern Uganda are providing substantial development assistance for the restoration of the greater North.

Although the President did not comment on our current deployment in Somalia as part of the AMISOM peace keeping force, it will be a great failure on our part if we do not comment on it in light of the 7/11 Al-Shabaab terrorist bombings in Kampala. We will also have failed if we do not salute and thank the UPDF for the great sacrifices of body, blood and life the soldiers have made in Somalia.

Madam Speaker, as we stated before, we join hands with all Ugandans in facing the challenges of the bombings. We also salute the sacrifices being made by the people of Burundi in Somalia, and thank Djibouti and Guinea for pledging troops for the mission. We, however, urge other African countries to urgently send their troops to join the Ugandans and Burundians without which the deployment will demand a full review of our role in Somalia, including the withdrawal of the UPDF who have already sacrificed so much. 

We also reject the cynical and despicable attempts by some Police and security officials such as the DPC of Amuru District recently did to use the terrorist bombings to curtail political freedoms and block legitimate Opposition rallies and their other public activities. Honourable colleagues, we must as a country end this moral hypocrisy. 

Justice, Law and Order

In the area of justice, we commend the President for heeding the call of Parliament to appoint more judges to the courts. We applaud the recent appointment of the various judges and urge that more be appointed to fill the vacancies still existing. We further congratulate all those who have been appointed and wish them well in their honoured service to the country. 

We also commend all efforts to improve the housing, welfare, and effectiveness of the Police, Prisons, and other law and order bodies, and we salute and thank all those officers and men who in the face of great personal challenges, have served this country faithfully, diligently and honourably. We cannot, however, help decrying the continued attempts to remould the Police into an oppressive, insensitive and politically biased force, all under the guise of strategic and operational restructuring.

We note in particular the emergent character of our Police force, again, recently reflected in the violence they meted out on the Opposition women league in the dispersion of an otherwise harmless DP rally in Kamwokya, and in the severe beating of innocent women demonstrators in Mbale last week, even when they had boarded a Police truck.   

We further note the absurd close consort between the Police and the backward, Aminist, barbaric and shameful Kiboko Squad and the frequent unleashing of this highly provocative mix against the Opposition.

We must not also ignore the murmurs of sectarianism in deployment and promotions within the Police that is harming its spirit and undermining harmony and effectiveness. We appeal to this Parliament to quickly debate the report of the select committee on the Police force in order to help address the various concerns.

Health sector

On health, the President made a very extensive submission covering more than six pages. Unfortunately, in spite of the outcry for better health services by our people, little of what he enumerated represents new initiatives. Whether rehabilitation of hospitals, equipping of health centres, plans to rehabilitate and equip Mulago National Referral Hospital, or promises on reproductive health, malaria, HIV/AIDS treatment and control.

It was also quite obvious to us that in spite of our huge tax revenues that the President is so happy about, without donor funding, there is no hope for malaria control, the provision of HIV drugs or even the provision of water and sanitation for our people. 

We also took note of the recentralisation of procurement and supply of medical drugs back to the National Medical Stores. We wish, however, to remind the country of the past problems of expiry of huge amounts of drugs in the medical stores and the theft of drugs along the whole supply chain.

Unless concrete and resolute actions are taken against offenders, the President’s call to the Police to investigate ghost health centres in the lake and on Kampala Road, and even the deployment of his special investigative team to curb drug losses, will be mere political hot air and will yield no tangible results.

Education sector

Honourable members, we, the Opposition have consistently lent our support to education development in this country and have commended Government where progress has been made. We have also consistently made our dissatisfaction known particularly in the areas of provision of quality UPE and secondary education, technical and vocational training, and the revamping of science and technical training in our tertiary institutions and universities. 

Our concern for the quality of primary and secondary education in rural areas is genuine as education is the critical means of moving the rural population out of subsistence living.

Rather than focusing on enrolment per se, Government must prioritise and commit to bridging the wide performance divide between rural and urban schools. In this regard, we urge Government to give serious support to the commission of inquiry on UPE and to prepare to faithfully implement its findings for the good of our country.

On secondary education, we expected the President to report on what his Government has done in the last one year and to lay out concrete commitments for the next. Unfortunately, what he outlined as having been achieved was for the period since 2006, and even then, very little indeed. His promise for the next year was also most confusing. 

Whereas the President stated in his plan for the next year, on page 35, that, “In the financial year 2010-2011…the following, among others will be carried out in the secondary sub-sector”, all the commitments listed are to be carried out in the next three years instead, including of all things, promise (b), “Construction of 15 new secondary schools within a period of three years…”  What has gone wrong in this country that we must take three years just to build 15 secondary schools? How then does the President arrive at this assertion, in (e) that, “The target is to have at least one Government secondary school per sub-county by 2015 for the purposes of Universal Secondary Education”, when hundreds of sub-counties have no secondary schools and Government has not made firm commitment to build secondary schools in any of them?

On Business, Technical, Vocational Education and Training (BTVET), the President has now been forced by the reality of inaction to abandon his campaign promise of 2001 to build a vocational school in each sub-county by 2005. Now, a decade later, and with very little achieved, the new promise is that “(d) The plan is to have, at least, one technical institute, polytechnic, technical or vocational institute per district by 2018.” This is a target date even beyond the 2016 general elections. And in case you had gotten carried away, please also note the “or” in this deliberately worded promise.

The priorities for university education tell the same story, with activities for financial year 2010/2011 being either “kick-starting” or “preparation” for some activity but with no achievements to report and no tangible outcomes to expect over the next year. Against previous promises, two priorities are worth referring to.

The first is “kick-starting the preparation for the operationalisation of a loan scheme in all public universities”, whatever the President meant. When the loan scheme was first announced, it generated so much hope amongst our rural poor that the education barrier between them and the rich created by their inability to pay university fees was being removed by the government that they had for long placed their faith in. Regrettably, that hope was once again clearly misplaced.  

The President’s other priority of note was: “Preparation of a comprehensive science and technology infrastructure needs assessment programme of public universities for mobilisation of capital development funds.” To appreciate the nature of this commitment, we humbly invite you to visit the pathetic laboratories and technical yards of the faculties of Medicine (both Human and Veterinary), Technology, Agriculture and Science at Makerere and our other public universities. We fervently appeal to Government to take a very hard look at its commitment to professional training and science education in our country.  This has become even most urgent due to recent developments. 

Firstly, it is the commitment of the President to support science and technology development that was backed by appropriation of substantial funds for research over the last two years, and his direction to his minister that was much applauded during his address to, “ensure that starting with the coming financial year, scientists’ wages should be close to international levels of remuneration.” On both, hon. Members, we humbly beg to disagree with the President and to assert that the two initiatives are grossly misplaced.   

Let us remind you of an earlier initiative of the President to produce toothpaste from grass that failed miserably. And now under the Presidential Banana Initiative that received Shs 10 billion last year, Government has been reduced to, of all things, distributing matooke suckers to farmers. In all such initiatives, rather than letting objective scientific processes define and drive his goals, the President has falsely relied on his layman’s enthusiasm and excessive self-belief. 

More importantly is the plain truth that science cannot be developed without science teachers, or practiced without functional laboratories. A more sober and functionally objective policy must thus be to channel all such monies to build science teachers’ colleges, such as Kenya has done, construction of science laboratories in all secondary schools and urgent rehabilitation and expansion of laboratories in our tertiary institutions and universities. (Applause)  

The second development is the coming into force of the East African Common Market Protocol that has not only opened up competition in trade, but has also provided for the free movement of labour within East Africa. 

Hon. Members, for years, Kenya invested heavily in technical and professional training to underpin their ambition to industrialise, with over 1,000 technical and professional institutions, and overseas training of thousands in key fields. To spearhead information technology development in the region, they are also now building an IT City outside Nairobi. Rwanda similarly, as a comprehensive manpower development programme, has systematically trained thousands of its young in key scientific fields abroad and is implementing IT development and access and training right from primary level. 

Where is such focused and deliberate action for our country? Other than wishful political rhetoric, what strategic actions have we taken to move us into a middle income country by 2015 or to enable us to compete in East Africa? If before the Protocol, Kenyan professionals and technicians in industries, services and finance et cetera, were already dominant in Uganda, what will the situation be with free movement of labour? 

Given our gross neglect of technical and professional training, what labour will our country export if not sugarcane cutters and manual labourers? Should we continue to bury our heads in the sand and ignore this gross neglect and potential tragedy?  

Petroleum and Nile Waters

We have consistently supported Government’s efforts to develop the country’s petroleum potential. We have, however, also consistently cautioned against the challenges of effectively managing huge revenue inflows from oil to prevent the country being ripped off by investors or the huge revenue inflows becoming a curse as has happened in some African countries.

Hon. Members, we welcome Government’s commitment to ensure that our petroleum industry is built on a firm consideration of its environmental and social impacts and on clearly defined mitigation measures. Unfortunately, the reality that petroleum will be in the life of our country seems not to be adequately appreciated by this government. With the current corruption in our country, if we remain indifferent, as we are now, what will happen to the oil revenue? How come both the National Land Policy and the National Development Plan do not critically capture the potential impact of petroleum exploitation on our economy, agriculture, demographics and social disparities, and do not outline strategies for appropriate interventions? 

We also welcome Government’s determination to collect from Heritage Oil and Gas the tax of around US$ 400 million due from the sale of some of its petroleum assets to Tullow Oil. While Heritage will walk away with a huge windfall from its modest short-term investment in Uganda of about US$ 150 million, this sale of over US$ 1.45 billion actually adds to the cost that must be recovered under the Production Sharing Agreement before we begin to enjoy the real benefits of the oil. As we move forward, therefore, we must ensure that the short and long-term interests of our country are fully protected. We also demand full transparency and accountability on petroleum matters from Government.

The other issue physically connected to petroleum exploration in the Nile Valley is the Nile Water Treaty. We applaud Government and those other countries that did so, for signing the new agreement on the sharing of the Nile waters. We equally urge the Sudan and Egypt to embrace the new agreement for the good of all our peoples. 

Transport Infrastructure

We, in the opposition have unreserved recognition of the importance of good transport infrastructure in the development of our country for we know the history of the Kenya-Uganda Railway and its role in opening up of the East African interior. We also know the economic progress Uganda made in the 1960s when our transport infrastructure was one of the best in sub-Saharan Africa. 

It is again with this recognition that we have consistently supported the President’s push for infrastructure development and acknowledged where progress has been made. Sadly, however, the President has not even mentioned the railways in this year’s address in spite of promises made earlier on. We also beg to fervently disagree with this assertion that our vastly improved revenue base will make huge differences to infrastructure development as this will not happen unless we seriously build capacity, plan systematically and change our corrupt and wasteful ways. 

In 2008, when the infrastructure budget was substantially improved and many roads were, like this year, listed for construction, we cautioned that project implementation, “Must not be rushed for political expedience, but be preceded by detailed planning, revamping of local management capacities and comprehensive review of the extent to which the Ministry of Works has to date handled or mishandled the transport sector coupled with full political accountability.” 

We also strongly recommended that rather than providing huge lump sums for particular road works above what can be utilised in a given financial year, a prioritised annual road works plan and budget first be considered... annual funding for these roads must then be considered, but funds over and above that required should be re-deployed to meet other priority needs.

As we knew, our caution and advice then have come to pass. Hon. Members, responding to us then, did the Minister of Works not swear that with the money he was given, potholes in Kampala would be a thing of the past? With that money and promise, however, has Kampala not remained the potholed capital of East Africa?
Mr Speaker, wasn’t it only recently -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am not Mr Speaker. (Laughter)

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Speaker, I am sorry and I apologise.

Madam Speaker, wasn’t it only recently that the Minister of Finance admitted that less than 25 percent of the funds allocated for the major road works had been utilised yet agriculture is underfunded, schools remain without laboratories and hospitals and health units are without drugs? As if things are not bad enough, the President has now promised, with rapturous applause of this august House, to tarmac 17 other roads and more, all totalling thousands of kilometres when the 22 kilometre Kampala By-pass has taken us more than five years or when construction of the 40 kilometre Gayaza-Zirobwe road first committed to more than a decade ago, has now taken more than two years but is still incomplete?

Why then, hon. Minister, must we heed the President’s biblical call of John 16:33 that, “Brethren do not fear, be of good cheer?” Why?

Electricity generation and infrastructure

Turning to the Energy infrastructure, while we support Government efforts to make electricity available to all our people, we sometimes marvel at the over enthusiasm of those who provide information to the President regarding this matter. You recall the President’s assertion in 2006 that he would build both Karuma and Bujagali hydro power dams in 44 months. And of course our cool and well reasoned advice to him then was that even with all the monies available, due to structural impediments, corruption and inadequate capacity, it was not possible to do so. Well, even Bujagali alone will not now be ready before 2012. It is in the President’s statement yet in his address, the President again audaciously asserts that we are aiming at 3,800 mega watts in the next five years. Sadly, this totally unrealistic figure is also contained in the just launched five-year National Development Plan.

Further arguing on the premise of availability of funds and in complete oblivion to the realities on the ground, the President again listed in his address, on pages 29 to 30, 19 power lines totalling thousands of kilometres that he commits to constructing this financial year. These are besides those that his ministers are promising in their localities.

The President further affirmed in his address that, “By the end of this year, the following lines will be connected...” He listed 11 of them and I cite (2) Katakwi-Iriri-Moroto-Katikekile and (3) Gulu-Atiak-Adjumani etc. Yet work on these lines is not about to start five months to the end of the year.

Unfortunately, also among the additional eight lines that he pledged that construction work will soon start, he again stated in 19 of that list on page 30 that, “In future, we are going to build Gulu-Atiak-Adjumani-Moyo line...” which is supposed to be completed by the end of this year.

Hon. Members, why does this government take this country and our people for granted so much? 

Before ending our response to the President’s address, let me now turn to two areas that were clearly very close to the President’s heart, one of which was his pride. These were agriculture and Prosperity-For-All and our tax revenue growth and national transformation.

Agriculture and Prosperity-for-All 
Since 2007 when we first critiqued the President’s 2006 campaign promise of “Bonna Bagagawale” or Prosperity-for-All, we have consistently declared that the programme and the NRM Government itself cannot deliver prosperity to the poor. Rejecting our honest and well meaning advice, the President in 2008 called us “doubting Thomases” but we countered that we could never waiver in our certainty about this government’s inability to deliver to the poor.

Since then, the President has kept shifting the number of families targeted for support under Prosperity-for-All from the original 30 per parish down to six in 2008, and now in this election period to a very attractive and hope-building 100 families per parish.

Meanwhile, along the way, the President began to systematically abandon “Bonna Bagagawale” as a distinct programme and to claim NAADS as being Prosperity-for-All. In fact last year, he listed the core activities under NAADS as of Prosperity-for-All.

Recognising the direction the President was taking, last year we noted accurately that he was slowly converting NAADS into Prosperity-for-All with a highly political tone, and that implementation of NAADS was going to proceed in that intended political form. 

Hon. Members, time has again proven us right. Having talked windingly of achievements in agriculture and very little about “Bonna Bagagawale”, the President in his address this year made fleeting reference to presidential pledges and how through the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries (read NAADS), he has made 166 presidential pledges.

The personalisation of NAADs by the President and its transformation into his campaign tools is now complete. Whereas the President recently stopped NAADS implementation, in Lira just last week a presidential assistant was handing over oxen ploughs under a programme purportedly initiated by State House Political Directorate under NAADS, but without the involvement of NAADS officials.

Hon. Members, in the usual Ugandan way of eating where one works, the ministry leaders now helping the President re-direct NAADS, are themselves exacting their rewards and are equally implementing their pledges. Like for GAVI funds, quite a few Members of this House are also beneficiaries of this charade and impunity.

Unfortunately, to get their way, highly skilled leaders of NAADS have now been threatened, victimised and even ethnically attacked. One has resigned, another was attacked by gunmen and efforts are now underway to get rid of these unfortunate Ugandans. Hon. Members, that is the President’s “Bonna Bagagawale” for you with all its promises. That is the progress you were applauding during the President’s address and this is the government some of our rural poor have tragically pinned all their hopes on. 

Surely, when are the politics and the crude quest to win support and elections going to be subordinated to the greater honour of faithful and dignified service to the least of our brothers as Jesus Christ commands us? 

The economy and national transformation
Over the last three years, the President has expressed great joy over the performance of our economy and optimism that we will grow rapidly like China and India and become a middle income country by 2015 or so. We as the Opposition have acknowledged the relatively high growth rate of our economy, while also affirming that with real freedom and democracy, prudence, solid investments in agriculture, manpower development and ending of corruption, our GDP could even grow by even 15 percent per annum.

This year the President was particularly pleased about the relatively high growth in spite of the global economic downturn. He pegged every promise he made on the availability of funds from the taxes as he was being applauded by the NRM members. There were persistent murmurs of concern from us the Opposition. The President then asserted that he had nothing but pride as he stood here to tell us the figures. He continued to say that the murmurs from the Opposition were coming because of jealous.

We harbour no ill-feelings on the progress that our country has made for we have firmly contributed to it. We do not also harbour the selfish notion that some individuals or group are solely responsible for the progress. Our murmurs were legitimate given our good knowledge of how this government works. We also do not agree with the President that the impediment to progress in the country has been caused by lack of funds. 

This is because in the years when our tax revenues were up to 75 percent, our development budget was funded by donor grants, low interest loans and huge tax relief under the highly indebted poor countries initiative. With this money, we built UPE classrooms and health centres and funded various development projects around the country. The impediment has been the corrupt nature of this government, its reckless use of funds, including dipping its hands in the Consolidated Fund account without Parliamentary approval, and failure to build institutions. This, combined with lack of state organs to implement development programmes objectively and without due interference.

We, the Opposition, have in mind the general state of poverty and disparities in our country vis-à-vis the stated revenue outcomes. We doubted the data presented by the President in his address, which data he later proudly presented to the NRM delegates’ conference at Namboole. Consequently, we took a hard look at the President’s data and once again we have been proven right. 

In the first instance, we quickly noticed that the net URA revenue figure in the President’s table for 2007/08 of Shs 1,361.0 billion was totally at variance with those for the immediate years. When we checked the official figures, it was Shs 3,161 billion then using the net URA collections and tax to GDP ratios presented in the table, we derived annual GDPs from which the tax to GDP ratios were supposedly derived and calculated GDP growth. Amazingly, for 1987/88 and 1989, for instance, our annual GDP growth based on the figures of the President were some incredible 215 percent and 130 percent respectively. From 2001 to 2010/11 the calculated GDP growth presented in the table below range from 10.4 percent in 2010/11 to an amazing 25.59 percent for 2007/08 far above any known official figures - obviously the figures presented by the President are not correct. 

That these are the national statistics presented by the ruling NRM and our President is scandalous to say the least. The figures presented before us here are inherently incorrect. The people providing the President with data are deliberately misleading him or typically manifesting public contempt that familiarity and regime longevity always breeds. In the circumstances, which of the Government’s data on agriculture, UPE, roads, rural incomes and medical services can be believed?

Does the country now see and appreciate why we, the Opposition, have consistently rejected the rosy picture that this regime paints of our economy when ordinary people are wallowing in poverty as the corrupt have run amock and those in power are rewarding themselves using public resources with impunity. Even with drastically increased revenue inflows, there cannot be hope for this country if things remain the same. 

How does this government attribute a meagre budgetary expenditure on agriculture of about three percent to lack of funds when the Obote I Government with far less funds used to commit over 25 percent of our national budget to agriculture and because of this prosperity reigned in the whole country? How come that the UPC Government was able to build a chain of hotels and strategic industries such as Soroti Meat Packers and Lira spinning mill? This was to promote tourism and industrial transformation as far back as the 1960s, and for just a few years in power, yet the NRM regime which has been in power for 24 years has not made any such investments with much improved Government revenue.

How about the Soroti to Pakwach railways and the Karuma-Pakwach bridges, would we be crossing to West Nile with canoes boats and dilapidated ferries if Obote had not built the railway bridge across the Nile in the 1960s? How come even the Obote II regime with its meagre revenue and a war in the heart of the country was able to start secondary schools, teacher training colleges to prepare for quality UPE, colleges of commerce and technical schools to produce needed manpower when we had just emerged from 1979 Amin liberation war and we were in a collapsed economy, yet the NRM regime with its 24 years in power and vast resources has not done such a thing?

How come that without any meaningful resources, the NRM regime in its early years up until mid 1990s was able to pull the country out of the rubble where chaos had plunged it; revived agriculture with a bumper harvest throughout the country, and brought hope back to faces of Ugandans, yet with huge revenue inflows over the last 10 years it has nothing to show to Ugandans? Poverty, desperation, bad roads and resignation are overwhelming our rural communities.

What can this government show on the ground for the Shs 13,882 billion or 13.88 trillion that it collected as revenue plus grants, loans and other support it received in the last four years? Why must we shy away from asking the President and his government to account to the people of Uganda for these resources and the lost opportunities?  And why is it wrong to do so anyway? Why must we not dare dream about greater possibilities under a more open, balanced and financially prudent government?

In conclusion, hon. Members, we challenge you to think outside the box. We challenge you to think of our peoples’ expectations of Parliament as the oversight organ of State of Uganda. We also challenge you to have the courage to ask our government to account, for that is what the people of Uganda elected us to do.

To our President and Government, I would like to say that we appreciate all that you have done for our country, human weaknesses and other limitations notwithstanding. You have nothing to fear from us, the Opposition; we love this country and its people as much as you do, and we equally mean well in whatever we do or aspire to do.

To Ugandans, we say that the country is more important than anyone of us, including our political parties and beliefs. We do not have to hate or harm one another or subvert each other’s rights and freedoms in order to rule or to flourish.

In spite of our diversities and differences, together we can build a great future for our beloved country, for our children and their successors and for posterity. Yes, we can and yes, we must. I thank all of you for the kind attention. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Members. The motion was moved and seconded and the Leader of the Opposition has replied. So, Members, can now make their contributions starting with hon. Nalubega, but for only five minutes -

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I know that later we shall have responses, but there is a very important issue that I would like to request the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to record so that she can come back with an answer to help us as a country. This issue is about figures as shown on pages 17 and 18 – I am talking about the statistics. As someone who knows a lot about figures, I know there is a problem. Can we have the correct picture, if there is anything honest on this situation? If there is anyone feeding the President with wrong information, such a person does not deserve the position he/she holds; it is totally wrong to misguide the country or mislead the President or even us in this House. This needs to be corrected.

Finally, I want to repeat that we need to get the correct picture – we have seen this – it is what was extracted from the statistics books – we have Uganda Bureau of Statistics, which is a national body that gives figures. That person who is deceiving the President must pay for this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think the government will respond later. Let us listen to the debate first. Yes, hon. Nalubega.

12.51
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Youth Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the mover and the seconder of the motion. Kindly allow me add my voice to the voices of the others in thanking and congratulating H.E. the President of the Republic of Uganda for the good State of the Nation Address. I also would like to thank the Leader of the Opposition for his statement although I am saddened that he has not appreciated what the President has achieved during his term of office.

I would like to focus my contribution on three sectors, one of these being agriculture. I was happy when the President, once again appreciated the contribution of the agriculture sector to the development of this nation. It is also reflected in the budget that the agriculture sector now takes a top position when it comes to national budgeting.

However, in his speech, the President noted the misuse of funds under the NAADS programme. I am happy that he has come out –[Ms Ibi rose_] I am very informed, hon. Ibi. As I was saying, I am happy that the President has acted on the corrupt NAADS officials. However, I would like to appeal to the President and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries not to simplify issues when it comes to dealing with the corrupt. Those corrupt officials should be disciplined; we should make sure NAADS is mainstreamed. We should also ensure those to benefit from NAADS do so.

My other appeal to the ministry – some time back this ministry came up with a programme of zoning this country. Unfortunately, that programme was abandoned yet we had felt that it would be a good way to go when it came to improving and promoting agriculture.

I would like to contribute something in regard to education. There is one issue on which the President did not come out very strongly – this is the issue of teachers who are saboteurs. There are primary school teachers who have abused the UPE programme. They even advise parents not to enrol their children in the UPE programme as if it is not meant for all Ugandans. They are those teachers who take their children to private schools and when the parents ask why they do so, such teachers usually say that UPE was not meant for us Ugandans and that those who feel they have to enrol their children in UPE schools can do so. Teachers who keep saying such have really abused the UPE programme. 

But we also have mercenaries disguising as teachers. There are teachers who are given jobs, but go on to hire these mercenaries to do the teaching on their behalf. My appeal is that the Ministry of Education and Sports should strengthen supervision and monitoring.

I also notice that the President did not highlight anything on sports yet we very well know that this is a big venture into which we can invest a lot and also gain a lot. It is not only about promoting skills, it also promotes health and the well-being of a person. Therefore, I would like to ask the ministry that before it brings its ministerial policy statement, they first focus and show us how they intend to invest in sports.

The other sector I would like to comment on is health. I am happy that this year Uganda hosted the AU Summit whose theme was very welcomed by Africans and the entire world – that theme on maternal, infant and child health development in Africa. There were very many issues that were discussed by the presidents and by other side meetings that also took place during the AU Summit. I know that countries came out very strongly to pronounce themselves on how they are going to promote maternal and infant health.

Madam Speaker, you know that we have the MDGs with Uganda being one of the countries that are implementing these MDGs. I think the only way to achieve those MDGs is through accelerating and improvement of maternal mortality –(Member timed out.)

12.57
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, People with Disabilities): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I beg to be on record for supporting the motion that thanks of this Parliament be recorded for the clear and precise exposition of Government policy contained in the State of the Nation Address by His Excellency the President, on 2 June. 

I have three requests for this side - to request the Executive - and one request for the Opposition. 

The first one, and I beg to make reference to page 39 of the address by the President where he so ably articulated measures being taken to provide Special Needs Education for people with disabilities in this country. I most heartily commend the President for articulating his position in regard to education for my people. However, I would like to let you know that if you compare these rights with the ministerial statement, the message you get is that while the President said it was going to be implemented three years ago, the Ministry of Education put in place a budget provision for Special Needs Education but allocation has been zero from last time up to today, not even one shilling has been provided for. Therefore, if political commitments are not translated into resource allocation, it means that we have been given what in Luganda we call “byoya bya nswa”. 

So, what is my appeal? I appeal to the Minister of Education to translate this presidential commitment into resource allocation and ensure that some money is provided for Special Needs Education for our people in this country.

Secondly, on page 50, the President commends the good work being done by this Parliament. I feel proud to know that the President appreciates our work. However, Madam Speaker, I would like to let you know that making laws and implementing these laws are two different things. We have passed a number of laws that up to today remain unimplemented. One of these is the Persons With Disability Act, 2006. This remains largely unimplemented and, therefore, I  call on the responsible ministers to fast-track the implementation of the laws and petitions we passed in this exercise so that at the end of the day, we are able to measure the performance of this Parliament not only by the number of laws, but also by those that have been implemented.

Thirdly, I note that the Opposition makes reference to Ugandans being in Somalia. This is clearly articulated in the speech by the Opposition. But in our opinion, we need to know that this is an African problem and not only for Uganda. Therefore, I appeal to the Opposition; let us set timeframes - set a deadline for our withdrawal from Somalia. There is no way we can be in that country alone forever. I beg that we should help our President to understand that we cannot be in Somalia alone and we cannot be there forever. I, therefore, call for deadlines in relation to Ugandans being in Somalia.

Lastly, on page 18 of the speech of the Leader of the Opposition, there is a very serious statement immediately after the statistics being mentioned. He says, “Hon. Members, the national statistics presented to the country and the ruling NRM party by our President are scandalous to say the least.” It goes on to say that, “all this information is misleading.” Madam Speaker, this is a very serious statement.

I know the role of the Opposition in a democracy like ours is to present alternatives. If the data presented by the President is not accurate, where is your own data? If the President was telling lies, where are the facts? The record is now in the Hansard ­(Member timed out­.)

1.03
MR LIVINSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum):  I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to those who have spoken ahead of me. I thank the Mover of the motion, the Seconder, and in particular, I would like to thank the Leader of the Opposition for giving a detailed response to the State of the Nation address. I will just mention what was not covered by the Leader of the Opposition.

My first point is in a raw version of the State of the Nation Address – the Hansard of Wednesday, 2 June 2010. On page 11760, the President had this to say, “That we are moving and that I will tell you a little later if you will not be too tired because it is quite a long speech –(Laughter)- well, if you sleep, that will be good for you in case you did not catch up with sleep last night –(Laughter)- it is good to use this House for relaxation. No problem –(Laughter)- as the Bible says, many are called but a few are chosen.” My point here is that on 2 June, the entire world was in the public gallery here and for our Head of State to report to them, to inform them that Parliament is just there for relaxation, it was very unfortunate. (Laughter)  I am, therefore, not surprised that Members on the frontbench on the other side followed the President’s advice and started sleeping in his full view. Because the President said, “You make a choice,” those Members made a choice as per the advice of the President. It was most unfortunate. This Parliament is for doing serious business and not for relaxation.

Secondly, in the same Hansard on page 11763, the President made a statement that after A’level, he taught and the amount of corruption he saw was unbelievable. I also taught after A’level - a year after the President. There was no corruption and at that time I did not even know the word “corruption” –(Laughter)- because it did not exist. So, what goes into our records should be correct. 

During those days, all workers would save their earnings up to the next month. They could spend and save. I built a semi-permanent house with my salary from that work. It is still there in the village. So, to mislead the country that there was corruption in the 70s is not correct. 

When Idi Amin took over, he set up a commission of inquiry into corruption and the commission found zero just like NRM/NRA also did with the Oder Commission. How many people have been prosecuted? None, because there was no corruption. This answers the many questions posed by the Leader of the Opposition. Why the two UPC governments did a lot with little but this Government with too much is not doing anything. The answer is one; there was no corruption. There was no corruption. Full-stop. Do not go beyond that. 

Thirdly, I find a very thin line between the address to the nation and the budget speech -[Hon. Member: “Information”]- I do not need it. My time is very little; do not eat into it. I find a very thin line between the address to the nation and the Budget Speech. If you -(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, I have both of them here. The same routes that were mentioned in the address to the nation are the same routes listed in the Budget Speech in the same chronological order. Could we consider combining the two speeches so that we do not waste time, and debate once and finish? (Laughter)

1.09
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank both the President and the Leader of the Opposition for their statements, but my specific interest goes to the investment in agriculture by this Government. In the President’s address, he talked about considerable improvement in the lives of Ugandans. But the actual investment in this year’s budget is about 1.9 percent of the GDP. And that is after deducting the wage investments. 

And so to my colleague, the Youth MP, it is not true that Government has substantially invested in agriculture, because if you are talking of 1.9 percent of the GDP and population is growing at 3.3 percent, then the revelation is that the 11 million hungry Ugandans are going to increase to about 15 million in subsequent years. So, it is very important that Government re-thinks its investment strategy in agriculture.

When you talk about Prosperity-For-All, this is just a sub-sector in the agriculture sector. The promise now is that Government is only focusing on agricultural extension, called NAADS, to make investments in a huge sector. Right now, the fisheries sub-sector is declining at 2.2 percent and the food-crop sub-sector is growing at only 1.3 percent - a total revelation that unless we change the direction of our investment in agriculture, we are continuing to produce children we are unable to feed and those who are already with us are actually defeating us.

It is true that there was a zoning, but what came out of this zoning? This zoning was basically intended to promote agricultural research and investment but all these zones cannot function when you do not have the right moneys placed in the right places. So, I call upon the President to realise that investing in one sub-sector of agricultural extension will never drive this country to a middle-income class.

On education, it is not true that a qualified professional teacher will be a saboteur of the education sector. No; I am a qualified teacher; no teacher wishes a child to fail, but the pathetic conditions under which our teachers are instructing our Ugandan children are unacceptable. For the last two weeks, I have been teaching in both primary and secondary schools, but there is no standing space. Actually, if you are not decently dressed, these children can just pull down your cloth or peep through because the teacher is placed back at the chalkboard. You cannot find space to turn; you cannot find space to walk through.  How does a teacher who enjoys his or her job instruct under such pathetic conditions and yet we have our children placed in some of the most expensive schools? 

Ask any MP here who has a child of nursery-going age where they take those children, and compare it with the ordinary Ugandan in my village in Terego. The question here is, are we investing in our children so that our posterity is defined? If not, then this is a fundamental yoke. How many of your UPE products are going to compete with your daughter so as to have a levelled ground? That is not going to happen unless we do the right thing; for example, invest in the classroom infrastructure; invest in the number of teachers; and invest in the fact that there is nothing free. Education can never be free. The attitude of parents has swayed away from responsibility to educate their children, to just producing children because there is free education. How the President should come up openly to challenge this question of free things is very important because now, in my village, people actually want the school to even feed these children.

How will they invest in looking at their books? First and foremost, the parents cannot afford pens and books. The teachers, because of their pay and living conditions, are unable to have the morale to instruct the Ugandan child. Tell me – basically – what is it we are investing in? We have not invested in agriculture, our investment in education is misdirected and above all, no rural child in Uganda today is satisfied with the services they are getting both in the very basic unit - the family – and at school. So, what are we producing? (Laughter)(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, if you are still internalising the State of the Nation Address, I will suspend proceedings to 2.30 p.m. in the afternoon. House is suspended.

(The House was suspended at 1.14 p.m. On resumption at 3.00 p.m. the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in the morning, we had started debating the State of the Nation Address. Debate continues.

3.01
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on an issue regarding education. I want to thank our Government for doing whatever they can to keep our children in school. However, right now, I am talking as a parent. On 23 May 2010, our children went back to school. The circulars we received from schools stated that the children would have their holidays on 13 August 2010. But to our surprise, we heard without notice that our children are breaking off this Friday. Most of the teachers were not ready for the break and they were forced to give the children early exams. The parents have been told that reports will be collected on 13 August 2010. We the parents had paid school fees for our children to stay in school to 13 August. Now, they are telling us that we should be ready to pay school fees again as early as 23 August 2010. 

Madam Speaker, we would like to know from the Ministry of Education why they are in such a hurry to send our children back home before they complete the term. And they have not told us whether they are going to pay our balance for the money that we paid for fees – (Interruption) 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is more than what hon. Kiiza is saying. From certain sources, this is the beginning of the rigging. The term has been cut short to enable some pupils to go and vote during the primaries. Some people are doing it intentionally to phase out other Members of Parliament in the primaries. But they also target to use it in the third term for the final elections. That is the whole secret behind it. Stop beating around the bush; that is the fact. 

MS KIIZA: Thank you, my brother, for the information. Madam Speaker, you remember when the NRM party was doing their registration, we said it here that people as young as 16 were being registered. We were told that they were just grooming these young people to make them used to the party behaviours. 

At a later stage, the NRM Party declared that it has 9 million voters. We are not surprised, therefore, from the information that my brother has given me that schools are breaking early to come and vote. These 16-year old pupils will be eligible to vote because they are in the yellow book. 

Therefore, if that is not the reason, can the minister tell us why the parents have to receive these children back home after paying huge sums of money and no refund is made?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think this is a very serious issue for which the country would like to get an explanation. I believe parents plan how much money they will spend on their children. If you force them back quickly, you are forcing parents to spend more money. And I do not know whether the USE funds are being sent back to the Government. Can the Government inform us about what is happening?

3.07
THE MINISTER OF COMMUNICATION & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Aggrey Awori): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a little taken aback that the parents in this House do not want their children home early. However, my colleagues will come back with a more comprehensive statement on Thursday afternoon. Thank you. 

MR CHARLES ANGIRO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is another issue which also needs clarification regarding this matter of education. In one private school which I visited yesterday, I learnt that these seven days which have been take off, for each child who should have been at school, it would cost the school Shs 10 million. Shs 10 million for each child times 1,000 students which I found in the school; that would earn this school a good surplus of Shs 70 million. And this money has been earmarked to be shared with some NRM officials. Can the Government explain this?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, maybe we should wait for the statement because I do not see the Minister of Education here.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I would like to assure my honourable colleagues that what I said still holds. My colleague in charge of education will come here with a more comprehensive statement on the issue on Thursday afternoon. There is no cause for worry.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us go on with the debate on the State of the Nation Address. But before we do that, I want you to join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of Kyebando Progressive School. They are represented by hon. Latif Ssebagala. You are welcome. (Applause)

THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance, and it relates to the civil servants of this country. Madam Speaker, as you realise, we hurried to pass the Vote-On-Account knowing that the machinery of Government must be kept lubricated; and that in no way should Parliament be condemned for having caused a blockage in the flow of resources to service Government institutions. To hasten this, it is now one and a half months back since the Minister of Finance laid on Table the lists of accounting officers for the Financial Year 2010. All this was done so that Government machinery may not be blocked. Today is the 3rd of August and civil servants around the country have not been paid their salaries, including our own staff of Parliament. I have even been told that some Members of Parliament have not been paid. 

This, therefore, makes me recite the Lord’s Prayer, “Lead us not into temptation.” These people are already disfavoured in terms of the amount of money given to them to cope with the standards of living. In a similar manner, my colleague had raised the issue of school fees. Universities are opening on 9 August 2010 and most civil servants have their children in schools. How do you expect them to meet their parental obligations of paying school fees, in addition to the day-to-day welfare of their families? 

We would wish to seek an explanation from Government; what is it that has hindered them from receiving their salaries? We have already passed the Vote-on-Account; we have already been informed of accounting officers being in place; what is the problem? Is it that there is no money? If there is no money, can they come and explain to the public through this institution so that we know why our civil servants are not being paid? This is the humble request I am putting forward to Government. Let Government give us an explanation as to why civil servants are not even given the little that they deserve. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us hear from the workers. 

3.12
MS TEOPISTA SSENTONGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to add my voice to that of my colleague, the Opposition Chief Whip. Salary is someone’s right and effective communication is always a key tool in management. If there is any shortcoming, for example, late payment of salaries, there must have been some communication earlier than now when we are demanding for it here. 

It is true universities are opening soon. Many of our children are not enjoying the benefits of Government sponsorship. Therefore, many of us - many workers’ salaries cater for the school fees and tuition of those students. What is going to happen?

I am saying the government should have effective communication all the time. There must be some communication so that people know and maybe make prior arrangements to cover some of the gaps that may be created as a result of failures in the payment of salaries. 

So, I urge Government to ensure that salaries are paid on time and always communicate to people early enough to enable them find ways of covering up the gaps that could be created. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us go back to the State of the Nation Address. (Interjections) Five minutes, please.

3.15 
MR FELIX OKOT-OGONG: (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): I am going to make my statement later, but this matter is very important, Madam Speaker. We do not have to plead with Government. It is a right for people to earn their salaries. As Parliament, we only need to direct that from midnight tonight, money should be on the accounts of all the workers of this country, all the civil servants. (Interjections) Failure to do so, heads must roll. We are directing as Parliament. So, once you fail to honour our request, we shall act -(Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, you know this Parliament took a resolution that civil servants must be paid by the 28th of every month. It has been working very well. This is a very serious breach.

3.16
THE MINISTER OF COMMUNICATION & INFORMATION  TECHNOLOGY (Mr Aggrey Awori): Madam Speaker, there is no intention on the part of this Government to occasion any inconvenience to persons in the Public Service. However, I would like to assure the August House that my colleague in charge of finance will be here tomorrow.(Interjections) Public Service is coming in, but Public Service is not in charge of the purse; it is in charge of the conditions and terms of service. When it comes to the arithmetics, it is definitely the Minister of Finance -(Mrs Sezi Mbaguta enters_) So, I would like to give the Floor to my colleague who has just come in, maybe to give a more detailed statement on the matter. (Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of State for Public Service, the country wants to know why civil servants have not been paid up to today. (Interjections)

3.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca Mbaguta Sezi): Madam Speaker, I have been taken by surprise. (Laughter) I will come with a statement tomorrow. I was not even aware, but I will come with a statement. (Interjections)

MR OKOT-OGONG: Madam Speaker, we are here with the Minister of Public Service. She is in charge of all the civil servants of this country and the minister is not aware that our workers have not been paid up to now. Are you in charge?  Are you really in charge? If you are not in charge, just vacate the office and let other people be there. (Interjections)

3.18
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): Madam Speaker, I really do not know what is going on. Parliament has been sitting since morning. I believe the ministers are all aware that business is on. I wonder why we cannot have the ministers responsible to answer the questions. These are serious matters. We should not take issues regarding payment of people’s salaries as simple things. The way hon. Awori, the former Congressman really wakes up -(Interjections)- to take us very simply like that is not very good. Let us get a little more serious. 

MR ELIJAH OKUPA: The acting Leader of Government Business introduced a term here; hon. Aggrey Awori introduced a term here of the drizzle, the rain, when things could not move. Now, you have seen the situation; I think this is desertification that has happened to the Public Service. 

I think before we break off today, we should be able to have a statement. The hon. Minister can excuse herself and consult with her colleagues, but get to this House before the closure of today’s session such that the country there, the teachers there, the workers out there, know why they have not been paid and whether they are going to be paid from midnight tonight as proposed by hon. Okot-Ogong. We need that assurance please.

MS MARIAM NALUBEGA: Thank you colleague for giving way. I am among those many people who have not been paid and the information we have got from our banks is that money came in and it just vanished. They do not know where it went. So, we need to know if it is the system or – because banks have tried - since the 21st of this month, my money was put on my account, but they do not know where it went and I have not touched it nor withdrawn it. Our accountants are also asking the same question. They do not know where the money is hiding. We need to know if we will be able to get our money or it will just appear once again. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, the issue is that civil servants have not yet been paid.

MR OKUPA: I thank my colleague who has given that information. Yesterday, one of the managers from Post Bank was asking me and he said, “Most of the people who have loans with Post Bank from Parliament have their monthly salary payments in arrears, how come yours is cleared?” I told him; “Mine is not tagged to Parliament, I pay it from a different source.” That is what I said. We have not received money on our accounts. It is not limited to people who have loans and tagged them to their salaries; they are many and banks are going to charge people arrears and penalties. Who is going to take care of that? The problem is bigger than just having the money paid to people’s accounts. People who had used their salaries as security to get loans are in bigger problems including Members in this House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, have you internalised the problem? The country has not been paid; that is what is at stake. 

3.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR MICRO-FINANCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was whispering to the minister in charge of payment of salaries because payment of salaries is a mandate of the Ministry of Public Service. So, I would like to beg that I am given time to go and consult with the Permanent Secretary to the Treasury and find out whether we have a national problem that has brought us in the situation that we are in. I do not have the answer now. I would like to be allowed time to go and consult on this. I also did not receive my salary and I thought that maybe I was the only victim. But let me beg for time, Madam Speaker and colleagues –(Interjections)- it is a matter of going outside and speaking to the Permanent Secretary. Otherwise, I am not useful to you now because I do not have the answer. I am irrelevant.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I think it is important that you go and get the necessary information and inform the country so that people know what to do. Thank you. 

HON. MEMBERS: Let her go now. 

MS NANKABIRWA: The technicality I have is that I am standing in for the Minister of Finance. If I go out, the ministry will not be represented, as you transact business. May I beg that I am allowed to sit in and consult in the evening? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I think you can go and make a call. You do not need to go to the ministry. (Laughter) 

MRS WINIFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, when we last broke off from this Parliament, we were told that Parliament would resume today. After all that long time, given the reason that members of the frontbench were participating in the AU summit and were very busy, the AU summit ended. Here we are, moving again in circles. The ministers are not coming. We would have excused them if the party elections were still taking place, but the party elections ended. Most of them were elected in bigger positions – we want to congratulate you, Madam Speaker, for having attained that big seat in Kamuli. Use it to whip your friends who are members of the frontbench, to always appear in Parliament. 

It hurts us as people’s representatives when we come here, having been sent by our people to ask pertinent questions regarding their status and service, and members of the frontbench are not there to answer. Some have travelled; we have many ex-officios; and some of them are not up-to-date and it defeats the logic of having Cabinet ministers. I ask the Leader of Government Business, who is at the same time the minister in charge of the civil servants, to save this country. Time wasted will never ever return and time is money. That is where we go wrong as Africans. We do not value time. The time we are wasting here in those consultations, “Let me make a phone call, let me do this…” we should have ended this matter and continued with other issues. I want to passionately appeal that seriousness be given to this Parliament, as we come to the conclusion of our term of office. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, when I allowed plenary to go on recess, I gave notice that work would resume in earnest today at 10.00 O’clock, and I also informed you that I would expect that the State of the Nation Address and the Budget reports are done by 12th August. But if even the people who were here in the morning have not come back, then I do not know what we are going to do. We have tried to calculate the time to make sure that we finish all this work within these two weeks, but we can continue with the State of the Nation Address. The ministers who are here should take note so that their colleagues can answer [Hon. Members: “But they are sleeping.”] I will wake them up. (Laughter)

MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You posed a question, “What can I do?” I think you can do a lot. You are in charge of this Parliament. If the ministers cannot listen to the Leader of Government Business, you can talk to their boss directly. One time the President told the Committee on Presidential Affairs that he has a minimum of two ministers per ministry because one must be in Parliament at all times. There must be a minister from the ministry. But if you find two out of 70 sitting here, and the Leaders of Government Business are four and one has just walked in; and we do business without the Leader of Government Business, then I think it is a serious situation we are in and something should be done. Otherwise, we are wasting time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I see that a few more members of the Executive have come. Please, let us continue with the State of the Nation Address. (Hon. Okello-Okello: “But she is back.”] Are you ready with the information, minister? 

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, I have made a short call to the DSP –(Laughter)– because of the gravity of the matter. I have been informed that the Bank of Uganda is updating their system of payment and that is what has caused the delay and we shall be informing the nation. I asked about the exact timeframe and I was told that within three days; the Bank of Uganda will probably have finished updating their system. Otherwise, the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Public Service did their part, but the Central Bank is updating their system and I beg the indulgence of Members of Parliament and all civil servants who have been affected. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But when do the three days begin to run?

MS NANKABIRWA: Right now, hon. Syda Bbumba is talking to the Governor of the Bank of Uganda and I have been informed that within three days, probably from today, the system shall have been updated. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know, hon. Minister, the people do not want to hear that the system is being updated. They want money on their accounts. That is what they want to hear; not updating the system of the Bank of Uganda.

3.32
MR KASSIANO WADRI: Madam Speaker, when I raised this issue, it was bearing in mind the negative effect it is already bearing on service delivery especially in institutions like health. More so, if Government knew that there was a problem with the financial systems in Bank of Uganda, it would have been courteous on their part to keep us informed; to keep the people informed, and give them reassurance that something is being done. 

This evening we are told three days and today is Tuesday. If matters get out of hand and workers lay down their tools, please, that should not be a surprise. At least we have played our part as people’s representatives to draw your attention to the fact that the problem is bigger than we experience it here in Kampala. The ordinary teacher needs his salary. The nurse who is toiling day and night for Shs 200,000 needs that money. That money is very dear to that person. I know you have just come out of elections and you are very fresh, but you see the other people who are out there are more desperate than you are, Madam Minister. 

Please, let these three days from today, that we believe on Friday money should be on people’s accounts so that life goes on normally, because pupils are coming home. We have been told that they are being sent home and parents have to prepare themselves to send them back. Universities are opening on the 9th and all that calls for money. 

Please, we really appeal to you, on behalf of the workers of this country, let something be done to avert bigger problems. Thank you.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, let us have an update on Thursday morning here. We want an update on Thursday morning. Let us go to the State of the Nation Address. 

3.34
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I take the Floor to add my voice and congratulate the Leader of the Opposition for his reply to the State of the Nation Address by the President. 

I remember vividly that day when the President made his speech, but I was surprised when I looked at the Government side and I saw that most of the people were sleeping. I kept wondering whether the government side was bored by the President’s speech, and up to now I have never known the actual reason.

The President raised a number of issues in his speech, touching on every sector of this country. When you talk of economic growth, the first thing that comes to somebody’s mind is to see whether there has been a change in the livelihood of Ugandans. 

Where I come from, when you talk of 8 percent economic growth, I do not read it on the faces of the people I represent. I have had a chance to travel to different parts of this country and this poverty is not written only on the faces of the people of Mbale, but the whole country, I have seen it. 

Now, when you talk of the growth, the first thing that comes to your mind again is the infrastructure. How has the infrastructure helped the economic growth? The first thing to look at is the roads. I do not need to talk about it because you all know how the roads look in this country. How have the roads helped the economy of this country grow? Terrible state; every sector.

Look at the health sector that the President talked about. The health centres III and IV do not even function. I have two in Mbale. The other time I was asking the Minister of Health here; when you go to these health centres there is no medicine. The doctors come in at 10.00 and leave by 2.00 because there is nothing in those health centres. Now, can we proudly say that we have improved the health of the people of Uganda? The other day we had a meeting of the African Union. Proudly, we were talking about maternal and child health, but when you look at the health sector of our people, the people in this country are suffering. I think as a Government they would have been proud walking with their heads high, saying that, “Our people can now access medical care; the women are no longer delivering on the stairs of Mulago Hospital; the children in Mbale -” when you go to the children’s ward, Madam Speaker, you will find four or five children on one bed and the mothers are standing on one side, the others are also on one side and they told me when I visited the children’s ward, “Hon. Member, we do not even sleep; even prisoners at Maluku Prison sleep.” So, the health sector is really bad -(Interjections) [Mr Okot Ogong: “Procedure]
Now, I want to talk about education because the President touched every sector –(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, I am talking  about the State of the Nation Address by the President -(Interruption)

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, we are on item No.5: “Motion that thanks of Parliament be recorded for the clear and precise exposition of Government policy contained in the address on the State of the Nation by His Excellency, the President, to this Parliament on Wednesday, 2 June 2010.” I think the motion is very clear that thanks be recorded.  But what I am hearing from my honourable friend is totally different. He is not recording any appreciation -(Interjections)- his motion is just to criticise and not to thank -(Interjections)- which is totally against the spirit of the motion.

Madam Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member to go against the spirit of the motion?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is the way he understands it. Proceed.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for protecting me. I wonder whether the gentleman was following because I was talking about what the President talked about - the issues of this country; how the economy has grown and when the economy grows you see it in every sector. That is what I was talking about. 

I wanted to touch education because it is part of nation building and we can be proud that our economy has grown; the children in schools have benefited; hospitals have benefited; the roads are okay and the social sector is wonderful.  

This House approved a loan from the World Bank. The government borrowed money from the World Bank to build classrooms and improve the livelihood of our children in schools, but right now, there are a number of children in a number of schools who sit on the floor, right on the ground. The other day, I was donating to children of North Road Primary School in Mbale where I took 50 desks and 200 mathematical sets. But children sit on the floor and moreover this House approved money to go and build classrooms and improve the classes. 

So, I keep wondering when one talks and I think my colleague raised an issue this morning and said, “Look, these people who gave the President wrong figures should be answerable because they misled the President.” We have got the Bureau of Statistics up here that would have given him the actual figures. This country has been writing rosy articles in the international press that the economy of this country is doing very well while in actual fact we have economists out there - professors, who read and can tell that we are telling lies simply because somebody is misleading the President. I happen to have served in Uganda’s missions abroad, but the situation in our missions was bad. At times even water was disconnected, power not paid for and some of our colleagues were calling us and saying, “We read wonderful stories about Uganda’s economy growing, what happened? Can’t you even meet your daily requirements?” So, these issues should be addressed.

The Baganda have got a saying that “amazima gakaawa”. The Leader of the Opposition spoke the truth. When we come up and speak some of these things, do not think we are criticising as a Member on the other side said. We are speaking the truth. Our people are suffering in poverty. We do not want to deceive the nation. We should not deceive the President that we are doing very well. We should speak the truth and address some of these issues that concern Ugandans. It is an actual fact that the people of Uganda are suffering.

On agriculture, when I was growing up, there were the three Cs, which included coffee, cotton - now when you talk of cotton, it is a forgotten word. As I speak now - Ms Nankabirwa rose_)- I am not taking the information.

MS NANKABIRWA: I am sorry, Madam Speaker. I did not want to interrupt the colleague on the Floor but the way he is proceeding is misleading to the nation. He talks about deceiving the people when we talk about the economic growth in Uganda. Uganda has been rated B+ by a world recognised rating group and our figures were ascertained, but he continues misleading the nation that some chaps sit and give rosy figures on our economic growth. Is he in order to mislead Parliament and the nation when our rating was declared B+? This rating was not done by little groups of people in Uganda, but it was done by a globally recognised rating group. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this morning there was something which the Leader of the Opposition said in his statement disputing the figures presented by the head of state. I think that is what he is talking about. I think that is what he is addressing.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the honourable minister was not in the House, but page 18 will tell you those figures.

What I was saying is that we want the truth. We want our people to know the truth. When we bring up the truth, we want these people to improve and look at the realities and the needs of the people of Uganda. They should not just take it that what they say is the truth. Before I end, I was even shocked on that day when the -(Member timed out.)

3.45
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to add my voice to the statement made this morning by the Leader of the Opposition in respect of this motion.

While his Excellency the President laboured so much on that day to deliver his State of the Nation Address to this important august House, I think later he regretted that 10 percent of the Government side was asleep. I do not know what action he is going to take to discipline especially the frontbench because to me that is an abuse to his Excellency the President’s speech.

I want to express my concern about the elections. He assured us that the elections will be conducted in a free and fair manner, but we are aware that even tomorrow, there is going to be a series of demonstrations against the Chairman of the Electoral Commission. One thing that I do not understand is that after giving the Police notice for demonstration, is there any part of our law which does not allow you to demonstrate? 

This is a multiparty system in which, to the best of my knowledge, there should have been a fair representation at that body. This is a chairman who was appointed during the NRM administration when there was only the NRM party in existence. Now that we have all these parties, what is going to happen to their interests? Unless that is dealt with, even on the eve of the elections, people will still be demonstrating to ensure that something fair is done. 

What assurance are we going to get? When you read statements from the IGP and other policemen, they say they are not going to entertain any demonstrations. Which country is this in which the policemen do not entertain demonstrations when they are right? Are demonstrations right or not? This must be put very clearly so that we know our destiny. It will be useless for the people of Uganda to go to the bush after the elections when things are not correct right from the beginning. So, we are demanding explanations as to why the people of Uganda cannot be allowed to demonstrate against some of the issues that should be put right. Demonstration does not mean overthrowing a government; it is a message to the administration that something is wrong, so let it be put right. 

I want to know if this part of the assurance that the President gave us will be fulfilled. When you try, you are arrested and beaten. There is even the kiboko squad which we know was part and parcel of the Police recruitment; there has been no clarification about it and they are still beating up the Opposition -(Interjections)- Yes, since you are on that side, you do not see the evidence. 

The second issue that I would like to register my concern about is NAADS. I want to thank the President finally for assuring the country that this time Members of Parliament should get concerned to follow the NAADS programmes in their districts or constituencies, but this is now too late. For us in Lira, those who had already misappropriated the funds were arrested; even others who misappropriated funds like the NUSAF I were arrested. However, now the licence is that once you cross to the NRM side of the bridge, you become a free person -(Member timed out.)

3.50
MS SUSAN NAKAWUKI (FDC, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Leader of the Opposition for the reply to the State of the Nation Address and at the same time thank the President for that address.

On page 53 of the State of the Nation Address, the President addressed the august House on the upcoming elections and he discussed the progress on the registration of the voters. Just a month ago, there was registration of voters by the Muelhbauer Company. They actually mobilised our voters to go and register. Everyone is excited about acquiring a national ID which is paramount in this country pending issues like the explosions that happened. We are all aware that with these national IDs, we are going to be able to identify who is who in the country.

We have really had a lot about this registration process. I actually took the initiative and visited the Muelhbauer offices in Kololo. I was informed that as far as they are concerned they are ready to deliver and they even had some IDs ready. However, I was also informed that the Government itself has failed on its part. Government was supposed to provide the national printery for use as a processing house. The Muelhbauer Group was supposed to deliver the equipment for processing the national IDs and they were supposed to be produced in Entebbe. They were also supposed to train Ugandans on how to operate the equipment. However, I tried to consult the Minister for ICT and the Minister for Internal Affairs but they do not seem to give logical conclusions. 

Madam Speaker, we hoped that with these IDs we could maybe have a free and fair election. When I contacted the Minister for ICT, hon. Aggrey Awori, he said that we are not going to use these IDs for elections. With the Ministry of Internal Affairs, there is one person – all that you could hear is a one Mr Kagoda, the Permanent Secretary, who is sitting on everything. Government has not made any attempt to secure the premises for processing the IDs. Is it a deliberate plan to rig the elections? These people are just waiting for that to start processing the IDs. I wish the Minister for Internal Affairs was here because he would give us better answers as to why this one person, Kagoda, is becoming an issue in the ministry. 

I am saying this on behalf of all the Ugandans. Why can’t they explain this? They have already committed tax payers’ money to this project. Either way, even if these people do not deliver, since we already concluded the contract, we have to pay. So, I expect the minister to come here and explain to this House why the processing house is not ready and yet these people have already made all the specifications for them.

Secondly, the President in his speech on page 40 praised the health sector. Well, we appreciate all the efforts that Government has put in place, but it is not good enough. Three months ago I visited hon. Mallinga to tell him about the condition of Masaka Referral Hospital and the health centre III in Busiro East. I was surprised that the minister could not even give me a hopeful answer. I was surprised that a whole Cabinet minister could just say that there was nothing he could do about the condition.

Like hon. Wamai said, in Masaka Hospital if you visited the children’s ward, it is heartrending. You find about five children suffering from different ailments on the same bed. I even showed him photos. Attendants for the patients cannot even sleep inside the wards; they sleep outside on the veranda. I went to him to inform him that maybe as they are budgeting, they could think of expanding this referral hospital, especially the children’s ward. Even in the corridors they put small sheets on the floor and they put children there. They were even on drip while on the floor. It is unhygienic, but the minister told me, “You see, there is nothing we can do because even the money we have right now is not enough.” 

3.55
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA KAGWERA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to thank the President for the good State of the Nation Address. The President put the State of the Nation Address under a number of sub-headings - the growth of industries and the service sector; support to the scientists of this country; increased foreign and local investment; peace and security; education; health and many other aspects. 

I really agree with the President that there is growth in this country; there is no question about that. So, whoever opposes it needs to go outside and see for himself. One of our colleagues here said he has visited a number of places, but from the way I see my constituency, Burahya County, from the 80s and even the 90s it has greatly changed. So, nobody can tell me that there is no growth. The only thing we can say is that there is no development. Mark the difference between the two. 

Growth is here, but what we need is even distribution. Many people have a lot of money - mark the word “alot” - and others have little. So, if we say let us see how we can equitably distribute the resources of this country, then that I accept. We must address that. Whereas many people in this country are growing rich, others are increasingly becoming poorer. We need to really get a middle point. 

The other issue that the President talked about, but did not emphasise was the issue of corruption. Actually, this country would have been much better if we controlled corruption. In his address, he said that there is nothing more irritating than a fly falling into your milk. So, we must protect our milk. However, it is not only one fly but many flies are already in our milk. What do we do? I have waited and waited to see this country fight corruption but I feel that we have not taken serious measures because people who steal Government money are at large. At times when they are taken to prison, they are there for just a day or two days and the following day they are out. 

On that note, I think as Government we need to be more serious – (Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way and thank you, Madam Speaker. 

On corruption, the President said that corrupt people are like flies falling into milk. These flies are with the President. They are in his house. Why should the President lament and let flies fall into the milk in his house? I thank you.

MR KASAIJA KAGWERA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for the information. The other issue is, as I have said, we have developed, but we need to put our priorities right. When we talk about industrial development, the service sector, we need to put emphasis on agriculture and tourism. I believe the principle of comparative advantage works better than anything else. So, where does our comparative advantage lie as Uganda? Our comparative advantage lies in agriculture, but the investment we are putting in agriculture is very limited. I call upon this Parliament and Government to invest more in agriculture because this is where we can compete favourably.

Madam Speaker, it is not true to say that these figures are wrong. I waited for the honourable member who raised this issue to give alternative figures, but if you do not have alternative figures, let us go by these figures. If you are disputing what is here, what are the alternative figures you have?

I commend the President and Government but my only problem is - (Member timed out.) 

4.01
MS GRACE OBURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to my colleagues in thanking the President for fulfilling his constitutional mandate of giving the State of the Nation address to the people of Uganda. 

I have a few issues to comment on in the President’s speech. One regards the hard-to-reach areas where 2,398 teachers were identified for increment. In fact, all areas in Uganda are hard to reach. In my area, for example, there are teachers who get their supplies from across the border because they cannot easily access the other areas; so, that area is hard-to-reach. I do not know what criteria were used to identify these schools and teachers so that they can benefit from the increment that was made. There should have been a general increase across the board so that all teachers get it. I do not think a place like Bukwo is not hard-to-reach because you have to go through Kenya to reach it, but there is no school from Bukwo that was included in the hard-to-reach area.  

Another thing is about construction of teachers’ houses. We appreciate the Dutch fund which is to build teachers’ quarters in West Nile. Whereas West Nile could have been worse off than other areas, is there any plan by this fund to have these teachers’ houses rolled out in other areas because we need teachers’ houses in all areas of this country. 

The third issue, as I conclude, is that the Opposition is a mirror. There are key issues which were raised by the Leader of the Opposition which if taken and acted upon, will ensure that our people get the good services they require. We all work for this country – the Opposition and even Government.  So, as Government if we take some of the issues raised by the Leader of the Opposition, we shall ensure that this country receives the services that it desires. Thank you very much. (Applause)

4.04
MR MUHAMED KAWUMA (DP, Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the President for performing his constitutional mandate of delivering the State of the Nation Address. I would also want to thank the Leader of the Opposition for the response and critic he has given to the President’s State of the Nation Address. 

I have the following observations: In the preamble of the State of the Nation Address by the President, he mentioned the eight percent economic growth and further mentioned the words, “guerrilla concept”. My colleague here mentioned that there could be growth as we may appreciate here and there, but the element of the uneven distribution of resources is very pertinent. 

The new structures, developments and persons pursuing higher education - undergraduate and postgraduate courses - are not evenly distributed and this needs to be addressed. The guerrilla concept of allowing a few to eat on behalf of the others for the last 24 years really needs to be put to rest. As Government, we should now put up a mechanism to ensure that all the people appreciate the availability of the resources endowed by their country. 

Madam Speaker, I represent Entebbe Municipality.  Time and again I get concerned when I see Kenya Airways making five rounds as they transport passengers and you cannot see any Ugandan aircraft. This is a commercial plane, it pays all the fares, but it still remains in business. 

We have not addressed the issue of public transport. It is totally messed up. The past governments put up a railway network covering the major areas of this country and every other person appreciated the prices of commodities. Actually, what would happen was that a person from Kasese would load Irish potatoes and come, though barefooted; sell their Irish potatoes and go back, but this is not possible today!  You will find that it is even the high ranking government officials that have vandalised these railway networks - the slippers. It is very unfortunate. We would now be looking at upgrading and developing but we are once again going to start planning how to lay slippers again. 

The President in his address appreciated that agriculture is the backbone of the economy of this country; it is the major life sustainer. He also observed the previous year’s performance of the sector, where there was a growth of 1.1 percent. While appreciating the growth in our population and the inability of Government to provide employment, we needed to have allocated more resources to develop the agricultural sector, which is the major life sustainer and employer. What is the percentage allocated to the agricultural sector this financial year?  You will find that it is less than 10 percent. This is the sector which deserves more resources because it is the major employer. 

Alongside developing the railway network, look at the congestion of Kampala; we are worried today. Where Mukwano Arcade is there used to be a bus park, but there is no bus park in Kampala today.  There is no upcountry public transport service and we are dancing to the tune of the private people. There are certain sectors that must be handled by Government or at least Government should make very intensive intervention. 

I also want to give a brief reaction to the President’s address regarding the elections. I am getting worried. We were hearing over the radio from different parts of the country yesterday where the NRM had its primaries that elections were marred by violence including –(Member timed out.)

4.10
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to thank the President for performing his national duty of delivering the State of the Nation Address, 2010. The purpose of this definitely is to ensure that Ugandans receive accountability from the head of state. Apart from this, it is also important that once Ugandans have received the accountability, they should be able to review, assess and evaluate the progress. This is the meaning of the State of the Nation Address. 

What are we able to learn from it? We should be able to see that as we are moving on, Uganda is surely developing and there is a transformation. We should be able to appreciate this and be able to thank the head of state since his ideas contribute to this greatly. 

Madam Speaker, it is naturally always good to first appreciate any contribution that one makes for the benefit of the majority. This is very important. I have four areas in which I would really wish to give thanks to our head of state. 

The economic transformation: I will not talk much about this but just look at the revenue collections from 1986, which was only Shs 5 billion, to 2010 collections, which is Shs 5 trillion. If you can analyse, those of us who are mathematicians, what is the rate of improvement there? That was also mentioned by the head of state and it is 1000 times. These are issues, which we should be able to see and appreciate.

Let us look at agriculture. Our head of state has been so emphatic about agricultural development so as to eradicate poverty. The NAADS programme is being felt in rural communities. What type of production? We are seeing all these; so I may not really have time to enumerate all the progress and development that is being seen.

I wish to take a little of my time to talk about peace and security. This is a very important factor and a prerequisite to development. In the State of the Nation Address, the security situation in Karamoja was not commented on. Generally, we all know that at least there is some progress going on, but that must not make us complacent because as of now, trouble is about to start. Even before I came to Parliament, there were about two raids which took place in my constituency and they are still fighting up to now. There is one raid where they managed to succeed and get the cows back, but in another, the soldiers are still fighting. So, it is my wish to inform the ministries of defence and internal affairs that a lot needs to be done in this regard. 

In a recent visit by the Karamoja Parliamentary Group to Karamoja, the people of Karamoja requested if Government could have the clans of the Karimojong jointly graze their cows so that they can really develop a heart of friendship and unity. That was a very strong message from them to us, but no one seems to be heeding that information. So, I am bringing it to the attention of particularly the Office of the Prime Minister. We request that OPM helps us there. Even now before I sit, I would kindly -(Member timed out.)

4.15
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Madam Speaker, I want to thank you very much for according me an opportunity to first, thank His Excellency the President for his well thought-out State of the Nation Address, hence fulfilling his constitutional mandate very effectively. I want to thank him so much.

I will address myself to three issues and one is on infrastructure. I do appreciate the work and role being played by Government in ensuring that our infrastructure especially rural roads are worked on. However, for some time now there were these roads which were taken over by Government from local governments. Local governments had hitherto been working on these roads very effectively. However, we were extremely happy and excited when we were given documents to the effect that some of these community roads had been taken over by the Central Government. Since that time, and it is over two years now, these roads have never been worked on and these roads are becoming a menace. They are the worst of all the roads and there is no serious explanation. 

We complained very bitterly and they promised that some Shs 30 billion would be put aside to ensure that these roads would be worked upon. To date, nothing has been said about it and no money has been released. I think the ministry needs to be put in the firing line. It is high time that they came out very boldly and explained to this country what is happening to some of these roads.

When I go to some of these roads under construction like the Masaka-Kampala Road, it is a horrific situation. The road is nothing but dust. They have worked on a very long stretch almost up to Mpigi, but none of this stretch has been tarmacked. It is so dusty and they have no courtesy to pour water along that stretch. We are only waiting to see disaster on this road. In actual fact, every time I go through this road to my constituency I get a very bad cough. Even as I talk now, I went through the road and I have a very bad cough. What about those poor souls who live along this road? 

I really feel and think the minister concerned should come up openly and tell the nation what should be done. Is that how things are done in other countries? Surely, they should be brought to order, especially the contractors. I have a bad cough.

There is also the Mbarara-Kitagata Road. I want to thank the President and his government for putting it on the programme, but for over three years now there is a road but no road. What is happening? Sometimes as we wait we get a little bit bored and patience runs out and we are about to run out of this patience. We need an explanation and there is always no explanation at all. 

Finally, I am going to talk about water. Whereas the country is very good in as far as water is concerned - nationally 63 percent; that is not very bad - look at Isingiro with 23 percent and look at Isingiro South with 11 percent. It is a disaster. We have cried our hearts out telling the ministry concerned that we need nothing but rainwater harvesting. They have ears but they cannot hear. They give us useless valley dams; a valley dam of Shs 5 billion to cater for 500 residents! Surely, I do not know the logic. Who is in charge? I just do not understand. 

With that Shs 5 billion in Isingiro, if they bought us equipment maybe we would have done a lot better. If we had gone into rainwater harvesting, maybe 5000 families would have been covered. It is high time the ministry woke up to the realities on the ground and also listened to the voices of the representatives of the people.

Finally, on health, I just want to commend Ministry of Health for the services being rendered, but I would rather say that some of the health centre IVs now need upgrading. If we are to save these mothers and our children from dying of preventable diseases, and if we are to have many more staff on board, I think we need to upgrade some of these health -(Member timed out.) 

4.20
MR JAMES BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me take this opportunity to thank the President for the State of the Nation Address and also thank the Leader of the Opposition. This year’s reply is far better than last year’s and I congratulate him.

Now that we have testified that most parts of Uganda are peaceful, it is time that we look to investment to see that this country moves ahead. From that perspective, I really thank Government for its policy of seeing that investment is greatly envisaged in the private sector. On what they have put in place, the climate is attractive and also profitable as has been stated in the State of the Nation Address by the President.

When you read through the statement, you see the expected investment in this country in the FY 2009-2010, which is over US$ 1 billion and job creation approaching 7,000. That is commendable. Many people have been talking about UDC and Government putting up industries, but this is a substitute by Government by way of change of policy. The money that should have been used in UDC is the money we are using in UPE, USE and other social programmes, which are assisting the country. 

We know that the road sector is important for investment and I thank Government for having taken a decision to increase the funding for our roads. If you move in any corner of this country, you will see road works going on; many roads are being upgraded from murram to tarmac across the country. This will assist our people as they will be able to bring their goods to the markets and other areas for them to earn a living.

I am also happy that Government has looked into the issue of water transport; many ferries are being bought, designed and built. The safety of water transport has been looked into as navigation aids are provided to those who use water transport.

I have always been saddened by the carnage on our roads. The Government has looked into this aspect and is in the process of creating a national road safety agency which will focus on the safety of our roads. I am also happy that they have also started vehicle inspection, which will improve on the road safety. They have made provisions for getting professional driving schools, which will assist in improving safety of our people.

What we are waiting to see now is for Government to concentrate on the railway system. This is an expensive venture and my advice is that this should be handled as a regional project by the countries in the community. I also appeal to Government to ensure that the shortfalls in this sector are looked into to ensure that we get value for money.

Let me briefly talk about agriculture. Agriculture is the backbone of our economy. The majority of our people depend on it and colleagues here have said that they have heard of increased GDPs but it is not felt in the countryside. In my view, I think Government has embarked on a journey to change this –(Member timed out.) 

4.26
MRS GRACE BYARUGABA (NRM, Woman Representative, Isingiro): I would also like to express my appreciation to His Excellency the President for presenting the State of the Nation Address to Parliament. He covered a number of positive issues, but I want to express my concern on the issue of water. The figures given by his Excellency putting water coverage to about 61 percent to me looks good enough. However, we who come from water stressed districts feel that we need a bit of assistance.

My colleague talked about 11 percent of water coverage. Some areas do not even go as high as that; people are almost dying and animals are dying. When you look at the State of the Nation Address on page 11, the President talked about water for production and he said that some dams are being built in Isingiro and are near completion, which is not true. I will give an example of Bwengyero Dam. That dam has been abandoned and the trucks were left there. I think we need an investigation like the one in Karamoja for us to know what is happening.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are there any more contributions on the State of the Nation Address? I hope you are still internalising. Those who are not aware that we were supposed to tackle the State of the Nation Address have not been in Parliament for some time. When I adjourned the plenary, I gave a detailed programme. 

Hon. Members, since you are still appreciating the State of the Nation Address, tomorrow morning I want us to complete the Computer Misuse Bill. Hon. Awori, last time I had to adjourn plenary because you were busy with AU. Now do not interrupt my work anymore; come and complete that Bill tomorrow and your colleague can represent you in Cabinet.

So, let us complete the Computer Misuse Bill in the morning and go back to the State of the Nation Address in the afternoon. I hope you will have internalised both presentations. I adjourn the House to tomorrow 10 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 4.29 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 4 August 2010 at 10.00 a.m.)

