Wednesday, 2nd August 2000.

Parliament met at 10.41 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON FORESTRY.

MR.KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA (Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I beg to give a few words regarding the report submitted by the Committee. I will be a little unorthodox in my contribution because I think that the main aim of setting up this probe was to see how we could improve our forestry coverage in this country. It was not so much to find fault and try to pin the offenders.  

In the report, we are told that 4.9 million hectares of land, which amounts to 24 per cent of our landmass, is covered by forests. From this information alone, Parliament should be able to direct the Government so that the forest cover is increased up to 50 per cent over a period of say three or four years. Unless we have a policy towards that, we cannot be able to plan to have these forests.  In Japan, only one third of the country is not covered with forests and yet, we who depend on agriculture, we need a big coverage of forests. This should not only be restricted to Government forest reserves but also to all private owned forests.

Secondly, the contradiction between the laws governing the forests under the control of the Central Government and local governments need to completely be harmonised. We need to know exactly who is in charge of what forest. For example, who is in charge when it comes to the conflict in Bunya forests? The blame is sometimes put on the Central Government, and then the Local Leadership is also blamed for it. So, it must be very clear.   

The Land Act gave permission to grant licenses and concessions and permits to enter areas of forests and maybe do some afforestation, but from my own findings, this has been grossly abused for example in South Busoga. Here people were given concessions. These people were knowledgeable. Knowledge is first acquired by those who are in a position to get it. Those people were not nationalist. They only took advantage of that knowledge to carve out large areas for themselves. 

There were a number of people who were given concessions, on the plea that they were going to carry out modern forestation.   Actually, they had no capacity but they were only greedy. These concessions gave them access to certain chunks of forest reserves so that they were able to cut the hard wood for timber and to make charcoal to sell. They also lent that land to the peasants and told them to go in and grow their crops and they promise to plant and maintain tree seedlings that had to be provided. Now, you find that those people have actually contributed more to deforestation. They have cut down the big old trees and burnt all the other small trees for charcoal. They have allowed their concessions to be infested with a lot of peasants who are desperate for land to grow their crops for survival. In the end, they become victims of eviction, and when they are evicted, the blame is placed on the Government. 

I am surprised that on page 35, the Committee says that the companies operating in the South Busoga Forest Reserve should be given permits to manage the forests in accordance with the Forest Act. None of those fellows have performed and one of them is a member of the Select Committee! On what ground do you now ask for them to be given concessions? I think we need to change our policy. It is not the people who have got big muscles who should walk into the Minister’s office and claim concessions. I think we need to recognise that we should involve the peasants, because, ultimately, these people give small chunks to the peasants on the plea that you grow maize and I will put some trees, which are never provided. 

If we want to completely reforestate that area, it is better to engage local fellows. Everyone can be given a small piece of land so that they can grow easy crops, with instructions to plant certain trees. And as the trees grow, definitely the peasants will go away. You will end up by foresting that place instead of inviting the Minister or me because he is a big weight, coming to demand so many square kilometres of Bunya Forest. I do not have the capacity, unless I am greedy. If I go there, there may be some trees, which I can be able to cut down and sell for timber and maybe go into the charcoal business. So, I think, we need to completely change that recommendation. 

Unless somebody has got the capacity to ensure that he is going to plant trees and we have got the means to supervise, these concessions should be forgotten. If you read the appendices, on Document No. 9, I think the British High Commissioner was very clear. He said that we do not have the capacity. If I could read for the Members what he said they would be able to appreciate my point.  This was in respect of Mpanga Forest, Document No. 9, and this letter was from the British High Commission to the Minister of Natural Resources. The operative paragraph says: “I should tell you that it is the experience of DFID specialists who have had dealings with the Forest Department that it is poorly led, poorly administered and with a dubious integrity record: they doubt whether the Department would be capable of running effectively (and transparently) the proposed project.”  

I think that is a mark on the whole of the department and therefore, if the whole thing is so rotten, to me, it is ridiculous to try and single out an individual as if he is the whole problem of our deforestation.  I think – (Interruption) 

MR. PINTO: May I seek clarification from the hon. Member on the Floor concerning what he has read now. If we are seeking remedies, to whom shall we address our complaints, through whom shall we hope to get a remedy to rectify that rotten status that you are referring to?

MR. KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: Thank you very much. I was coming to that. I said, that should be the essence of the recommendations of the report. We as Parliament, must focus on that, and therefore, direct Government with clear methods of, first of all, making sure that the Forest Department is streamlined. And also to make sure that a clear policy in forestry is understood and articulated, and therefore, able to be administered and supervised. I think that should be our role, instead of picking on an individual and saying if that one is kicked, then our problems will be solved.

The Committee has also tried to look at the staffing and interdictions. My point is that the Committee went a little too far in trying to do the job of the statutory organisations. We set them up, and if we do their work, then they are irrelevant. If we find something wrong with the discipline, then we should ask these statutory organisations responsible for recruitment, responsible for disciplining to do their job. If we take up all the work and bring it back to Parliament, then it will be our duty to discipline, recommend, dismiss and caution and I think that is not our role. We are a little too big for that. 

We can make laws if we want the State to run that way, because there is nothing we cannot make. We can say that the work of the Civil Service and the work of the Judiciary Commission will now be exercised by Committees set up by Parliament. We can do that. But if we have got other Committees in place, let them do their work. When we find something rotting, we will need to draw it to their attention and demand a report from them. I think that will be better administration, other than somebody trying to act in a position where she or he will not know how to behave, whether in accordance with the rules that put him in that place or just to please the Parliamentary Committee. Once we put ourselves in the position of a judge, we have to know that a judge normally decides and you can only appeal what he decides to another high court, the Supreme Court. And if you are defeated in the Supreme Court, that is the end of the job. 

So, in order to create confidence in all the statutory organisations, we must demand from them what they are supposed to do. If we find so many things that have not been done, then we can demand the concerned statutory organisations to take necessary actions and give us a report. With that, we shall be able to streamline our roles, that is the role of the Executive, the statutory bodies and Parliament.  

I have also been irked – this is my last point - by the fact that whenever we set up a Select Committee, there is always a tendency to try and pinpoint a person so that the whole saga is moved from its main focus and brought onto an individual. This has been the history of the Sixth Parliament. As we end our term of office, and we are supposed to go back to our people who are responsible for putting us here, I think let us not give them this impression at this moment.  We do not always need a probe committee to try and find a scapegoat whom we imagine when he is lynched then our problems will be solved. I think that has been done and I do not think we have solved anything other than quench our thirst and prove that we are powerful. 

This has also contributed to the mood in Parliament. When it comes to such issues, the House is full, but yesterday after the heated debate, everybody walked out. Even right now, the attendance is not equivalent to the one we have when we bring up issues of censures and all those things. So, I think, we need to be a little more serious –(Interruption).

MR. PINTO: Mr. Speaker, once again, I follow with keen interest the efforts of my colleague to contribute and liven up the debate. But he is using such phrases like ‘quenching our thirst.’  It is early morning, and I am not thirsty yet. Would he please try to clarify which thirst this is?

MR. MWANDHA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The hon. Member referred to moving a motion of Censure. Is he planning to move a motion of Censure?  If so, can he inform the House on what grounds he intends to censure anybody in this House? Thank you.

MR. OKELLO OKELLO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The hon. Member on the Floor has made a statement to the effect that it is a tendency here for Select Committees to point fingers or get individuals as scapegoats. I would like to know something from the hon. Member. If the investigation pointed to an individual as the cause of the problem, should the Select committee have stopped there and said if we mention this individual we are looking for a scapegoat? What should be done?  Thank you. 

MR. KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: Thank you very much. I thank all those who have sought clarification, and I think with my clarification, their hearts will be put at rest. First of all, let me refer to the clarification sought by hon. Pinto. Mr. Pinto is a very good religious man, and I know that he reads the Bible, and the best language is normally the language of parables, which is in the Bible. So, he will understand what I mean when I say ‘quench thirst’. 

I have always said that Parliament is the most powerful organ in any land.  The only thing it cannot do is to make a law to change a man into a woman. But when you have got all that power, you do not need to exercise it. You must actually exercise it very cautiously, and not only when you want to make a point but also when you want to improve the situation. So, what I was trying to say when I said ‘quench the thirst’ was to prove a point that we are powerful.

Now as regards to the censure, I am also a Member of this House and I also go through the corridors. Not only that, but the hon. Member himself was a chairman who probed one of the parastatals where I was the key target. He thought that for a Minister to use 2000 litres of fuel to go and do a job somewhere is very bad. But that had a very small relevance to the improvement of the railway system- (Mr. Pinto rose_)- no, let me finish my contribution. Mr. Pinto has contributed and I think - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is not allowed.

MR. KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: I would like to finish my contribution because I am not alone -(Interruption) 

MR. PINTO:  Mr. Speaker, quite a number of my colleagues who were on that Committee and the Commissioners who probed Railways are here and the report was tabled. In the report it was very clear that the Minister who was supposed to supervise the affairs of this parastatal failed to discharge his duties to the extent that this whole enterprise ground to a halt. The 2000 litres was an addition to the Minister’s failure to exercise his authority. In fact, he was censured for incompetence to exercise his authority. Is he in order to take the minority aspect, which was misuse of 2000 litres of fuel for his personal gain, and try and obliterate the essence of the report that was presented in this House? Is he in order, Sir?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, in the first place, as far as I remember, the Minister was never censured, therefore, the question of censure as far as he is concerned does not arise. But since this House adopted the report, I think it does not serve any purpose now to try and dilute the contents of the report. Proceed.

MR. KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: Well, as far as hon. Mwandha is concerned, I think the clarifications are cleared with the ruling from the Chair. I said a lot of water has gone under the bridge, we are just now trying to reassemble our country, trying to create new structures, and trying to see how we can manage our environment. So, our effort should be not so much to try and find fault with individuals but to find the things we need to put in place so that we are able to manage our affairs in governance, our surroundings, and all the things that make Uganda ‘tick’. Thank you very much.

MR.PATAKI AMASI (Obongi County, Moyo) Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the Committee for their detailed report on Forestry. When I read the report, I came across two areas of concern. The first one is that, the Committee has not looked at the areas that host refugees. For instance, Districts like Moyo and Adjumani have been flooded with Sudanese refugees since the 1980s. In fact, the number of the Sudanese refugees is swallowing up the number of the nationals. As a result, the refugees are agents of deforestation in these areas. The Government has done nothing. No programme has been put in place for afforestation in those districts. The number of refugees is going up in thousands every other day and this has affected the weather pattern in these two districts.  There is now famine. There is no rain in those areas.  Moreover, UNSR is only providing food for the Sudanese refugees and not the nationals. Now, if these Sudanese refugees threaten the vegetation, what is the fate of our nationals? The nationals are hosting the refugees but they lack food.  

One of the forest reserves was degazetted for refugees and this area is not even enough for the number of the refugees now coming in. As a result of this, they are leaving the official settlement camps and are settling outside among the nationals! The food provided by UNSR is not tinned food but dry ratios, so, for their cooking, they destroy trees at a very high speed. 

I am glad that the Prime Minister is here. I travelled with him one time to Adjumani during the African Refugee Day and he saw the number of the Sudanese Refugees in Adjumani and in Parolinya in my Constituency. The number of these refugees is threatening the number of Ugandan nationals down there. The people are crying to this Government trying to find out whether there is a plan in place to re-locate some of these refugees or at least to provide food for the nationals now that the rain pattern has changed.  

The other point I came across is that the Committee focused on only the forestry officials moreover there are some public officers, like some high principal politicians and high UPDF officers, who are involved in deforestation. The Committee did not mention some of these areas.  They only pinpointed a bit of State House and diverted to concentrate on Forestry Department officials and Commissioners. They recommended for their interdiction or demotion, but they said nothing about the UPDF officers and other politicians - some are even in this House - who are agents of deforestation. They have been left out and that is what hon. Kivejinja was saying.  You fix your mind on particular people and leave out others whom you know are a threat or for some reasons you simply – (Interjection) 

MR. RUZINDANA: Mr. Speaker, the Member on the Floor said that there are some agents of deforestation in this House. I would like to be assured that I am not one of them. The hon. Member should mention who they are, rather than letting all of us be suspects.  

MR. PATAKI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If the Member heard me properly, I said some of the members in the UPDF. I did not pinpoint certain names. If he is not guilty, let him not mind -(Laughter).  

I was just going to end by advising that in future, whenever there is such a committee sitting for such business, they should engulf all the areas and concentrate evenly. They should not pinpoint certain small nucleuses for their operations. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. MULASSANYI (Rubanda West, Kabale): Thank you for this opportunity, Mr. Speaker. I would also like to thank the Members of the Committee for the detailed report and for the work well done. But I want to comment on only two issues. The first one is the issue of political influence. Most of the contributors in this House have talked about the political influence observed in this investigation and the only politicians mentioned in the Committee are the President and the Minister. I wonder whether, when a Minister tenders advice or takes action in the Ministry, he is influencing the civil servants politically or whether he is doing his job? To me, a Minister is placed in the Ministry as the overall overseer of the operations of the Ministry. The Minister is a consultant on matters of policy in the Ministry.  Therefore, he is an advisor to the technocrats in the Ministry on matters of policy. So, when he is doing his job, is that tantamount to political influence, especially when he guides the people under his charge?  The problem is when he misleads them. But when he is guiding them, I do not think that it should be construed as political influence and so on.  

In the course of his duties, I thought that the Minister could constrain and restrain people who tend to do wrong things. And in the process of restraining the officers, he can warn them, he can suspend those who consistently commit wrongs, and at certain times, he can recommend termination of a person’s duties. Therefore, I think that a Minister should be allowed some latitude – (Interjection)

MR. PINTO: I seek clarification from my colleague on the Floor.  There are established laws and there are established institutions, which are charged with the administration of the Public Service. Ministers are appointed to oversee implementation of policies. Now, when the public servants make mistakes or do not conduct themselves properly, I thought the established procedure would be to have the person in charge, in this case the Permanent Secretary, to refer the matter to the Public Service Commission. But now when my colleague says the Minister should interdict or should suspend, is he advocating operating outside the law? May I seek this clarification Sir?

MR. MULASSANYI: Thank you, hon. Member.  I said that the Minister could recommend the termination of duties of such an errant officer. It is not him who will dismiss, but he will recommend. What I am really trying to say is that a Minister is not put in the Ministry simply as a titular head, but he has responsibilities there. He has to see that everything in the Ministry goes on well because whenever mistakes are made, whenever wrongs are made, it is finally the Minister who will bear the responsibility. So, he must make sure that everything possible is done to streamline things in his Ministry.  When things go wrong in the Ministry, we are sometimes to blame, because the Minister represents us there. So, if he fails in his duties, then we are to blame, and the appointing Authority is also to blame. I think it is in our interest to see that, when the Minister does the job of overseeing the Ministry, nothing wrong happens. When the officers under his charge commit wrongs, he will take the responsibility just as we take the responsibility for his mistakes.  

The second point is on the recommendations of the Committee on the activities of Mr. Onyango. I thought that Mr. Onyango should have been among those who were recommended for dismissal. Because Mr. Onyango committed the wrongs of spending money before it was banked. I regard this as a very big mistake. In the financial regulations, it is very wrong for anybody to spend money before it is banked because then you do not have any signatories. You may not know that the money is lost because the bank has never received it. So, this is a serious fraud according to the financial regulations. And this is the big mistake that Onyango made. I have all the reasons to suspect that he had his personal reasons for not banking the money.

On page 52, the Committee says: “The Permanent Secretary, as an accounting officer, is personally answerable for any unauthorised or irregular expenditure and thus should ensure that the accounting regulations are strictly adhered to.”

This is why the Permanent Secretary interdicted this man.  He gave himself the right to spend money without the authorisation of the accounting officer, the Permanent Secretary. That is a very big mistake. It is a very big sin for which he should have been punished.

Mr. Olet, Mr. Kigenyi were dismissed. Their dismissal was recommended on account of conflict of interest. If these people had companies dealing in timber in the Department of Forestry, that truly is conflict of interest. But in my view, it is not as bad as Onyango who embezzled such amounts of money. If you can form a company, which operates in the same region, in the same Ministry and on the regulations, there are two wrongs. But one wrong cannot be better than the other. In my view, the embezzlement of money, which is already in the Ministry, is worse than somebody just being a Member or having shares in a company that is transacting business in the Ministry where he works.

They say that a bird in the hand is better than two in the bush. This money we have already received is more useful to us than the money we expect to get. So, Onyango, to me, committed a worse sin than those who had shares in companies operating in the Department of Forestry –(Interruption).  

MR. WAMULONGO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I would like to thank the hon. Member holding the Floor for yielding.  I would just like to give him some useful information because he has consistently referred to Onyango as having embezzled the funds. I would like to inform him and this House that Onyango spent money from the source, he did not embezzle.  That money was used in the department, and perhaps I would like to inform you further that the Ministry was also aware of the expenditure at the source.  In fact, sometimes, the Ministry would also pass some requests for that money from source. Thank you.

MR. ERESU: Mr. Speaker, I would like clarification on the gentleman referred to as Mr. Olet, who had shares with a company operating with the Department of Forestry. When you follow the transactions of that company, was there any indebtedness on the part of the company to the Department of Forestry or not?

Secondly, if that is the case, how should the issue of Mr. Olet, who was related to this company, be treated vis-à-vis the transactions that that company made?  

Was Olet a major shareholder or he was just merely an ordinary shareholder within that company? I would like to be clarified how the facts behind these recommendations that have been given, were established.  Thank you.

MR. MULASSANYI: Thank you for those clarifications. As for hon. Wamulongo, the money was spent in the Ministry, but it should be the Permanent Secretary to authorise the expenditure. The fact that the Permanent Secretary interdicted this officer shows that he did not act according to the laws.

On the latter clarification, I have said that there are two evils, i.e. belonging to a company that is transacting business in your department, and then stealing money from the department. I am saying that they are both evils but one is better than the other. So, those belonging to the companies, which transacted business in the Forestry Department, whether they paid up or they defaulted, were in the wrong.  

Finally, officers of any calibre should never create cause for suspicion. As the saying goes 'there is no smoke without fire'. When you are being suspected of doing something, then there is cause for suspicion.  Therefore, an upright person, an upright officer should never give cause for being suspected. When you cause that kind of situation, it is you to blame. 
I want to thank you for this chance, Mr. Speaker.

MR.MWANDHA JAMES (Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I will only discuss encroachments as reported by the Committee.  Let me specifically refer to page 27 and 28 of the report, it says:  “Mr. Speaker, on 30th May 2000, the Committee visited South Busoga Forest Reserve and noted that the manner in which the evictions were carried out was dehumanising and destructive. The Committee observed the following: In October 1999, hon. Kezimbira Miyingo visited South Busoga Forest Reserve and directed that the people settling in the Reserve should remove their structures and crops from the Reserve by 30th December. 

    a) On 16th March 2000, Lt. Sam Rwabwogo, an ISO operative, working with the Forest Department, deployed an army detach which gave the people only three hours to vacate the reserve.  

    b) That on the 20th March 2000, Lt. Sam Rwabwogo, in the company of armed personnel, launched an eviction exercise in which huts were burnt and some people beaten. (A copy of the medical report is annexed as Document 2). The people are now homeless without alternative accommodation".  

That is one scenario, Mr. Speaker. Now we go to a second scenario, and here I want to refer to Document 4, dated 3rd May 1999. It is addressed to one Peter Kabatsi through the Ministry of Justice, Kampala. It reads as follows:

“RE: ERNEST BAGARUKAYO 
Please refer to your discussion with H.E. the President on the subject above.  
H.E. the President has directed that: 
    (1) You proceed expeditiously to degazette the area of Kamusenene Forest Reserve occupied by the family of Bagarukayo.
    (2) That should need arise to find alternative land for the Forest Reserve, an equivalent size should be curved off from UPDF land at Kaweweta, Ngoma".  

Point 1 actually implies that Bagarukayo was also an encroacher. He was actually an encroacher on this forest reserve. But here you are being told to proceed expeditiously to degazette the area occupied by Bagarukayo and his family.

Now, there are two cases of encroachers: one case of several families in Bunya and the other case - (Interruption).

MR. PINTO: Mr. Speaker, my hon. colleague has brought to light the issue where the hon. Minister went in October to give notice to vacate that forest by December.  Secondly, that there was an ISO operative who deployed our armed forces to carry out this exercise in which some people were beaten. I would like to refer to Article 209 of the Constitution, which defines the functions of the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces. It reads as follows:
“The functions of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces are- (a) to preserve and defend the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Uganda;  
(b) to co-operate with the civilian authority in emergency situations and in cases of natural disasters; (c) to foster harmony and understanding between the Defence Forces and the civilians; and 
(d) to engage in productive activities for the development of Uganda".  

In the eviction exercise, the deployment of the UPDF did not meet these criteria. It was therefore contrary to the Constitution –(Interjection).  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought the examples the hon. Member gave were to show a difference of treatment of the encroacher.  I think that is the purpose, but proceed.

MR. MWANDHA: Mr. Speaker, in the first scenario, families are given three hours and our soldiers are used to evict them from a forest reserve, where they were regarded as encroachers, without an alternative! Maybe Government should have moved those fellows from that forest reserve and taken them to another place. 

In the second scenario, you have another encroacher, who is using the forest illegally, and in that case, they say they must expeditiously – expeditiously, note that - degazette the area so that he can actually use it legally. Then they say if you find that you must find another area for a forest reserve, use Government land owned by UPDF. This is an alternative that was not availed to other groups of Ugandans.  

Furthermore, Document 5 is addressed to Engineer Kabanda, Permanent Secretary Ministry of Lands, from the Solicitor General. The Solicitor General is the man responsible for advising this Government on legal issues. He immediately says in his letter “degazetting land in favour of Mzee Erinesti Bagarukayo”.  Incidentally, when the Rt. hon. Prime Minister attempted to support this case, he was informed in this House that actually Bagarukayo was occupying the five square miles. I have gathered information from members of the Committee that actually Bagarukayo was occupying only 500 hectares adjacent to the reserve. And in addition- (Interruption)

MR. ERESU: Mr. Speaker, hon. Pinto has just read out to us the functions of the UPDF.  I seek clarification from the hon. Minister for Defence - (Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Member, we are not dealing with Defence. We are dealing with forests.

MR. ERESU:  Sorry, I withdraw, Mr. Speaker, but I still seek clarification from the Member holding the Floor as to what action is to be taken on Lt. Rwabwogo for misusing UPDF in the process of degazetting the forest.

MR. MWANDHA: I would like to thank the hon. Member for that clarification, and I would like to assure him that if I had powers, I would have taken action that would have satisfied the hon. Member. But here is a letter from Kabatsi to Kabanda and he says: 
“DEGAZETTING LAND IN FAVOUR OF MZEE ERINESTI BAGARUKAYO.  I refer to our telephone conversation of yesterday (M/S Kabatsi/Kabanda) concerning the directive to degazette five square miles of land occupied by Mzee Bagarukayo in Kigweri, Ngoma…” In fact, the Solicitor General got his facts wrong. According to the information I have gathered from members of the Committee, Bagarukayo had only 500 hectares adjacent to the reserve.  Therefore, to say that he was occupying it was wrong. The best he could have said is ‘that was being encroached by Bagarukayo.’  

The letter goes on to say:
“For the reasons I explained to you in our telephone conversation and following a report to H.E. the President by Col. Kiiza Besigye. I have received a directive from State House in writing, a copy of which is enclosed herewith, that the degazetting of the area of Kamusenene Forest Reserve occupied by the family of Mzee Bagarukayo be expeditiously done…”  

Now, I do not know whether the Committee was able to meet the Solicitor General and find out about the conversation the Solicitor General had with the Permanent Secretary, Kabanda. But I leave that one maybe for the chairman to explain to the House. 

The letter goes on to say: 
“I enclose herewith a draft Statutory Instrument to be signed by the Minister for that purpose. I also enclose a copy of Statutory Instrument No. 1 of 1997 in respect of Namanve Central Forest Reserve…”  

So, you see how the events are unfolding. Of course the Minister goes ahead, and without hesitation, signs a Statutory Instrument which is not dated and which has no information with regard to the sizes or the amount of land that is going to be given to Bagarukayo- (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, maybe you were away yesterday.  The Minister concerned gave information to the effect that there was actually no such thing as a Statutory Instrument. What he was exhibited in the report is the draft. You will note that that the purported Statutory Instrument has no number and it is not indicated anywhere in the gazette that it was ever published. That is the information, which was given yesterday when you were away.  May be you may take into account that information.

MR. WACHA: Mr. Speaker, I do not know whether hon. Mwandha would give me this clarification, but arising from the explanation from the Speaker -(Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I was only giving the information that had been given.

MR. WACHA: And quoting what the Minister said the other time, can hon. Mwandha maybe clarify whether the piece of land in question was degazatted or whether the Mzee we are talking about is still occupying the land illegally.

MR. BAGALANA: I would also like to know whether in this country drafts are signed.

MR. MWANDHA: I took interest in this matter and the information I have gathered from members of the Committee is that, immediately the Committee started inquiring, the process of transferring the land was actually withheld.  

With regard to the question raised by hon. Bagalana, as to whether drafts are signed, I leave that to you, Mr. Speaker. We may benefit from your legal expertise and experience since you seem to agree with the position the Government gave yesterday, but –(Interruption)   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think I have to make a correction here. I was here since yesterday, and you were not. I want to assist you by giving information, which was given to the House, so that you take into account this information when you are making your contribution on this particular issue. I do not have to agree with this and the other, I only listen and try to guide you and then it is up to you to decide to agree or not to agree. 

With regard to the question of whether a draft is signed, I think the thrust of the information was that when you talk about a statutory instrument, to be effective, it must be gazetted. In the same way, if we pass a law here and that law is assented to by the President, but it is not gazetted, that law will not be effected until it is gazetted.  So, I think according to him, draft means that it has never become a statutory instrument. I think that is the import. Proceed please.

MR. MWANDHA: Mr. Speaker, that shows that this saga brings a lot of questions in peoples’ minds as to whether even before the gazetting is done, this sort of thing should be signed. But I think the House will satisfy themselves as to whether that was the proper way of doing it or not.  

I would like to refer to Document 7. I would like to commend the courage of Deo Byarugaba, who actually ventured to give counsel in spite of all these exchanges of information from very high offices. He gave counsel as follows: 
“I am following up on my letter to you (4/46 of 31/08/99) on the above subject…” He had already written a letter but the Committee does not give us a copy of this letter – (Interruption)

MR. KWIZERA: I would like to inform the hon. Member that if he continues praising the civil servant, he could be endangering him. Thank you.

MR. MWANDHA: Well, I will take that advice, but I doubt that this would happen, in view of the very clear and transparent system of administering our civil service –(Interruption).  

DR. MAKUBUYA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Permit me to refer to Article 173 of the Constitution. It says: 
“A public officer shall not be- 
    (a) victimised or discriminated against for having performed his or her duties faithfully in accordance with this Constitution; or 
    (b) dismissed or removed from office or reduced in rank or otherwise punished without just cause.”  

In view of this protection, I do not think that the fears being raised by hon. Kwizera are valid. Thank you.

MR. MWANDHA: I would like to agree with the Minister of Education. I think the civil servant will not be victimised. If anybody does, so he will be doing it against our Constitution. But Byarugaba, in his letter to the Permanent Secretary of Lands, says: 
“It appears that State House is not aware that this issue was forwarded to you. As a result, Mr. Fox Odoi of State House has spoken to me on telephone inquiring about the action we have taken.  

The Forest Department still believes that Mr. Bagarukayo should be given a permit like other investors, although in this case, it would be a permit to graze, as provided for in the Forest Act…”  
This is very useful information based on our laws, but of course it was not followed until the Committee intervened and I think the process was withheld. 

What I want to demonstrate is that we have two scenarios in this report, the Bunya scenario and the Kamusenene scenario. In one scenario, you have so many Ugandans being evicted, being thrown away, even being beaten by the army and their huts being burnt.

MR. WAMULONGO: Thank you for giving way. I would like to inform the Member holding the Floor and this House that, apart from the two scenarios, there is yet a third scenario. In the NEMA report on the state of the environment in 1997/98, they stated that there were encroachers in Kiboga, but when they were being evicted, Government came in and stopped the evictions. Those people are still there. But when it comes to the people of Bunya, they are given only three hours to vacate! And when it comes to Mzee Bagarukayo, one individual, he is being given 5.4 square miles. So, this is a case of double standards from the Government.  Thank you.  

MR. MWANDHA: Mr. Speaker, the people of this country expect fair play from Government. It does not matter in what part of Uganda you are living. It does not matter what you look like, it does not matter what language you speak, I think fair play should not only be exercised but must be seen to be exercised.  Thank you.

DR. KASIRIVU ATWOOKI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. As you have rightly indicated, I am a Member of the Select Committee and I did a good job, as Members on the Committee will attest- (Laughter).  However, yesterday as we were going out, I was attacked and my life was threatened by hon. Kajura. He said, he would deal with me. And considering that I am at a tender age and I have young children, I take a statement coming from an elder person like hon. Kajura, who is surviving and struggling for political life, very seriously. I thought it was a joke, but he continued saying that Beatrice Byenkya and I would see. I reported the matter to the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister and this morning, to the Minister of Internal Affairs. But I have got many calls this morning threatening me. I take that very seriously, and I thought I should inform this Parliament. Thank you.

MR. KAJURA: Mr. Speaker, it is true I met Dr. Kasirivu and I told him that I the information I had received was that he and his colleague were behind fomenting what was going on, and that was not interesting, because we come from the same family. I asked him what the problem was and I did not threaten him.

MR. DICK NYAI: Mr. Speaker, whereas I loath to stop the hon. Minister in his explanation of what happened, is the hon. Minister in order to say that the Select Committee report is ‘fomenting’? What are we fomenting as a Select Committee? Is he in order to use that word in regard to a Select Committee report, which is based on evidence received from the people?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, as far as I am concerned, and from what I have heard from the Minister, there was no reference to the report, but to something. So, whether it is report or something else, I do not know. Maybe you should seek clarification from him as to what he said. But as of now, he has not referred to the Select Committee’s report. 

MR. KAJURA:  Yes, Mr. Speaker, I was not referring to the report nor was I referring to what is going on in the House. You would have read in the papers yesterday that there was a move to censure me, and this is outside this House, although moved by the MPs. This is what I was referring to.  Thank you. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr. Ayumu Akaki): I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee for its interim report, and particularly for the effort they put in to come out with it.  

When you look at this report, you will find very important recommendations that have far reaching implications on the Uganda Wildlife Authority. In some cases, the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry is mentioned. These are contained on pages 7,9,18,23,26 and 86. I will refer to one of them. On page 23, it is stated thus:  
“…the Committee recommends that the forests currently located in wildlife conservation areas be controlled by the Forests Department, which is the lead agency as defined under the Uganda Wildlife Statute”   

Currently, Uganda Wildlife Authority controls the wildlife conservation areas. I would have thought that recommendation that touches on two different two different Ministries, would of necessity call for consultation form both Ministries. We imagine that both Ministries should have been given an opportunity to express an opinion. I wish to put on record that the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry was not at any one time consulted on this. Since this is an interim report, before the final report is eventually worked out, I am appealing to the Committee to give an opportunity to the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry to put its case forward. We should put our case forward to justify continued management of protected areas under Uganda Wildlife Authority.  

When they talk about controlling forests in the wildlife conservation areas, recognition should be given to the fact that wildlife includes wild trees, wild plants and wild animals. It is not only restricted to wild animals. Any species native to Uganda is actually wildlife. Species of plants and animals –(Interruption)

MR. SEMBAJJA: I thank the hon. Minister for giving way. I wish to inform him and the hon. Members, that the Committee found some difficulties when a certain function of the forest management, under wildlife, was left to the Department of Forestry. This function includes the issuing of licenses to take forest produce, originating from wildlife controlled forest areas. 

When the Committee interviewed the Director of Wildlife Authority, he informed the Committee that he had a problem of eliminating timber from the wildlife controlled forest reserves, because first of all, he did not have the numbering hammer. It is within the law to number the timber. He also did not have a license to take forest produce. 

As a result of the above, when the timber tracking team from the Forestry Department was going around to get people cutting trees or making timber without licenses, they found a problem! They could not identify which timber originated from the forest reserve under the Forest Department and which timber originated from forests controlled by the Wildlife Authority. That is why there should be a harmonized solution so that what the hon. Minister is talking about can be put to rest. Otherwise, if the matter is left –(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Member, I think his main complaint is that his Ministry should have been involved in the probe, but it was never contacted. That was his main complaint. 

MR.TOSKIN:  Mr. Speaker, I also want to inform the Minister and the Members that, during our Committee work, we did interview the Executive Director of the Uganda Wildlife Authority. His view was that they were finding problems in dealing with the movement of forest products, because the Forest Department, on the other side, also had their own work. He actually, recommended that this matter should be harmonised. Also, during the course of our interviews, we realised that Uganda Wildlife Authority does not seem to have the competence to manage forest activities. That is why we came up with that recommendation.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

MR. AYUMU AKAKI: I thank you. What I am requesting for is to be given an opportunity to be heard. When you recommend that the control of forests in protected areas should be given to the Forest Department, you are not harmonizing anything! You cannot harmonise without listening to both sides.  We have all got an interest in that, and that is all I am calling for –(Interruption) 

MR. PINTO: Mr. Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from the hon. Minister. Is he aware that contacts had been made with a director from his Ministry? If so, wasn’t that fair representation of the Ministry in terms of the implementers of the activities of Government? Secondly, when my colleague talks about harmonisation, is it harmonising policy matters or is it harmonising operational matters? Could the Minister clarify to me please?

MR. MWANDHA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Committee is recommending that they complete the terms of reference. Would the Minister be happy if we recommended that as the inquiry proceeds, from now onwards, his Ministry should be involved a bit more than it was in the first part of the investigation? If he agrees, then that does not become a contentious matter. We can proceed with other matters.  Thank you.  

MR. AKAKI: Mr. Speaker, I have no quarrel with having a technical person, an implementer, being interviewed by the Committee. What we are talking about is the issue being addressed. The recommendation being given here touches on political leadership and policy. As a matter of policy, I thought the political leadership of the Ministry should have been given a hearing, and that is what I am asking for.  So, in that respect, we are saying we would wish to participate when the final decision is being made. I think that should answer your question. 

I only want to make two more general observations. My plea has been that we be given an opportunity. Now, I would like this House to recognise that the ecological, economic and operational justification for turning the forest ecosystems of Kibale, Semiliki, Bwindi, Rwenzori, and Mount Elgon as National Parks, way back in 1991-1993, was in recognition of certain problems that were being faced at the time. Those problems are now being addressed by the statutory body I have mentioned. If there was any weakness the Committee saw in that body, I guess there would have been a way of addressing it, without necessarily taking the responsibility away from them. 

I would also like to observe that when you make a comparison between the state of the above mentioned forests way back in 1990 and now in 2000, there is clear evidence that the Parliamentary (NRC) decision of that day, to turn these areas into National Parks under the control of Uganda Wildlife Authority, was a very sound one and did not warrant a reversal. I would like to give a very simple example. Take the case of Bwindi, where a half of the population of gorillas is, if you take the control of the forest in Bwindi to a different forest department and yet the control of the gorillas is with Uganda Wildlife Authority, I see a lot of complications. I see complications in carrying out a kind of decision where permission must be sought from the Forest Department as to whether the gorillas should be allowed to stay there, for example, or things like that. Definitely, there is going to be a problem with the operational matters –(Interruption).

MR. PINTO: Let us clarify this, Mr. Speaker. I know we have one Government of Uganda, which has different Ministries, but one cornerstone I know is that Government operates inter-departmentally. Inter-Ministerial functions overlap each other.  Why is this Minister belabouring on this issue here with us? We expect Government to harmonise its operations. These are civil servants employed by one entity and they are assigned responsibilities. It is not really the role of Parliament to demarcate Ministries and their functions. We want harmonious co-existence.  Why is this Minister labouring this point to the extent that he wants us now to reverse certain issues?  

First of all, when he talks about what happened in the NRC, that was before the coming into force of the Constitution. Since then, we have been harmonising according to the Constitution. Does he find difficulty in receiving co-ordinated support and supervision from the Office of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, so that he now comes to cry out for help from us because he finds one department cannot work with the other? May I seek his clarification?

BRIG. KYALIGONZA: I am seeking further clarification from the Minister. He has told this House that there are certain problems, but this ambiguity within the House is a bit dangerous. You talk about certain problems, but if you need any help from this House, you should at least assist us to understand what these ‘certain problems’ are. These problems must be specific and understood.  As hon. Pinto puts it, we need also to understand whether there is no inter-Ministerial relationship in terms of working on policies.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it your view that these pleas are presented in the wrong forum?  I think let the Minister wind up.

MR. AKAKI: Mr. Speaker, I had only one point to make and I have made the point. My point was on my plea to be consulted, and for the Minister to express a view on a decision. The recommendation being made here affects the Ministry, which affects a statutory body under the Ministry. It is not that Government does not know how to harmonise. Indeed, the two Ministries are already talking, trying to harmonise the position, but now that it has come out in the report, I have got to make a comment for purposes of the record in Parliament. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Minister, do you want to say something?   

MR. AKIKA: I would like, Mr. Speaker, to seek some guidance from you.  I have not contributed to this debate but I wanted to move some resolutions to be adopted as part of the Chairman’s report if the Chairman accepts. I would like to be guided by the Chair on how I could go about it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: First of all, I was trying to sort out whether the Minister responsible for the subject had something to say, but apparently, it seems he does not have. As for what you want, these are recommendations, because there is a motion on this report. If you think there is something you want to change or something you want to add, then you can move your motion. We shall see how to go about it before we end. If there is no such thing, then I will put the question to the original motion as it stands. But if you think you want to do something about it, it is your right to do so. 

THE MINISTER OF WATER, LANDS AND ENVIRONMENT (Mr. Kajura Henry): I thank you, Mr. Speaker. Most of the issues have been debated and perhaps it would not be right to repeat what has been said. Let me make one comment about what is regarded as political interference. I do not think Ministers are just there to sit and wait for civil servants to advise them all the time. And I do not think they are supposed to always act in accordance with that advice. For example, I flew over Budongo forest and I noticed the extensive destruction of the forest. When I returned to Kampala, I had a discussion with the Commissioner. I told him that the forest had been very severely depleted and yet the officers had been in the area for the last 11 years. So, I asked him whether it would not be a good idea to remove these officers and put others. We were not recommending a demotion but giving a suggestion to put fresh blood to look after a difficult situation. Now, this is not political interference, in my view. 

I believe that Ministers have a right to express a view and to make a recommendation. As long as one is not asking for a demotion, one is not asking for a dismissal, because these are issues for the Public Service Commission. But a question of transfer is a matter, which is administrative. 

On the issue that our colleague has brought up, I do see some problem. Without wanting to influence the chairman and the Committee, perhaps you could accept us to implement the same law in both the Forestry and Wildlife Departments. We can do this so that the concepts of preservation, which are exercised in Forestry, are also exercised in the Wildlife Department. The two agents can harmonise and implement the same law, but this is a suggestion, which the Committee might want to consider. In that way, we shall resolve the problem.  

There have been a lot of discussions about the Statutory Instrument. Yesterday I spent some time explaining how that instrument came about. I looked at it in a hurry as I was in the process of travelling to Geneva to attend a meeting on forest conservation. So, I called the Permanent Secretary and told him that I had signed that document but there were gaps, and when he gets the relevant information, since the matter is urgent, he will fill in the rest. 

Now, as it happened, there were problems, and therefore, by the time I returned, nothing had moved. Because of the various views, which had been expressed by the Commissioner of Forestry and by various people on how this matter could be handled, we decided to put a halt to it. So, it is not a legal document because if it was a legal document, we would have completed it and sent it back to the Solicitor General, who would have gazetted it.  At that stage, it would have acquired legality. So, in effect, there is no doubt that the land has not been degazetted as yet. 

I have the view of the Solicitor General and I would like to read it out. “The view that the statutory instrument is improper at law and fraud is not legally correct. Signing the instrument does not in itself make it valid in law. After signing the instrument, the same should have been forwarded to the Solicitor General to authorise publication in the gazette, subsequent to which, the instrument would be given a number and published in the gazette. In the circumstance the above steps were not exhausted, the instrument signed by the Minister is incomplete and therefore of no legal effect. The legal position is that the land in question has never been de-gazetted, it is still part of the forest reserve.  Consequently, the issue of the instrument being improper at law and fraud does not arise.”  So, I would like to tender this as documentary evidence.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the date of that letter?

MR. KAJURA: 1st August, because I sought his view. It is addressed to the Permanent Secretary.

MR.PINTO: With due respect, in terms of procedure, which should have come first? I can understand a situation where an error was committed and from that point of view, maybe a word of apology would suffice. But, if we go on to justify ourselves then I would like to ask which of the procedural steps would have come first. Should it have been de-gazetting before seeking the Solicitor General’s guidance to make sure that we are within the law or signing first and then de-gazetting and applying the law later? May I be clarified? And if there were a simple, shortcut apology that there was an error, it would be welcome and accepted.

MR. WACHA: Mr. Speaker, you asked for the date of the letter, and I heard him say 1st August, I would like to know which year.	

MR. KAJURA: The year of our Lord 2000, -(Laughter)- may I continue?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the clear issue now is that you cannot talk about de-gazetting that particular portion of land. So, the position is as it was before these procedures were started. I think hon. Wacha asked a question but it was never answered. He asked about the current status of the person who was meant to benefit from de-gazetting the area. I think that is something that you have to clarify.

MR. KAJURA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The word used is ‘status quo prevails’. In other words, the position has not changed because there has not been any de-gazetting. He was a bona fide tenant, that is the position in my view, and this has not changed.  

Let me also repeat what I said yesterday. When I met the Committee, I did not indicate that there were very serious consultations going on. Indeed, there were consultations going on and I was supposed to report to the Committee.  However, because I went away for a few days, by the time I came back, the report had been produced. So, that is what has been going. No land has been de-gazetted and no land has been allocated to Mzee Bagarukayo –(Interruption).

MR. MWANDHA: When the Minister says the status quo prevails, is he saying that the process of degazetting is in progress while Mzee Bagarukayo continues to encroach on the forest reserve?  We want some clarification.

MR. KAJURA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This issue is being actively pursued and I would suggest that this process be allowed to take its course. There are many views, recommendations and alternatives that are being proposed and that need to be taken into account. This is in addition to the fact that Bagarukayo has been living in the area for sometime, and as the Prime Minister explained, he was there even before the land was gazetted as a forest -(Interjection).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Minister, the concern, as I detect from these questions, is that there is a legal position. I think that is what you called the status quo. The legal position is as it was, even up to now. 

There is Mzee Bagarukayo who is on the land, and who may have been told that these things have been worked out and he can stay. There is also the Ministry concerned with forests, your Ministry, and there is a law it is supposed to enforce. These Members may now start questioning what have you done with the person who is illegally on the land. Why do you not evict him? These are problems that actually require solutions.

The Mzee will say, ‘no, I was told to stay and therefore I have been prejudiced, you cannot evict me.’ The forest people may say, ‘but what does the law say’. This is the concern, which I think requires clarification from you, so that Mzee also stays on the land without fear that the officials of the Ministry will go and evict him. Can you please clarify?

BRIG. KYALIGONZA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I wish to apologise to the hon. Minister for interfering with his deliberation. I only want clarification on an issue, which fortunately, the Speaker has made clear. 

I appreciate that the Minister has been under administrative pressure that caused him to sign a blank instrument because he had to abide by the instructions of his superior. At the same time, I feel a bit uneasy when I hear him say that the status quo has gone back to the original one and yet there is an administrative problem.  The Minister was asked by His Excellency the President to ensure that Mzee Bagarukayo gets his problems sorted out, and this consequently caused him to sign this open document, trying to of course beat time, as he was hurrying to go away. Of course he went, knowing very well that there were other Ministers who would have done it in his absence. 

What is the situation going to be now? The status quo is going to remain the same and His Excellency the President, who instructed him to help this old man, is now going to bring out further contradictions. How does he intend to sort out his contradictions with his boss, because he was acting in consonance with the instructions from his boss?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think all clarifications are zeroing on one thing, i.e. what is the position? Would you please answer, hon. Minister.

MR. KAJURA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The position is that nothing has changed. A recommendation has been made and is still being studied and reviewed, and consultations are still being held. So, he is still on the land, he has not been removed from the land, and a decision will soon be made.  Thank you.

MR. MWANDHA: Mr. Speaker, among other things, is the Minister going to consider the advice given to him by his Commissioner, Byarugaba?  

MR. KAJURA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I already indicated that there are many views and alternative approaches that have been voiced. These consultations involve the views of the department and the views of other people. These views include the fact that the man is still on the land and has made some developments, et cetera.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we have exhausted clarifications on this issue. He has said that the status quo prevails and you all know the status quo. What else do you really expect him to say?

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, I am seeking some clarification from the Minister. Having listened to his response, I am a little bit perturbed. The Minister is aware that in his capacity as Minister, there are statutory instruments he has to follow when running the affairs of the Ministry. Did he respond to the President's demand simply because the President is the Head of State?  Does he not have principles when acting?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I have already ruled that there is no statutory instrument. So, do not refer to a statutory instrument because it is not there. He has nothing to say about a statutory instrument because there is none. 

The position is that the statutory instrument that was issued, maybe in 60s, is the instrument controlling that particular issue. At the same time, he has told you that there is somebody on the land. That is all. That is the status quo. If he says he is illegally there, then that is different. You have asked the Ministry concerned whether they are going to evict, and they have said no, they are looking into this matter to regularise it. That is the position the Minister gave. Forget about the statutory instrument because it is not there. 

MR. AKIKA OTHIENO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  As a way of concluding what is embedded in this report, I beg to move a motion for adoption of a resolution of Parliament to constitute part of this report. And this motion is also for purposes of expeditiously implementing the recommendations of the report. I wish to go ahead and read the resolution. 

Having received and considered the report of the Select Committee on the Forestry Department and taking into account the debate in this House; 
This House Recognises the strategic importance of the Forestry Department in the economy, and notes the disappointing mismanagement in the Forestry Department; 
Committed to putting an end to the mismanagement in the Forestry Department; 
Now therefore, the Parliament of Republic of Uganda duly convened, constituted and sitting in Kampala on this 2nd day of August 2000 do resolve as follows:
    1. The Forest Act be amended expeditiously as recommended by the Select Committee report.
    2. The Minister in charge of the Forestry Department presents to Parliament immediately a detailed time frame within which to complete the process of establishing – (Interruption)   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Excuse me, there was a motion for adoption of a report, which included certain recommendations. Are you adding or removing? What is happening?

MR. AKIKA OTHIENO: I am moving a resolution to be adopted by Parliament so that we specifically ensure that those recommendations are implemented. This includes the ones that are already in the report. We are just adding to what is in the report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, you want to amend the recommendations by adding?

MR. AKIKA OTHIENO: Exactly.

MR. MWANDHA: Mr. Speaker, I think there is a procedural problem. In my view, the Mover of the motion should have been given an opportunity to wind up before we consider adoption of the motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is no such thing, because he is now contributing by saying that he has read the report and found out that it lacks this, if we do it, the report will be perfect. It is perfect, but he is adding something so that we look at the entire motion together with his suggestions. I think that is what he is doing. Have you contacted the Committee chairperson? 

MR. AKIKA OTHIENO: Mr. Speaker, I have made consultations with the Committee Chairman and other members of the Committee and we are in agreement.

MR.MWESIGE: Mr. Speaker, he did consult, but I would have expected to be given an opportunity to wind up and then he moves the motion for a resolution to adopt the recommendations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before you wind up, he interrupted because he had studied your report and maybe that is the spirit in which he is bringing in this matter. But since it is about lunchtime, I suggest that the hon. Member and the Committee Chairperson wait, so that at the end of the day when we come back, you bring us one consolidated resolution.

So, with this, we end this morning’s sitting. The House is adjourned until 2.00 p.m. to enable the two people sort this out. 

(The House rose at 12.36 and adjourned to 2.00p.m)

(On resumption at 2.38 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAEKR: I do not see hon. Othieno, but since the chairperson is here, let him please tell us the position now. 

MR. MWESIGE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have agreed that hon. Akika moves the motion amending some of the recommendations of the report, and after that, I will wind up.  Thank you.

MR. AKIKA OTHIENO: Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that Parliament adopts the resolution, which I am going to read, in respect of the report that has been presented to the House. 
Having received and considered the report of the Select Committee on the Forestry Department and taking into account the debate in this House; 

This House; Recognises the strategic importance of the Forestry Department in the economy, and notes the disappointing mismanagement in the Forestry Department; 
Committed to putting an end to the mismanagement in the Forestry Department; 
Now therefore, the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda duly convened, constituted and sitting in Kampala on this 2nd day of August 2000 do resolve as follows:
    1. The Forestry Act be amended expeditiously as recommended by the Select Committee report;

    2. The Minister in charge of the Forestry Department presents to Parliament immediately a detailed time frame within which to complete the process of establishing the Forestry Authority;

    3. That the Executive follows up specific instances of abuse of Office, leading to financial loss with a view to recover the monies from the persons responsible in accordance with Article 164 (2) of the Constitution;
 
    4. That the executive reports to the House action taken in respect of the above within three months from the adoption of this report;

    5.  That Parliament deplores the process by which the Minister of Water, Lands and Environment was proceeding to degazette Kamusenene Forest Reserve, the confusion, mishaps and political interference in the administration of the forestry sector and in accordance with the Committee recommendation, the Minister takes political responsibility.

    6. That Government spells out new policies relating to degazetting forest reserves in the country, awarding of concessions, and reports to Parliament within three months from the adoption of this report.

    7. That all cases of interdiction should be forwarded expeditiously to the Public Service Commission for appropriate action;

    8. Registers its appreciation to the chair and members of the Committee for the thorough investigation of the Forestry Department; and grants permission to extend the life span of the Committee by two months in order to finalise investigation on the remaining terms of reference. 

    9. That the demarcations for the South Busoga Forest Reserve be done for once and for all, so that the communities around get to know the clear demarcations. 

I beg to move, Mr. Speaker.

It is because of the importance of the Forestry sector and forests as a natural resource that this House deemed it important that a Select Committee be put in place to look into the affairs of mismanagement as reported in newspapers and the public outcry. Now that we have gone through the report and come out with some glaring evidence of mismanagement, I feel it important to have a resolution that will enable the Executive implement the decision of this House. 

The manner, in which the forestry sector has been managed, as Members will agree, leaves a lot to be desired. It needs immediate re-organisation. The kind of political interference that has encroached on the sector has left many workers in the forestry sector uncertain of the future. Therefore, their performance ability has been greatly affected.

You will also note that the establishment of a forestry authority has been delayed for too long. And it is important that this is put in place. I do not know what the Ministry is doing, but I am also told that this should have been in place by the end of last month, that is July 2000. I do not know how far they have gone, but I think it is time that this House urges the Ministry responsible for the forestry sector to expeditiously set up a forestry authority.  

One of the main concerns of most Members is encroachment on forests, and then the de-gazetting of forests and allocation to individuals. Is it the practice of this Government to de-gazette forests at will and dish out land to individuals? Is it possible that any person can benefit from such an act of de-gazetting and then dishing out the forests? What is the criteria being used for de-gazetting forest reserves and giving them to individuals?  In future, it will be imperative to put up clear policies that will spell out the methods being used to de-gazette forests and how private individuals can benefit. 

The case of the man who was referred to in this report seems to have been misunderstood by some of our colleagues. The issue is not that we are blaming State House for having directed that Mr. Bagarukayo be given a piece of land, the concern of most Members is the manner in which the whole process was handled by the responsible Minister. It left a lot of questions. A blank cheque was signed for anybody to do whatever he or she wanted to do with it. Is this how Government Ministries operate? We got clarification to the effect that this was a mere draft, and no forest reserve as yet has been de-gazetted.  But then the issue is, if the Minister was leaving the country on official duty, did he carry his office with him? Responsibilities must be shared. This kind of selfishness is not allowed. 

In every Ministry there is more than one Minister, and in any case, if there was only one Minister, someone else could have been assigned the duty of holding that portfolio while the Minister was away. But to present an argument here that because I was running away I had to sign a blank cheque and leave it behind so that whoever wanted would just fill it at will, I think, leaves a lot to be desired. It is not a proper working method. If only one could lift the veil to see what was intended beyond the veil. We could only be speculating too many things, which I do not want to speculate here.  

Also, there are double standards expressed in the Busoga query, why can they also not be allocated part of the de-gazetted land in South Busoga? What is so special with this Mr. Bagarukayo? I know that so many people contributed to the struggle, like hon. Kwizera said yesterday, but have they all been rewarded in this way?  Is the reward for struggling in terms of de-gazetting forests and giving them pieces of land? Could they have not bought Mr. Bagarukayo land elsewhere? Could we have not demarcated part of Karamoja and given Mr. Bagarukayo, since he keeps animals, to join fellow pasturalists?

MR. ILUKORI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I thank the hon. Member for giving way. I would like to inform him that Karamoja has no land. According to the records, two thirds of that land is actually a reserve, therefore, we do not have land of our own.

MR. AKIKA OTHIENO: I thank you, hon. colleague, for giving me that information. The point I am trying to make is that the newspapers have always advertised acres and acres of land, which is not forest reserve, could Government or whoever wanted to reward Bagarukayo, have given him money to buy this land which is being advertised? Could they not come to Budama and buy that land, which we have? We should have a most harmonious way of rewarding our combatants or people who supported us in the struggle without necessarily injuring others. It would appear, like an hon. Member said here last week, some people have been left to doom and poverty and even land is not theirs, as manifested by the Basoga who were chased away from the forest reserve.  

A lot has been said, but I would like to call upon Members to support this resolution so that if it is not implemented by whoever is supposed to do it, we can question that. I beg to move.

MR.SEMBAJJA SULAIMAN (Bukomansimbi County, Masaka): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am seconding the resolution because we are dealing with a sector, which is very rich and which has a lot of influence on the GDP of this country.  We are dealing with a sector, which has a big influence on the climatic conditions of this country. This sector affects the modernisation of agriculture. We are dealing with a sector, which has a bigger influence on the climatic conditions of this country, bearing in mind that there is a lot of soil erosion that has culminated in a lot of landslides in the various parts of this country. We are also dealing with a sector, which has a bearing on the wildlife, the fauna and the flora of this country. This is a sector where Government has put in almost only 10 percent of our budgeted resources. They have relied mainly on donor funds. We are dealing with a sector where we want to influence Government to put in place a law that was enacted in 1964, and since then, that law has become obsolete.  

We want to impress it on Government that as we drive throughout the country, we see a lot of bear hills right from Mbarara. All those bare hills that are not attended to are causing a lot of disasters like what we heard yesterday, where Government has to keep on feeding people because of desertification. That is a result of de-forestation of the area. 

This resolution touches on the fundamental human rights of the effected people, some of whom have been interdicted. At least one of them has been interdicted for the last six years, and he has been getting half his salary for the last six years, and his fate is not known. We are also dealing with very senior people, who have suffered under this interdiction and whose fate is not known. I pray that all the processes are carried out so that we have a quick and speedy action on those people’s cases. They may have otherwise not had the opportunity to explain themselves. They may have thought it is Parliament to come in and assist them so that they know their fate. I would like the Public Service Commission to realise and follow the guidelines as laid down. A person should not be interdicted for more than six months. We should realise that these people have suffered more than enough and they should be either exonerated or brought to book.

A lot has been said, and I think we want to put the Law into place. We want this Committee to continue with its work so that they can carry out on-the-spot inspections. The Committee can go out in the field to visit various private forests, which they have not done. The Committee can go out to the field to look at the private saw-millers and they can reach those areas, which are badly effected.  The areas in question are the mountains in Sebei, Kapchorwa, Budongo and Moyo. The Committee can do this in order to help Government harmonise and make sure that, what we normally sing as the national tree planting day, can be effectively implemented by Government. And they also encourage the Government to put in more money and not leave the forest sector to the donors. Once donors leave, then the sector will collapse. Government should also harmonize the relationship between the Wildlife Authority and the Ministry concerned.  

With those remarks, the Committee should be given three months in order to continue investigating the six projects, which were not fully brought up by this report, and to find out how money was utilised, to their satisfaction. I beg to stop here and support the motion.  Thank you. 

MR.ONGOM ABSOLOM (Omoro County, Gulu) Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to support the resolution, but I have two comments to make. One, the Mover of the motion, hon. Akika Othieno, did say that we are not necessarily blaming State House for giving a directive for a forest to be given out to an individual. That statement surprises me. Surely, if State House gives a wrong directive, why should they not be blamed? Who is this State House which can give any directives and go away scot-free yet other people who give wrong directives must be blamed? If we have to blame anyone, we should blame everybody who had a part to play this exercise, including State House.

Secondly, I want clarification on resolution five, which says: 
“That Parliament deplores the process by which the Minister of Water, Lands and Environment was proceeding to degazette Kamusenene Forest Reserve, the confusion, mishaps and political interference in the administration of the Forestry Sector and in accordance with the Committee recommendation, the Minister takes political responsibility.” I want clarification on this. What exactly do we want the Minister to do? What does taking political responsibility mean? Can those who are moving the resolution make this clear to us?  And who is going to make sure that the Minister takes political responsibility? I think this area should be clarified, otherwise, I support the resolution. Thank you very much.  

MAJ. KAZOORA: Mr. Speaker, these recommendations are raising out of the report of the Select Committee, which were exhaustively debated. I thought that we could go recommendation by recommendation so that Members raise objections where they are not satisfied, instead of opening up a general debate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That will be okay. If you think you agreed with the report’s recommendations, you need not say much, because you extensively debated the motion. But you can raise something like what hon. Ongom raised on resolution 5.

MR. RUZINDANA: I think resolution number 5 is badly phrased. I think you should put a fullstop after ‘Forest Reserve’. The next sentence should be another number, because it is referring to something completely different. Putting this part together with the first part of the sentence creates confusion. I do not know whether other Members feel the same.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So you are suggesting that we should split it? 

MR. RUZINDANA:  Yes.

MR. AKIKA OTHIENO: Mr. Speaker, I want to clarify. This is a continuation of the acts by the Minister. And, of course, the political responsibility stated at the end, is to be taken for all these acts. What is being deplored is right from the improper process to the confusion and the political interference. And for all those, the Minister must take political responsibility.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But was the interference only in Kamusenene?

MR. AKIKA OTHIENO: The interference apparently appears in all these actions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes. That is why he is saying that the statement ending at ‘Kamusenene Forest Reserve’ concerns a different forest. But there is political interference in the administration of forests all over the country. That is why, I think, he wants it to be a different paragraph. 

MR.PINTO MANUEL (Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Like my colleague who has spoken before, I would like to support this resolution. But I would like to point out something on resolution 2, which reads as follows:
“The Minister in-charge of the Forestry Department presents to Parliament immediately a detailed time frame within which to complete the process of establishing the Forest Authority.”  

You will realise that I belong to the Natural Resources Committee. For a long time, we have been debating with the Ministry about an emerging conflict. We have seen the desire, by the Minister of State, to establish a Directorate in the Ministry and yet at the same time, Government is promoting the establishment of a Forest Authority under the Minister in-charge of the Environment and Forestry. Our Committee rejected this. I hope it does not get budgetary approval. 

The Minister is trying to influence the establishment of a Directorate in his Ministry and at the same time, we are talking about a fully-fledged Forest Authority. I find this very contradictory. It can cause conflicts. Earlier on today, we saw this emerging here, when the Minister of Wildlife tried to see how he could fit in the Forest Department.  I think this is an issue where we need to caution Government that deliberate failures inherent in these structures will eventually cause problems.

Secondly, while this looks like a matter that has been well and thoughtfully reported on, I would like to say that I observed three instances in this investigation, in which the Constitution was contravened. The first was the deployment of UPDF forces that was not called for according to Article 209 of the Constitution. The second is Article 173, where the human rights of our colleagues, the civil servants, were abused and trampled over by these interdictions, without going through the Public Service Commission. The other is Article 237, which clearly lays down the manner in which Government can deal with land. Article 237(2)(a) says:
“the Government or local government may, subject to Article 26 of this Constitution, acquire land in the public interest; and the conditions governing such acquisition shall be as prescribed by Parliament.”  

Under this Article, Government had the option to come and say they wanted to acquire such land and gazette it.  

Article 273 (2) (b) says:
“the Government or a local government as determined by Parliament by law, shall hold in trust for the people and protect, natural lakes, rivers, wetlands, forest reserves…” and here we say Government now is saying the status-quo remains.  

We have seen a situation where the Minister stands up and says the status-quo remains. In other words, while in contravention of this Article, Government is upholding an illegality. Some corrective action has to be taken. I applaud my colleagues for the report, I applaud my colleagues for the resolution, but we should observe that just in one instance, three contraventions of the Constitution are inherent in the performance of Government.  This is not good enough. 

MR.WAMBUZI GAGAWALA (Bulamogi County, Kamuli): Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for allowing me making a few comments on this resolution by hon. Akika Othieno and hon. Sembajja Sulaiman. Resolution 1 is talking about the Forest Act to be amended expeditiously as recommended by the Select Committee. I do not know what sort of time frame he is talking about when he says expeditiously. If it is going to take one or two years, maybe by that time 50 per cent of Lake Kyoga would have disappeared. 

I think the first thing to do is not to degazette forests but to gazette new forests. What should be expeditiously done is to stop degazetting forests for public use. We should instead gazette more forests, because, unless we plant more forests quickly, even what we call Lake Kyoga is going to be history, because it is disappearing. Lake Victoria is also disappearing. What is happening on the slopes of Mt. Masaba and Mt. Rwenzori is because a lot of tree cover is being pruned from those mountains and is causing slitting of the lower lands.  Therefore, when the fish you hope to harvest L. Kyoga and L. Victoria disappears, even this 400 million dollars you hope to get per year is not going to be realised. So, urgent action must be taken to stop any degazetting of forests, to stop harvesting trees immediately, and to start planting trees.   

The people of Busoga are certainly very unhappy about what has been going on with their land. We have lost about 20,000 acres of Kakira Sugar Estates to the Government of Uganda. The Lukiiko is right now receiving nothing, and yet the Basoga gave this land to the Madhvani family on credit. Now when we hear that, even more forest is being degazetted so that Madhvani uses it for a sugar estate, we really start wondering. We start wondering whether these people were brought by the muzungu to come and just destroy Busoga! It is not amusing us!  Bunya was initially overpopulated by Basoga - (Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, we agreed that we are now dealing with these specific resolutions. Why do you not deal with that?  

MR. WAMBUZI: Mr. Speaker, I am not debating, I am expanding on the resolution, which says that the Forest should be amended expeditiously. There should be a time frame because there are issues which are going to cause us problems five to ten years from today, if we do not address them with vigour and within a limited time frame.   So, when we talk about the Forest Act being amended, we must put a time frame. We must say, for example, within six months, this law must be amended in favour of the people of Busoga, particularly the people of Bulamogi where the desert is taking off.  

Resolution 6 says that Government should spell out new policies relating to degazetting of the forest reserves.  Again, I say we should not talk about degazetting. We should talk about gazetting more forests. So, the issue of trying to encourage more degazetting should be completely ruled out of this list of resolutions. 
Those are the few items where we have a very problem. Bunya is being robbed from the Basoga and is being handed over to Madhvani. This sort of thing should be stopped!  Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON, SELECT COMMITTEE ON FORESTRY DEPARTMENT (Mr. Mwesige Adolf): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank the Members of this House, who have contributed to the motion and to the report, for their useful contribution and input. I am not going to repeat what has been voiced on the Floor, but I will just look at the issues of contention that have remained unresolved, so that the House can meaningfully pronounce itself.

Our report highlighted the importance of forestry in this country. From page 6 to page 8, we show the importance of forests, from how they impact the economy to how they affect the environment. Therefore, forests are very important to this country and every Ugandan has cause to worry about their depletion.

On the policy, the Committee, as stated in the report, did appreciate the efforts of the Ministry in trying to design the policy on forests. We did also look at the weakness in the current policy and we advised Government to come out with a comprehensive policy in the shortest time possible.  

An issue was also raised about the need for the forest cover to be over 50 per cent of land in Uganda. We commend that contribution, and we even think that forest cover should actually be more, because forest cover, in our view, has no conflict with other developments.

Concern was also raised on the social amenities that are found in forest reserves, like schools and hospitals. We have prayed for more time to go and explore and look into this issue. After two months, we shall be able to report to this House on how best the investments and developments that have been put up in the reserves can be protected without continual depletion of the forests.  

We endorse the concern on the forest law, and particularly the question of handing all the powers to the gazetted forests to the Minister. Of course, we do not agree that, at any one time, forests should be degazetted. We are saying that if need arises, the forests can be degazetted. But the question is, do we now gazette other land to compensate for that forest? We cannot say that all forests that were gazetted cannot be degazetted, because the world is changing. When degazetting takes place, there should be gazetting to replace the forest that has been degazetted.

We highlight our concerns on the law at page 26 of the report and we recommend that powers to degazette should, of course, remain with the Minister, but with the approval of Parliament. That will contain the abuses that we have reported in the Forestry Sector. We also commend and endorse our recommendation that concessions should not solely be handled by the Commission of Forestry, but a Committee on concessions should be set up to promote transparency in the award of concessions. We made that recommendation at page 27 and we maintain it.

Debate is still going on on the subject of decentralising the management of forests. When we have more time to move to the districts, we hope to get more information on whether it is viable to decentralise the management of forests.

A lot has been said about the Forest Authority, we share the views of the Members that the authority should be set up to promote efficiency in the forestry sector. But this should not be seen as something that has come to swallow up the professional forestry officers that are working in the department. They should be actively involved in the setting up of the authority, and if possible, those who qualify should be absorbed in the authority.

We note the concern of the Minister for Tourism about the conflict between the Uganda Wildlife Authority and the Forestry Department over forests that lie in national parks. When the Committee is given more time, we intend to work very closely with both the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment and the Ministry of Tourism, so that we can find a modality of harmonising the laws that are now in conflict. We shall also seek the opinion of the Attorney General on this subject.  

On the subject of interdictions, I would like to observe that this Select Committee of Parliament is a creation of a resolution of this Parliament. We did not set up ourselves. One of the terms of reference we were given was to investigate and review reports on interdictions, and we have done just that. We have not interfered at all in the work of the Public Service Commission. All that we have done is to recommend the Public Service Commission to take up the cases of interdictions. 

I agree with the motion raised by hon. Akika that cases of interdictions should go to the Public Service Commission. We agree with that and the Public Service Commission will go ahead –(Interruption)

MR. ABURA KENE: Mr. Speaker, did the Committee find out whether the proper process of interdiction was followed?   And if it was not followed, would it be proper to say that the offices were interdicted? Was the proper process of interdiction followed in their work?

MR. MWESIGE: Mr. Speaker, the process was not followed, because we have pointed out cases of officers who had remained on interdiction for six years. When we invited the Public Service Commission to give us professional guidance, they said the maximum an officer should remain on interdiction is six months. So, we found cases of six years and this worried us. So, the process of interdiction and the subsequent handling of the cases of these officers have not been proper. But as I said before, these are issues that we should leave to the Public Service Commission. They can look into these issues and find remedies or give verdicts on the evidence that they will have received. Of course, in the Constitution there is a provision for the Public Service Commission to report to Parliament once a year. These are the kinds of things that we expect in their report, when they are ready to report to us. We hope that these cases we have pointed out will also be contained in their report. 

I would like to emphasise that our recommendations are only recommendations, they are not verdicts or sentences. The power lies with the Public Service Commission, to see what they can do about each case in its own merit. However, we could not fall short of expressing our concern that the rights of some of these officers have been trampled on. This is because of the fact that an officer remained on interdiction for six years on half pay. CID had investigated some of these officers and found them innocent. Really, I think they deserved a speedy trial of their cases, so that they could know their fate. It is unfair for someone to remain blamed, he does not know his fate, he is receiving half salary, he is not working and –(Interruption)

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, I am seeking clarification with regard to what the chairperson is talking about.  Parliament is the highest Assembly in this country. During your examination of the interdicted officers, all presentations related to evil in regard to how those people were interdicted. Would it be a sign of responsibility for you to distance yourself from an action you have taken for the good of the people who are oppressed? Why do you extend that judgement? Justice should be seen to prevail!  Why extend it to a court, which is lower than your own establishment?

MR. ADOLF MWESIGE: Well, I wish the hon. Member had looked at the Constitution, because each body under the State has its mandate and its functions. Parliament does not work in isolation. Paliament works with other bodies in Government. Just like other bodies respect Parliament, Parliament must also respect other bodies. Parliament is not a court of law. Parliament is not the Public Service Commission. The Constitution, in Article 166 (2) says: “…the Public Service Commission shall be independent and shall not be subject to the direction or control of any person or authority…” 

All we can do is to give them a recommendation, they are at liberty to take our advice or not. I hope I have answered your question. As I was saying, we are just requesting the Public Service Commission to take up our concern that these cases should be expeditiously handled so that the rights of these workers can be realised.  

Some Members raised concern about other projects in the department, like the biomass project and the peri-urban project. As we have said in our report, we are asking for more time so that we can investigate these vital aspects of the Forest Sector. When we get more time, we will be able to report to Parliament on the performance of these projects. 

I would like to correct the impression raised by hon. Lukyamuzi yesterday, that this Committee shelved some allegations, which were made against State House. That allegation is not correct, because we brought all the evidence that we got about State House. We could not stretch further than the evidence that came before the Committee. If Members have read the report, they will see that we did say that the directive to gazette Kamusenene Forest Reserve came from State house. The letter was written by Mr. Fox Odoi, and the Ministry started the process of degazetting.  So, we have not shelved anything about State House’s involvement in the de-gazetting of Kamusenene Forest Reserve.  

I would also like to correct the impression, which was raised by hon. Kivejinja this morning, that this Committee was set up to target some individuals or to censure some people. I would like to inform him that this was a Committee of very sober people. This is one of the few Committees that I have served on, where there has not been any emotion in our investigations. Hon. Kajura is not the only Minister we investigated. Allegations against hon. Miyingo came up, but they were not proved and we dismissed them. Allegations against hon. Baguma Isoke came up, but they did not even produce a prima-facie case to warrant us to even call hon. Baguma Isoke. We did not even call him to appear before the Committee - (Applause). So, it is very wrong for hon. Kivejinja to say that this Committee targeted some individuals.  

Our report has 88 pages and Kamusenene is just one page out of the report. The only thing hon. Kivejinja has seen out of that report is Kamusenene, but we have done a lot of work, which, I think, will help Government to improve the Forest sector. It is not the job of the Committee on Forestry to censure Ministers. The discretion to censure Ministers lies in Parliament and not for every mistake.  We have just pointed out a mistake and mistakes should be admitted as they are seen. All that we are saying is that there was a mistake and I think it is honourable for the Minister to admit the mistake and life goes on. 

Not all mistakes in life are censurable mistakes. If all mistakes were censurable then all Ministers would be censured, because we are always making mistakes. Even Members of Parliament are always making mistakes. Ministers also make mistakes. What we should say is that, if someone has made a mistake, like attempting to de-gazette Kamusenene Forest Reserve irregularly, he should admit that mistake and if possible, apologise to Parliament and life goes on. All that we have brought here are facts about Kamusenene. We have not brought anything that is fabricated.  

Fact number one is that it is true, as the Minister said, Kamusenene has not been degazetted. That is a fact. Fact number two is that Bagarukayo and other encroachers – there are other encroachers on Kamusenene Forest Reserve, not only Bagarukayo - are still occupying the reserve illegally. That is a fact. Fact number three is that Kamusenene is in the process of being de-gazetted. And it here that the committee questioned how this process was going on. 

We have seen a lot of correspondence on de-gazetting. If Members have the report, you can look at Document 7, where the Commissioner of Forestry was actually saying that Bagarukayo should be given a permit to stay in Kamusenene. The Minister of State, hon. Miyingo, in his comments on the letter said, "let us not go backwards, there is only one option for Mr. Bagarukayo and that is for him to plant trees. The lease/permit should be for that use only or else he quits". This is a Commissioner for Forestry saying 'give a permit', and the Minister of State for Environment is saying Bagarukayo should either be given a permit to plant trees or he quits. And the hon. Minister of Water, Lands and Environment is signing an instrument to de-gazette. So, you can see the confusion that the Committee found. 

I do not think that we were wrong in pointing out this mess. You have two Ministers in charge of the same sector talking about different things on the same issue. And this is the mess that we would like to sort out. The question is, who was legally correct? As far as we are concerned, hon. Miyingo took the legally correct procedure. He said this was a forest reserve, so someone should either get a permit to plant trees or leave. But someone gets a blank instrument and signs it without particulars! This is what we really found as unbecoming conduct by the other Minister. Because the instrument did not have the area of the forest reserve, it did not have the boundaries. The survey report was also not attached, the beneficiary is not indicated, and the acreage is not indicated. We are asking, what comes first? Is it the particulars in the instrument or the signature of the Minister? 

We would have expected the Minister to sign after satisfying himself that, first of all, the reserves he was de-gazetting should be de-gazetted, and secondly, that the particulars on the instrument were correct as reported by the technical people. That is why we are saying that this was a mistake, and that is all we are saying. We have not said any more about that. We therefore, endorse the views of this Parliament that, this was really a bad act, which the Minister should desist from in future. 

We also request the Minister to visit Kamusenene Forest Reserve and acquaint himself with what is happening there, so that this issue of Kamusenene is sorted out. Since the Committee is being given more time, we would expect the Minister, before we report next time, to come out with definite legally correct measures on Kamusenene Forest Reserve.

Finally, we pray for more time in order to- (Interruption)   

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, before the chairperson takes leave of this subject, can I be clarified on the allegations against hon. Kajura. I think there were three allegations against hon. Kajura. One of them was by somebody called Fred Kigenyi, and you concluded that one by saying that, in view of the Committee, Kigenyi was lying. There was another one of degazetting Kamusenene, and you said the Committee observed this. 

Now, on allegations involving illegal pitsawying, the Committee seems not to have come to any conclusion. They just said that, when the Minister appeared before the Committee, he admitted that Bujada operated in Mubende District and that he had been instructed by State House to allow Bujada to operate. That is all. What is the conclusion? Who is responsible for this? It would be important for us to have your conclusion on this allegation as well as your recommendation.  Thank you.

MR. MWESIGE: Well, on the question of illegal pitsawying reports were made to the Committee that the Minister had allowed Bujada Pitsawyers Association and other associations to do illegal pitsawying in Mubende. But when the Minister appeared before the Committee, he brought letters from State House, which I think we have attached, instructing him. One letter was from Col. Kaihura and another letter was from Captain Ndahura, saying that there were security concerns in the forests of Mubende and Hoima, and they were requesting the Minister to deploy this group to do intelligence work, so that they could detect rebels in these forests. 

We thought that was a directive he got from State House. I do not think he really had a lot of power to reject it, because it was a security issue and the Committee understood that. That is why we exonerated him from that allegation.  It was a security concern, which all Members of Parliament should also appreciate, because forests are prone to a lot of insecurity. State House had detected a problem and they wanted to handle it through the line Ministry so that any possible insecurity in those areas could be detected and curbed. That is why we found no wrong doing with respect to illegal pitsawying. But we shall carry out more investigations on illegal pitsawying. It is not only in Mubende and Hoima, but also in other areas of the country.

We pray for more time so that we can investigate the situation in other forest reserves in the country. Because of the limited time, we managed only to visit about five forest reserves, and we have received a lot of concerns from a number of forests reserves about their situations. We would like more time to go and visit them. We would also like to examine the six projects, which I highlighted in my report, which are very important to the forest sector, especially the use of funds in those projects.  
Finally, I would like to beg this House to adopt the report.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have heard the chairperson’s conclusion and at the same time, we a resolution that concludes the report, so that action is taken as outlined in the ten points in the resolution.  My task is to put the question for adoption of the report- (Interruption) 

MS. KABAKUMBA: Mr. Speaker, I am seeking clarification as to whether I will be allowed to amend some of the resolutions, which have been put forward.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Move your amendments if you have them and we shall consider them.

MS. KABAKUMBA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My amendment is on resolution number 5-(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe what we should do is to go resolution by resolution, instead of jumping to 5 when someone may want to amend 1. 

MR. NYAI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to suggest that the House first adopts the report and then we go to the resolutions, and consider them one by one.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what I was saying. I will now put the question that this House adopts the interim report of the Committee.                                     

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now we come to the resolutions. There are 10 of them. 

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, it is not really an amendment to the substance but rather making it clear.  Recommendation 1 says the Forest Act should be amended expeditiously as recommended by the Select Committee. We must take responsibility on who ensures the expeditious amendment of this Forest Act. As it is now, it is an open handed resolution. So, I propose that we say, ‘the Executive ensures that the Forest Act is amended expeditiously as recommended by the Select Committee report.’

MR. CHEBET:  Mr. Speaker, I have a small difficulty in relating recommendation one and two. They seem to be contradicting. You are talking about amending of the Forest Act at the same time you are referring to establishing a Forest Authority. Establishing a Forest Authority pre-supposes that another law has to be made, which law may repeal the first one. This is where I am seeking clarification.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think who formulated recommendation two pre-supposes that there is a law or there is a mention somewhere in our law about the establishment of a Forest Authority. So, he is saying, with our current law, the Forest Authority should be created. But the first one is saying, in view of the report, there is need to make certain amendments to the Forest Act. The two are really different. Let us first deal with the proposed amendment by hon. Omara Atubo. I now put the question to it.
                        
(Question put and agreed to)

MR. BAGUMA ISOKE: Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform the House that we do not a Forestry Act. We have the Forests Act, 1964. What is forestry should read ‘Forests Act, 1964. Thank you.

MR. ETIANG: Mr. Speaker, sorry to take you back, but I have a quarrel with the preamble of this resolution. As it reads, it is as if hon. Akika Othieno and the seconder, hon. Sembajja, are the ones ‘having received’.  I thought it should be Parliament, having received recognises and committed, then the following operatives apply.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is an amendment to the preamble. It should read ‘this Parliament’. I now put the question to the suggested amendment.

(Question put and agreed to).

MR. DICK NYAI: Just a minute, Mr. Speaker. The title is ‘Resolution of Parliament on the interim report of the Select Committee on Forestry Department’. The mover and seconder can be lifted and put at the end of these resolutions, so, ‘this Parliament having received’ is absolutely perfect.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, what you are saying is that the mover and the seconder should go down? Well, I think that is understood. They will go down if necessary. Any other amendment before we come to the specific resolutions?

DR. OKULO EPAK: Mr. Speaker, I want to amend the second paragraph of the preamble, which starts with “recognises”. It should be ‘recognises the strategic importance of the Forestry sub-sector in the environment and economy’. So I am substituting sub-sector for department and adding ‘environment and’ before the word “economy”.  I 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will now put the question on that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to).

MR. ETIANG: Mr. Speaker, I may not have explained fully.  But what appears to be the fourth paragraph in the present preamble should actually be lifted up to be the first. It should start as follows, “the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda duly convened, constituted and sitting in Kampala on this 2nd day of August, 2000 do resolve as follows”. After that we can go to the paragraph saying “having received and considered the report…" and then we go on to the other paragraphs and finally to the operative paragraphs. That is actually what I meant.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have proposed an amendment for restructuring the text. I will now put the question on that.

(Question put and agreed to)

BRIG. KYALIGONZA: Mr. Speaker, I would like to add another section 10.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, we shall come to 10. We are still on the preambles. So, I take it that the preamble as amended is now acceptable. I put the question on the amended preamble.

(Question put and agreed to).

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, as I said, I would like to repeat that, as it is, we do not have specific responsibility on who should ensure that the Forest Act is amended. I would like it to specifically say that it is the Executive to ensure this. Therefore it should read as follows: ‘that the Executive ensures that the Forest Act is amended expeditiously as recommended by the Select Committee report.’

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. KEN LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, we have already spotted mistakes in the Ministry and now we expect the same Ministry to present a briefing. How can we be sure? So, I want to amend number two as follows: ‘The Executive presents to Parliament immediately a detailed timeframe within which to complete the process of establishing the Forestry Authority.’  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But the Minister is part of the Executive and definitely no other person, other than the Minister, will come here to give you those details. Well, there is a proposal that instead of the Minister, we say the Executive.

MR. RUZINDANA:  Mr. Speaker, I think this is correct. We must know who is responsible for bringing it. Hon. Kazoora will have nobody to question before the Government Assurances Committee, but this one pinpoints who should go before him.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to the proposition as put in the resolution.

(Question put and agreed to)

Resolution 3, agreed to

Resolution 4, agreed to

Resolution No. 5:

MR. RUZINDANA: I had already proposed splitting number 5.  Number 5 should end at “Forest Reserve”. And I imagine the next one should also start, ‘that Parliament deplores the confusion’. That would be number 6.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, maybe you should read 5 in full and then also 6.

MR. RUZINDANA: Although I am not sure whether we should deplore a process, number 5 should say, ‘that Parliament deplores the process by which the Minister of Water, Lands and Environment was proceeding to degazette Kamusenene Forest Reserve’.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What did they mean here, process or procedure?  So, in view of that clarification, would you read the next one?

First of all, let me put the question –(Interjections)- he has split this paragraph into two. The first part is that Parliament deplores the procedure by which the Minister of Water, Lands and Environment was proceeding to gazette Kamusenene Forest Reserve.  

MR. NYAI:  Mr. Speaker, I have a small problem. If you say that Parliament deplores the procedure by which the Minister of Water, Lands and Environment was proceeding to degazette Kamusenene Forest Reserve is one point and then you put a semi colon or comma, and then you say ‘the confusion, mishaps and political interference, it makes no sense. It is for all these together that the Committee is asking the Minister to take political responsibility. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a proposal that we split resolution 5 into two. I now put the question to that proposal. 

(Question put and negatived)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us exhaust the proposals from hon. Dick Nyai. 

MR. NYAI:  I would like to propose that resolution 5 now reads as follows: ‘Parliament deplores the procedure by which the Minister of Water, Lands and Environment was proceeding to degazette Kamusenene Forest Reserve; the confusion, mishaps and political interference in the administration of the Forest Sector and in accordance with the Committee’s recommendation, the Minister takes political responsibility.’

MS. KABAKUMBA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was of the view that we split this, but since it was defeated, we can put it in one number. Given the evidence we have, and in all fairness and justice, it is not the Minister who messed up the process of degazetting Kamusenene. I am of the view that we should place blame where it should be, and that is State House – Mr. Kabatsi and the like. 

I would like to say that the Minister was really put on pressure and the evidence is there.  He could take responsibility for the confusion, mishaps and political interference, but just because there are no clear policies and guidelines in the forestry sector. Even the chairman himself agrees that Government is confused. So, there is confusion in Government as far as the forest sector is concerned. I would like to amend resolution 5 to read as follows: ‘That Parliament deplores the process by which State House or President’s Office was proceeding to degazette Kamusenene Forest Reserve’ –(Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When you say State House, what do you mean?  There is a procedure of dealing with the President. 

MS. KABAKUMBA: I am referring to Document 4, Mr. Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And what does it mean? If you really mean the President, there are different procedures of dealing with the President.  So, when you say State House what do you mean? There is no office called State House.

MS. KABAKUMBA: The person I am referring to is this Fox Odoi, but he was relaying on instructions from H.E. the President, that they should expeditiously gazette Kamusenene Forest Reserve. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As I have told you, the procedure of dealing with dissatisfaction of the President is different, you cannot do it this way. 

MS. KABAKUMBA: Then, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move that the first part be deleted, since we cannot get to the person who is responsible for messing up the process. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a proposal by the hon. Member from Masindi District that the first part of this re-drafted resolution 5 be deleted. I now put the question. 

(Question put and negatived)

MR. WACHA: Mr. Speaker, I would like the chairperson to inform me whether the idea of the Minister taking political responsibility also flows back to the attempted degazzeting of this forest reserve in Kamusenene.

MR. MWESIGE: Yes, the idea of the Minister taking political responsibility also involves the procedure of degazetting Kamusenene Forest Reserve. Because under the Forest Act, it is the role of the Minister to degazette forests, it is not the role of the President. Now, if the President instructs a Minister to degazette a forest and the Minister does it wrongly, the responsibility is not with the President but with the Minister –(Ms. Kabakumba rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you made a proposal to delete the first part of the redrafted 5. The question was put and the proposal was rejected. This means that the redrafted 5 still stands, but some other person is free to improve on it. The proposal to delete it was rejected. 

MR. KARUHANGA: Is it possible for me to request for clarification from the Leader of Government Business. I would like him to assist me to understand where we are, so that we can be able to be certain in our minds. If a Mr. Fox Odoi, from the President’s Office, writes to the Prime Minister telling him to do something which the Prime Minister thinks is contrary to the Act, does the Prime Minister take that as a directive? Does he implement it or does he go back and advise the President or the cabinet? How does the Government operate?  I am really lost! I would like to know Mr. Odoi’s level. If the Leader of Government Business could help me, maybe I would be able to understand.

MR. OKULO-EPAK: I thank you, Mr. Speaker. In Public Administration, higher authorities differ.  The report of the Committee said that the Minister was directed, if I recall. Once an officer is directed, he has no choice.  That is what is mentioned in the Standing Orders. Once you are directed, you have no choice. When you are instructed at the other level, according to the Standing Orders, a directive has to be obeyed. Instructions have a bit of flexibility, but even then, it is usually a higher level officer who instructs a junior officer. Therefore, I wish to appreciate what option a Minister has when directed by the President to take action.  He may proceed wrongly to implement the directive but that is another issue altogether. Maybe the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, in giving clarification, will also explain to us.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, before we started dealing with these resolutions, you had adopted a report. You heard from the chairperson of the Committee and as far as they were concerned, the blame was on the Minister. So now, the basis for passing these resolutions is the report. So, now you cannot go back on the report, which you have adopted, and try to amend it. While you were debating this report, you could have said, on the basis of the evidence that the committee has presented to us, I think their conclusion in (a) was wrong. You should have said that. You could have done that when you were dealing with the report, but you did not deal with it. You cannot say that now, especially when the chairperson has clearly said that, as far as they were concerned, it is the Minister who is responsible.  

If you believe that that was a wrong conclusion, when I put the question to 5, which deplores the Minister, and you think it is not justified, say ‘no’ to the question. The Prime Minister was supposed to give some clarification.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, I do not agree that whenever the President gives an order, a Minister must simply carry it out like a machine. In fact, without saying too much, I want to say that the President is a lenient person. There have been cases where he has been misadvised and we have gone to him and told him that he was misadvised and he has changed accordingly. So, I want to make that very clear. We would be letting this country down if we simply took all the orders.  

The second point is that, Ministers are free to resign. When I was a Minister for Constitutional Affairs in Buganda, I resigned on principle. I want to make it clear that, should Parliament or any other person gives me a wrong decision, I shall resign.  I shall not do it. I fear nobody but God.  

The other point I would like to make is that, His Excellency the President made it clear that he did give the directive to the Minister through the Solicitor General. So, we do not want to give the impression that he did not do it. So, that has to be taken into account. So, he was doing it correctly by going through the Solicitor General. When the Minister received the directive, as he was saying, this gazetting was not consummated. That has to be taken into account. It was not consummated. He was dealing with different options available. So, this should also be taken into account when we are sentencing or criticising the Minister. So, I want to make that clear too. He had not consummated it and, therefore, I would strongly advise that we criticise him mildly because he had not completed the exercise.  I thank you.

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, I am very grateful to the Prime Minister for his explicit, precise and concise explanation, and the light he has shed on the question. Indeed that is how it should be and that is how I have always understood the functioning of Government. The Prime Minister has now put in some mitigating factors and measures pleading for the Minister. He is saying that there are mitigating factors, when you are sentencing, after you have found somebody guilty. These include whether the person should be hanged, imprisoned for life or for two years, cautioned, forgiven or on house arrest. 

The Prime Minister left me a little bit unsatisfied with his explanation. Is the Prime Minister likely to be proposing an amendment for mitigation? If he is, what type of punishment is he looking at? The chairman of the Committee already said that there was need for an apology, but I have not heard that apology forthcoming. An apology is also a punishment of sorts. I would like to advise the hon. Minister – (Interjections)- yes, I have the liberty to do so - in mitigating circumstances, considering his tenure of service, to stand up and apologise to the House and then after that Parliament should know why -(Interruption)

MR. WACHA: Mr. Speaker, at the time when the Rt. hon. Prime Minister stood up, we had dealt an amendment on resolution 5. I was of the view that my learned Friend, hon. Karuhanga, was going to propose a further amendment, but he seems to be developing points of argument for all action against the Minister.  I would just like to dwell a little on our understanding of what the Prime Minister said. With him it is completely different, but I was of the opinion that the Prime Minister said, yes, 5 is okay because the Minister should take political responsibility, because he did not take certain action.  But that is besides the point, I just do not see how we can now develop further arguments if we are not going to move further amendments to resolution 5. If there are no further amendments to 5, could we vote on it, Sir!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, that is what I said, we started with hon. Member for Masindi’s amendment and it was rejected, so the redrafted one stood. Now, if there is any other person who wants to make amendments on this resolution, definitely they can vote against it. If you are convinced, you can vote for it.

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, I think the report is very clear and it brings out findings on the procedure of de-gazetting Kamusenene Forest Reserve. It was first initiated from State House, then it went to the Minister, then to the Solicitor General for legal advise and then back, we have heard all this.  But, I think, what is important for this Parliament, at this stage, is to really give what I call ‘an umbrella resolution’, where you cover your intentions on all those whom you think are responsible for this action as broadly as possible. And picking from where hon. Matsiko left, besides proposing a wrong solution, State House was involved, and so was the Minister responsible for Justice or somebody in Justice, who is the Principal Legal Advisor to us, and I am sure the Minister also had civil servants who advised him, and so on. 

So, at this stage, nobody understands what we are contemplating. What is important at this stage is for us to come up with a broad resolution, and in my view, a resolution that covers everybody responsible for this mess. We should come up with the following: Instead of the Minister, we should put the Executive, because they are part of this –(Brig. Kyaligonza rose)- we blame the Executive because the whole thing is the Executive. Hon. Kyaligonza, I do not know whether you have a special interest in this matter.  Mr. Speaker, can you protect me from Brig. Kyaligonza.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have the Floor, just make your proposal.

BRIG. KYALIGONZA: The hon. Member of Otuke is contributing, is he in order to make insinuations that I have got personal interests in this report as a Member for Buhaguzi? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who has a personal interest?

BRIG. KYALIGONZA: Mr. Speaker, as he was contributing, he said that you should protect him from me because he knows I have personal interests in this matter. Is he in order to make such insinuations?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is out of order.

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Mr. Speaker, if that is what my good Friend, Brig. Kyaligonza, understood, I am sorry. I did not mean it. I know he has no personal interest in this matter –(Laughter).  

My amendment is that Parliament deplores the procedure by which the Executive was proceeding to de-gazette Kamusenene Forest Reserve, the confusion, mishaps and political interference in the administration of the forest sector, and in accordance with the Committee’s report, those responsible bear responsibility.

(Question put and negatived)

DR. OKULO EPAK: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to amend 5 to read as follows: ‘That Parliament deplores all action intended to de-gazette Kamusenene Forest Reserve…’ and then the rest is okay. Before “recommendation” we could say, ‘but the Minister responsible for Lands and Environment should take political responsibility’. 

(Question put and negatived)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, why don’t we abandon this, because it seems you cannot agree.

MR. ETIANG: Mr. Speaker, my proposed amendment in this paragraph is only semantic. Given the redrafted preamble, I beg to move that the words “that Parliament” be deleted. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That does not make much of a difference, it remains as it is.

MR. RUZINDANA: Mr. Speaker, I accept the amendment, but there is this word “mishaps”, I am not sure the Minister should take political responsibility for all mishaps in the department, like whoever has had an accident. I think we can safely remove that word “mishaps”.

(Question put and negatived)

MR.KAJURA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am referring to item 5. In the report, various issues were raised and allegations were examined. I was cleared of all of them, except on the process of degazetting Kamusenene. I accept the proposal by the chairman and I apologise. Thank you.

DR. KASIRIVU: Mr. Speaker, this morning I did mention that hon. Kajura threatened my life. Has he apologised to me, because he attacked me as a Member of the Committee?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Member. That is a different case.  We noted that case and it will require a different approach. Now we are dealing with the report. 

Hon. Members, there was a proposal from the chairperson of the Committee. He said that as far as they are concerned, it was not State House but it was the Minister in charge of the Ministry, and he said that an apology or something like that should come from the Minister. Now, we have heard the Minister apologise because of Kamusenene -(Applause). In view of that, do we have to continue with resolution 5 or we move to 6?

MR.MWANDHA: Mr. Speaker, I would like to move an amendment, therefore, in order to accommodate the apology, which I personally appreciate. I think we should remove the words ”the Minister takes political responsibility”

THE SPEAKER: There is a proposal that we delete anything in respect to the Minister. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

Resolution 5 as amended, agreed to

MR.ONGOM: I am sorry, Mr. Speaker, to take you back to 5 which we have passed, but it makes the thing look very awkward if we stop at recommendation. We are removing the Minister from the task of political responsibility. That means we stop at recommendation, and then the thing seems to make no meaning at all.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The text, as it reads, deplores the procedure taken to degazette Kamusenene Forest, the confusion, mishaps, political interference and the administration of the forestry sector. That is according to the Committee's report. That is where we stopped.  
Now, resolution 6 says:  “That Government spells out new policies relating to degazetting forest reserves in the country, awarding of concessions, and reports to Parliament within three months from the adoption of this report.”

MR.NYAI: Instead of “degazetting”, I would like to introduce the word ‘conservation’. 

MR.WACHA: Sir, I do not know what the word “new” there would signify. First of all, were there any old ones and what were the old ones all about? We need to know before we make up our minds. I do not know who can clarify this matter for me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe the chairperson could explain. What did you have in mind?

MR.MWESIGE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The old policies on degazetting gave all the power to degazette a reserve to the Minister. And all the power to award concessions was given to the Commissioner. Our proposal is that, in the new policy, if at all it comes, the Minister should only degazette with the approval of Parliament. And the Commissioner should only give concessions after consultations with a committee set up in the Ministry.  That is the new policy that we envisaged. We think the old one was centred on one person, and we believe that is why it could have been abused. It would promote more transparency, if wider consultations were made on these subjects. So, I propose that the word “degazetting” remains –(Mr. Wacha rose_). 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ben Wacha, you will have the Floor. Let us deal with the deletion of “degazetting”. 

MR.NYAI: Mr. Speaker, let me talk about why I was proposing conservation instead of degazetting. Instead of reducing the forest size or land size, I was talking of its conservation in a positive manner, so that when one part is reduced, another part is put in its place, as proposed by hon. James Mwandha. That is conservation. 

My plea to our Committee chairman, and to all Members, is that we should move away from the concept of a word that implies reducing on our forest reserves. When we are conserving, we are being like careful prudent mothers.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you not think that in certain instances, it may be necessary to degazette?

MR.NYAI: Mr. Speaker, even when there is the element of degazetting, that element is conservation, because you are removing a little part here and putting another part elsewhere.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Must you always do that?

MR.NYAI: That is the proposal I would really like this House to adopt.

MR.WACHA: Sir, that brings me to my point on the word “new”.  I have understood what the Committee and the hon. chairperson meant by having this concept of new policies, but if we are now going to relate it to conservation, then we must also be told what the old policies were. And we should be told what was wrong with the old policies before we can amend that aspect.

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, I submit that the word “degazette” should be retained because every reserve carries a sense of conservation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You stood up to give information to hon. Ben Wacha, who was complaining about using the word “new”. Hon. Ben Wacha was on the Floor and he was making a query about “new”.  Can we exhaust that then we can move on? 

MR.NYAI: Mr. Speaker, in the old system, degazetting meant the Minister could remove a section of a forest reserve and say it is no longer a forest reserve. He does not need to replace it with another piece of land. In the new policy, it is envisaged that there must be an equivalent piece of land put in its place.  

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, with due respect, I would like to inform hon. Dick Nyai that whenever you talk about a reserve of any kind, you already have a sense of conservation. So, you do not have to adopt the word conservation. Degazetting is what I would buy in this regard.

MR. CHEBET MAIKUT:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to support the view expressed by my colleague, hon. Lukyamuzi, that by deleting the word “degazetting” and substituting it with the word ‘conservation’, the whole essence of this resolution will lose meaning. So, I think we need to be focused and therefore, retain the word “degazetting”.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to the proposed amendment by hon. Dick Nyai to substitute conservation for degazetting.

(Question put and negatived.)

DR. OKULO EPAK:  Mr. Speaker, a resolution should be quite explicit, and for us to allude to a new policy without stating what it is sounds like, we are leaving the space completely undefined. I would therefore wish the drafters of this resolution to be very specific and include the element of the policy they want followed, rather than leave it for someone to go to the report to find out what the committee was recommending. In this particular case, I really wish to see whatever is called the new policy very specifically stated.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought you were bringing up an amendment.  Are you assisting the House on this?

DR. OKULO EPAK: Mr. Speaker, I am not a Member of the Committee. I do not know what new policy they intend to introduce. I would prefer that the mover of the motion and the chairman of the Committee really tell us what the new policy is supposed to be and we stop just talking about a new policy. If we knew it, we would just say, ‘in accordance with the following procedures’. That would be much better than this vague reference.

MR.AKIKA OTHIENO: Mr. Speaker, when the chairman of the Committee stood up to clarify, he did mention that in the old policy, the Minister alone would do the degazetting.  Now we are envisaging a new policy, which will require the Minister to degazette with the approval of Parliament. I do not know how best we can insert the involvement of Parliament into resolution 6, to cater for what we need in the new policy. I beg to be assisted, maybe by the Committee chairman.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As you heard from the Member, his point is that you are not clear as to what policy you want adopted. Why do you want that resolution? If you are sure, say what you want.

MR. DICK NYAI: Mr. Speaker, would it not therefore be relevant, if we are going to keep degazetting. Resolution 6 is really talking about Government spelling out new policies and we are saying that Government implements the new policies as contained in the report on degazetting.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you very much, Sir. Under normal circumstances, resolutions are derived out of documents, seminars or conferences. You cannot afford to put the proceedings of the conference in the resolutions.  Resolutions are summaries of what is intended, and therefore, the report of the Committee, since it has already been adopted by this House, is going to be the basis of Government’s development of new policies. Imagine that we can put all contents and provisions in the report in order to be very specific, we shall lose sight of what resolutions do. Secondly, a policy does not become a policy until it has gone through certain processes. So, for someone to suggest that the provisions in the report are new policies is not correct. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I get the impression that Members are saying that resolution 6 does not have any impact.

MR. TOSKIN: Mr. Speaker, looking at resolution 1, it is really asking Government to expeditiously amend the Forest Act. What we are actually looking at are issues, which are raised in resolution 6. We are looking at the policies relating to degazetting, for example, whether the Minister alone should do it or consult with Parliament or whether the Commissioner alone should be allowed to issue the concessions or together with a committee. So, I see that resolution 6 is actually redundant here, and I would like to move that it be deleted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The proposal is that resolution 6 be deleted because the policy that we envisage will be expressed in the amendments that will come from resolution 1.

(Question put and agreed to).

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, before I move an amendment, I need some clarification from the chairman of the Committee. The Select Committee undertook responsibilities to take action in a situation of emergency. Why do you, after acting in an emergency situation, extend the matter to a junior establishment?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the chairperson has explained that.  Emergency does not give you powers, which you do not have. The powers of Parliament are spelt out in the Constitution and at the same time, the Constitution creates other bodies, which are also entitled to exercise their functions. So, the chairman has told you that as far as he is concerned, he finds that this Parliament has no power to interdict or dismiss anyone when there is another body under the Constitution, which can deal with this matter. They can make recommendations, as they have said, which the commission in charge of disciplining, appointing and so forth may use or may not use. So, that is why he thinks that it is not proper for this Parliament to take up the functions of another body, which is competent to deal with the matter. I think that is his explanation. 

Therefore, you cannot say Parliament is a supreme body, it will take the judicial functions or it will take Executive functions. It has limits as provided for in the Constitution.

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Noting that, that is so, do you envisage a situation where the Public Service Commission could go against the advice extended by this Select Committee?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, they can. They may be entitled. With reasons, they can. We cannot write letters reinstating these people or saying they have to do this, they may say they cannot do this or the other. So, I think it is a question of demarcating the functions of each institution. That is what the chairman said.

MR.DICK NYAI: Mr. Speaker, there is important information, which might help my Friend, hon. Ken Lukyamuzi. While in the Select Committee, we found out that whereas staff members of the Forestry Department were purported to be interdicted – I am using the word ‘purported’ because the correct formula of interdiction in Government service was never followed - these matters were never referred to the Public Service Commission. These matters were only referred to the Inspector General of Government. So, we wanted Government, in this particular case, and the Forestry Department to now hand over these matters properly, according to the Government Standing Civil Service Regulations, to the Public Service Commission so that the cases can be expedited and resolved. I thank you.

MR.OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I believe we are on resolution 7 and I would like to propose an amendment. The current resolution reads as follows: “That all cases of interdiction should be forwarded expeditiously to the Public Service Commission for appropriate action.” 

I would like to add between the words “for” and “appropriate”, ‘a review and’. It would read ‘for a review and appropriate action’. I am proposing the word ‘review’ because the Committee noted irregularities in most of the cases. This may require a review and later on appropriate action. If this amendment is seconded, the resolution would read as follows: “That all cases of interdiction should be forwarded expeditiously to the Public Service Commission for a review and appropriate action.”  I beg to move.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr. Speaker, I think we should avoid redundancy and tautology. Appropriate action encompasses everything possible, therefore, reviewing is not necessary at all. Appropriate action is good enough. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will now put the question to that resolution as it is. 

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We now move to resolution 8. It was numbered 9, but I think it is 8, although it will go down because one resolution has been deleted.  

MR.AKIKA OTHIENO: Mr. Speaker, we shall just re-organise the numbers. There was an omission at 8, and then we have deleted one, so we shall re-align accordingly.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS (Mr. Baguma Isoke): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. During the last session of Parliament, my colleague, the Minister of State for Environment, did state that our Ministry has nothing to hide. He accepted that this Select Committee, be formed for the purpose it was formed. We therefore, register our appreciation to the chair and members of this Committee for the work so far done. But, as one of the Ministers of State in this Ministry, I have a problem with the content of resolution 8. I find a problem with the extension of the life span of this Committee alongside the work being carried on with the Sessional Committee on Natural Resources. 

What Select Committee has so far covered is already documented, and the Forest Department is going to proceed to fulfil what has been recommended. I have got a problem on how we shall move between two Committees at the same time, handling the same matter. For example, when the chairman of the Select Committee was concluding his report, he asked for leave of this House to grant an extension in order to cover the projects in my Ministry and in the Forest Department, and also to visit the remaining forest reserves. This is the work currently being carried out by the Sessional Committee on natural resources. The same Committee is handling policy, we have got a draft policy document, which in March this year was presented for consideration to the Sessional Committee.  

The same Sessional Committee is handling the amendment to the Forest Act, 1964, and the formation of the envisaged National Forest Authority, processes which we now want under this resolution and at the same time under the Select Committee. 

I have got operational problems. I need the Permanent Secretary, I need the Commissioner, I need all the respondents, all the technical people in the Ministry to do other work. How will they divide themselves between the Sessional Committee and the Select Committee, which are in fact discussing similar issues?  

We have got on the agenda for Parliament to consider the Ministerial Policy Statement on the Budget, and at the same time, issues like the projects in the Ministry, forest reserves, and everything else. What remains to be done by this Select Committee? 

I would like to humbly submit, though I have not consulted the Prime Minister, because I know the issues being discussed are of great importance and of urgency, it is not prudent for this House to assign the same task to two Committees of the same House at the same time. My technical people and my Minister cannot be in two Committees at the same time. We are a fairly large Ministry and a very busy Ministry. Water, lands, and environment are all our mandate. 

I would like to propose an amendment to resolution 9. I do not want it to be deleted, but we this Parliament should register its appreciation to the chair and the Members of the Committee for the thorough investigation of the Forestry Department. But, in order to finalise the investigation on the remaining terms of reference, this is where we should give the remaining terms of reference to the Sessional Committee of Natural Resources. I submit.

MS. KIRASO: Mr. Speaker, I would like to defer a little from the hon. Minister. When this House puts in place Select Committees, it is with full knowledge that the Ministries being looked into are answerable to Sessional Committees. Select Committees are put in place specifically to look into issues pertaining to a Ministry or department in an in-depth and specific manner. I do not see any conflict between the work of the Select Committee and the Sessional Committee, especially bearing in mind that the two committees, when sitting, do not call these officials on a daily basis. 

From what we have learnt, from the submission of the Committee in their report, most of the work was done in the field. This Committee is an investigative committee and there were reasons why this House put it in place. We were very aware that there was a Sessional Committee to which this Ministry answers. I would like to propose also therefore, that the Sessional Committee continues handling its work in general terms. It should continue with its mandate, the policy statement concerning the Ministry. The Select Committee should also continue its investigation, because that was their concern in the first place. That is why the Committee was put in place. I thank you.

MRS. MATEMBE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do appreciate the observations of the hon. Minister and the hon. Kiraso, and we do take the recommendations of this House seriously.  The Committee did a very good job, and in fact, it sorted out the burning issues, as you have seen, and this has opened the eyes of the Ministry. You require us to do these things in limited time, three months. We want to come back and tell you what we have done, and as he says, they are the same people. 

Could you please, accept and give them the trust and confidence so that they start implementing now, while the usual Sessional Committee takes over and continues with the other work. For sure, as Ministers, we really have a lot of work to do, and many times you find us going from this meeting to the other, and when you do not turn up, they take offence. They say that we have refused. For instance, I stand here because I was waiting for this corruption issue, but the Vice President had called me to attend this meeting on hunger.  So, she will think I am impudent, but I am here because of corruption -(Interjection) So, as the Minister for Ethics and Integrity, I would like to implore the House to trust us and have confidence in us. 

When they have revealed these things, they should let us go and work quickly while the Sessional Committee continues with the work. Surely, when an hon. Minister puts forward the problems that he will encounter in trying to work according to your requests, I implore you to really take it up. It is a very humble request and it is genuine. After all, when he was accused, you found out that it was ‘air’, therefore, when he stands here and says that he will do it, you should trust him. I would like to implore you to support the Minister.

MR. ABURA KENE (Moroto County, Lira) Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As has been said earlier on, the Sessional Committee should continue with its work and this committee should also continue with its work. There are so many other things left hanging in the report. I have seen certain things, which are mentioned here, but there is no conclusion to them. So, I would prefer this committee to be given an extension so that the work they are doing is completed well. Otherwise, we going to have half done work and then it will be useless for us. So, I would prefer the extension to be given to this committee to finish this work. The Select Committee should continue with its work. The work is half done. There are some names mentioned in the report, which have not been cleared properly. There are some issues raised that have not been completed. I would therefore, appeal to the House to allow this Committee to continue with its work. I thank you.

LT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA: Mr. Speaker, could the chairman of the Select committee explain what crucial areas are remaining, for which they want an extension of two months.

MR. MWESIGE: Mr. Speaker, my report is very clear. I prayed for more time on two grounds. One, to extend our investigations to the forest reserves we have not visited.  District forest officers are closely monitoring these reserves. Ministers do not stay in these forest reserves. We began all investigations in May, and we only met the Minister of Water, Lands and Environment twice. We visited Mabira Forest and he was not there, we visited Kamusenene and the Minister was not there. We also visited Bunya and the Minister was not there. We did not call the Minister.  There are District Forest Officers whom we interviewed. We also talked to the local people and other forest rangers in the field. We do not need the Minister to come to the field in order for us to come and report to this House.

Secondly, we prayed for more time so that we investigate six projects. Projects are run by project managers and they are sort of semi autonomous. Ministers do not run projects on a daily basis. When we visited the Tree Seed Project, we did not have the Minister with us. We did not even go with the Minister of State, but we got the information we wanted, because the officers are there and the projects are there. It is the projects we want to look at.  We are not in a dialogue with the Ministers. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there is a proposal moved by the Minister that, from now on, since the interim report has been made by the Select Committee, the Sessional Committee takes over. And because of that, he moved an amendment, which in a way was deleting the extension of two months for the Select Committee. I am going to put the question to the proposed amendment that this resolution does not include an extension of two months, because essentially, that is what the Minister has proposed.  

(Question put and negatived)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will now put the question to the resolution as it stands.  

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We now move to the last resolution, namely the demarcation of South Busoga Forest Reserve be done once and for all, so that the communities around get to know the clear demarcations. 

MR.KITYO MUTEBI: Mr. Speaker, I would like to move an amendment so that this resolution caters for the whole country, not only Busoga area.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, Instead of Busoga, it should include the demarcation of forest reserves in Uganda. 

MR.AKIKA: No, Mr. Speaker, I would like us to specifically emphasise Busoga, because they have really suffered as a result of this. I would therefore, wish to amend it this way –(Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us start with the amendment, because it is an amendment, so it is either taken or rejected. The amendment says that instead of restricting ourselves to South Busoga, we include the whole of Uganda. So I will put the question to that.  

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will now put the question to the resolution.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This completes the resolution. Hon. Members, we had some other business on our Order Paper, which deals with the issue of cotton. I do not whether we should proceed now, because as soon as you finish the business, then we shall give Committees more time. Do you think we should proceed now?  

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE REQUEST BY GOVERNMENT TO GUARANTEE SHILLINGS 7.1 BILLION TO THE UGANDA COTTON GINNERS AND EXPORTERS ASSOCIATION (UGCEA)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING AND INVESTMENT (Mr. Gabriel Opio): Thank you Mr. Speaker, the resolution under item four on the today’s Order Paper was among the resolutions which the Ministry moved in December, 1999.   To be specific, it was moved on 16th December 1999. However, the discussion on this particular one could not go on because it was necessary for the Sessional Committee on Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to be given time to discuss the issue. 

Between that time and now, the two Committees have discussed the resolution. From my discussion with the chairman on the Standing Committee of the Economy, I have been assured that he has discussed it with the chairman of the Sessional Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. They are ready to continue where we left off.  

Before you ask the chairman to come up, I would also like to state that this morning, there was a resolution, which was distributed, and which had a conclusion that was at variance with what we had discussed. Therefore, I would like to state here that the resolution that was distributed in the afternoon is the one, which is in consonance with what we discussed with the Committee, and therefore, is the one that is relevant. With these few words, I would request that you call upon the chairman to continue where we left on 16th of December 1999.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why don’t you assist other members and read out the resolution, they might have not got the copy. 

MR.OPIO: Okay. The resolution reads as follows:
Whereas the Government, on the 26th of June 1994, secured a loan of SDR 10 million from the International Development Association (IDA) for the Cotton Sector Development Project; and 

Whereas part of the proceeds of the said loan, being U. Shs. 7.1 billion is deposited in a special account in Bank of Uganda for the purpose of on-lending to Cotton Ginners and Exporters; and 

Whereas the cotton industry in the country urgently needs inputs, and yet it cannot secure financing through the normal commercial banking, as it has very few assets to offer as a security; and 

Whereas the Government and the Cotton Development Authority (CDO) have agreed that Government guarantees the cotton industry, to enable them access the funds in the Bank of Uganda, on condition that the CDO will ensure full recovery of the loans from the Cotton Ginners and Exporters Association; and 

Whereas the Government is desirous to see cotton inputs being availed to the industry, and is therefore willing to guarantee the said loans in accordance with the provisions of Section 2 of the Loans (Guarantee) Act, Cap 157, which requires prior authorisation by a resolution of Parliament, before the conclusion of a Guarantee Agreement;

Now therefore be it resolved by Parliament that, it authorises the Government of Uganda to Guarantee Shs. 7.1 billion to Uganda Cotton Ginners and Exporters Association through the Cotton Development Organisation (CDO).  
I beg to move, Mr. Speaker.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON THE NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr. Musumba Isaac): Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, indeed as the Minister did state before this House, on 16th December 1999, on behalf of the Committee on National Economy, I presented to this House a report. This report was seeking parliamentary authority to guarantee a loan to the Uganda Cotton Ginners and Exporters’ Association through CDO. 

Following some debate, the Committee on National Economy sought for permission to refer the matter to the Sessional Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for further consultation. The Sessional Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has discussed this matter with the relevant Ministers of Agriculture and Finance, and with the leadership in the Cotton Development Organisation. They have recommended that the Guarantee sought for to release Shs.7.1 billion be approved by this House. I have received this report and in summary it states as follows:

Committee's Conclusion:
The Committee on Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries recognized the importance of the cotton sub-sector in the agricultural sector. The Committee urges Government to ensure that a cotton farmer is sufficiently empowered and facilitated to enable him or her realise a meaningful benefit from his sweat. 

In this connection therefore, the Committee recommends that the guarantee sought for the release of Shs. 7.1 billion be approved by Parliament by Parliament.  

The Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries urges Government to further study the mechanism put forward for recovery of the loans, and to further ensure that CDO operates legally and is fully accountable to the stakeholders, cotton growers included. Government should organise its operations in such a manner so that it does not resort to operating outside the law, as provided under Article 156 of the Constitution.  

Finally, the CDO mandate should be reviewed, with a view to bringing it in line with the new Constitution. The Board should be constituted with the view to empowering the cotton grower and ensuring him a reasonable benefit.  

The Committee on MAAIF fully supports the cotton industry. The Committee’s demand is on transparency and accountability.  Once these are assured, the Committee is in full support of the resolution on authority to guarantee Shs.7.1b to the Cotton Ginners and Exporters Association. That is an extract from the report that I got from the Sessional Committee on Agriculture.

The Uganda Cotton Ginners and Export Association has already given farmers up to 8,000 metric tons of cotton seed for planting. The planting was done between May and July, in areas of West Nile, the North and Eastern parts of Uganda. Farmers now need pesticides urgently, and these funds will ease the procurement of these pesticides. If these pesticides are not availed in time, the country and the farmer may lose up to 50 per cent of the crop.  

The Committee on National Economy has evaluated the merits of the guarantee request and balanced them with the need for expedience. We recommend that, as the evaluation of CDO continues, money should be approved so as to divert the bigger loss to the national economy.

In light of the above, and in light of the fact that the cotton sector needs support, the Committee wishes to commend that the guarantee be authorised by this House.  I beg to recommend.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR.ONAPITO EKOLOMOIT (Amuria County, Katakwi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the Chairmen of the Committees and the Minister. I would like to support the motion, but rather conditionally. I say I support it because I represent people whose lifeblood is cotton. My reservation, however, is based on the fact that, cotton growing now is all but dead, at least in the part of the country that I come from. And I do not see the ginners and exporters as the messiahs of the message to resurrect cotton. That is why I attach some strings in supporting this motion.

After years of decline in cotton production, at least in Teso and Amuria, we successfully pleaded with the farmers to resume growing cotton. Over the last two years, they grudgingly responded to this appeal, which was lead by Members of Parliament, knowing that there was no other export crop in this part of the country. But we were deeply saddened when, after the people had responded to the appeal to grow cotton, they were stabbed in the back by what I would consider the conspiracy between CDO, the ginners and exporters.  

The stabbing in the back came via the pricing of the cotton. Farmers were assured to grow cotton for once because for once, credit is over, cotton rotting in their houses is over, and everything would be bought to a price agreed between them and the buyer, because the market has now been liberalised and privatised. When farmers had just harvested the cotton last year, they were told that the meagre price of Shs.300, which they had humbly accepted, had been drastically slashed to Shs.230 per kilo.  

I can assure you, hon. Members, that at least in Teso, much as the farmers have no option, sadly they have virtually vowed not to grow cotton unless they are assured that there is going to be a stable and fair price for cotton. It is very unfortunate that the ginners and exporters were totally silent at the time the price was arbitrary slashed by CDO, and yet CDO did not consult the farmers. Some of us, the representatives of the people, had our reputations put at stake when we told the people, ‘please grow cotton, you are not going to be let down’.  Then some bureaucrats in CDO, who do not understand the plight of the peasants, simply just cut the price and everything collapsed like that.  

The ginners and exporters, whom we are going to give this money, some of us learnt, were engaged in opportunistic business such as going to the Congo to import seeds that were diseased. And these seeds were supposed to be brought to the farmers because they were cheap seeds.

Much as this money is going to be given to the ginners and exporters, if the farmer is not remembered, nothing will change.  They could as well use the money on trading in brown gold and forget about the ‘white gold’ because the farmers will not respond without a fair and stable price.  Thank you.  

MRS.HYUHA DOROTHY (Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also come from a cotton growing area, that is Tororo and Busia, which I represent here in Parliament.  

Before I support this resolution, I would like, like my colleague who has just left the Floor, to express the same disappointment coming from the cotton farmers in Uganda. I find a lot of difficulty in supporting this Resolution. As my colleague has expressed, the farmers were totally disappointed.  If I can give you an example, at the buying price of Shs.230 per kilogram, a farmer who had cultivated one acre of cotton could earn an average of Shs.56000. And that is his total income in a year. Can that cotton farmer really educate a child in secondary school? That aside, can that cotton farmer take a child to University?  

It seems that these cotton ginners and exporters plus the Cotton Development Authority deliberately want to keep certain areas poor. I find it very difficult to support these cotton ginners and exporters to receive this facility, which is taxpayers' money, and yet they are going to make the farmers cry at the end of the day.

If you compared a cotton farmer to a coffee farmer or a dairy farmer, on average, a cotton farmer earns Shs.56000 a year, whereas a coffee farmer, on average, and in one season, can earn one Shs. 1.8 million and yet he is going to harvest twice a year.  A dairy farmer earns 500 shillings per litre - (Interruption)

MR. RWAKOOJO: Mr. Speaker, I would like to give the hon. Member some information. The 500 shillings she is talking about might exist at the final point of consumption, but not for the farmer. The farmer gets between 100 and 200 shillings per litre, when he is lucky. 

MS. KABASHARIRA: Mr. Speaker, I thank you and I thank the hon. Member. I would like to further inform her that, even the 100 shillings hon. Rwakoojo has mentioned is only got by those lucky ones, the majority do not get it and just pour their milk. The five hundred shillings you are talking about is got by people who sell the milk to people from around here in Kampala. It is not true that people get five hundred shillings per litre. We are equally affected. We are as affected as the cotton farmers.  

MRS. HYUHA: Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the two colleagues who have given information, but I think I was careful with my words. I said that on average, in Tororo, I buy half a litre of milk at two hundred shillings. In Bweyogerere, where I live, a tumpeco, which is half a litre, is 250 shillings. So, on average, that is 500 shillings. This price that I am giving for cotton is also comparative. At the end of the day, what goes to the farmer? 

I just wanted to give those comparisons to show how a cotton farmer is really disadvantaged in Uganda. I would therefore, like to appeal to those concerned. At least, if we are to support and mobilise cotton farmers to continue with cotton farming, we have to revise and we find means and ways of improving the price of cotton.  That aside, the allocation of inputs like pesticides, leaves a lot to be desired. I would like those concerned to address these issues before I can strongly support this resolution.  I thank you.

MR. WACHA BEN (Oyam North, Apac): Thank you, Mr. Speaker I represent a constituency called Oyam North, in Apac District in Northern Uganda.  Cotton is the only cash crop that I know of, and that is known in my Constituency. When I was born, I found cotton being grown in my village. I was sent to school with the proceeds from cotton. During Amin's regime, the production of cotton, in my place, went down disastrously, but people continued growing cotton. During the insurgency, cotton production was highly affected, but we continued growing cotton, because it is the only cash crop that we know about. I know that now there is no alternative to it as an instant means of getting money. Therefore, Sir, support any measure and any move intended to uplift the cotton sector in this country.  

The intent of this resolution is the betterment of the cotton sector in the country. I urge all my colleagues in this House, especially those of us who come from areas which grow cotton, not to lose sight of that intent. I know as a fact that there is a lot to be desired in this sector, but we should not lose sight of the intent. When you have a father and a mother in a home, you do not run and start blaming the housemaid for what is happening in the house. In this respect, I want to make certain proposals to Government, and I am going to pass these proposals through the Sessional Committee on Agriculture.  

I said that there are a lot of problems in the cotton sector, but the top amongst them all is the fact that the farmer does not get what is worth his sweat for the whole year. Those of you who may not know, the growing of cotton is labour intensive and takes one year. The farmer continuously struggles for about seven to eight months before he gets anything from his garden, and yet he gets very little now. Long ago, every time there was a problem with the cotton prices in the international market, Government would come in to put something. The subsidy would make it possible for the farmer to be able to subsist and know that he has done something for his sweat. 

Under the new Constitution, we have talked about affirmative action in a lot of areas. I am asking Government, through our committee, to seriously consider getting involved permanently in the cotton prices. It is not good enough for anybody to come and say that the market is liberalised when your people are suffering and when you can actually lose it. Hon. Onapito said that we have to go around convincing farmers to grow cotton. If we get tired, you lose that sector. Our people might suffer for a while and they will forget, but the Government will have lost a crop that earns them money.  So, Government must re-consider - and re-consider immediately - getting involved in stabilising prices for the cotton farmer in Uganda. Think about economic affirmative action in respect to the cotton farmer. That is number one. Hon. Kutesa talks about Agriculture, I agree - (Interruption)

MR. KUTESA: I want to inform hon. Ben Wacha that, while I entirely agree with him on the cotton sector, this really covers the entire agricultural sector. If you look at any activity in agriculture in which a farmer is involved, it is important to realise and to note that there is no Government intervention at all, other than collecting the money and taxes. It goes for cotton, it goes for coffee, it goes for tobacco, and it goes for cattle. Where has government helped the farmer? I thought I should inform hon. Ben Wacha on this.

MR. WACHA: I thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank hon. Sam Kutesa for that intervention, but that is only to emphasise the magnitude of the problem. Think about intervening on pricing of products, or production factors that affect agriculture in this country. Do not run away from your responsibility. That is your responsibility, Government. That is your responsibility!  It is naïve for anybody to say it is for CDOs. That is Government’s responsibility, and you must wake up to it - (Interruption)  
 
MR. MWANDHA: I am sure my colleague, hon. Ben Wacha, is aware that one of the cornerstone economic policies of this Government is liberalisation. That is why the coffee sector was liberalised, and that is why we are going to borrow this money so that we can lend it to private ginners. Does the hon. Member now suggest that Government should part from this policy of liberalisation and take on a policy such as is being proposed by hon. Kutesa?  Thank you.

MR. KITYO: Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform this House that while Government liberalised the economy, if it totally liberalised agriculture, it would be a grave mistake, because you cannot liberalise the goose which lays the golden egg. 

MR. DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. There has been an attempt by Government to liberalise the economy, but time and again, His Excellency the President of Uganda has complained publicly about the non- liberalisation policy by our development partners who give us aid. I wish to inform this House that although we are pushing a policy of liberalisation, no where in the whole world is the sector of agriculture completely liberalised. Even in the areas where IMF and World Bank are based, the people who give us these conditions, there is no liberalisation.  Thank you very much.

MR. KUTESA: Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform hon. Ben Wacha that the suggestion made by hon. Mwandha is incorrect. There is nothing inconsistent with the policy of liberalisation and intervention at the same time.  Liberalisation has been towards marketing that is why we have got rid of marketing boards. We got rid of Lint Marketing Board. We got rid of Coffee marketing Board and people have been free to buy coffee and cotton from private investors. Investment in agriculture is the only way you can talk about modernising agriculture, and there has been no investment, at all, in agriculture by the Government. If you do not do that, I do not know how you are going to modernise agriculture. There are ways you can do it, you can extend credit lines to farmers, you can give improved seeds to farmers and that is not inconsistent with liberalisation. We are talking about liberalisation of marketing.  Thank you.

MR.WACHA: I am sure hon. Mwandha is much the wiser after all that information. So, there is no way you can run away from this factor, because that is the basic factor in the production of cotton and the pricing. I would also like the hon. chairman of the Committee to re-think on this pricing issue and how it was being done in the past. There is a tendency of talking about lint and divorcing it from the seeds when you are talking about the pricing of cotton, but that is not for today.  

Secondly, I would like to re-echo what hon. Kutesa said about cheap and well treated seeds. There is no way you are going to increase the production of cotton anywhere without treated seeds –(An hon. Member rose_)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I am going to give you chance to contribute. 

MR.WACHA:  I am sorry, but I would have loved to hear from him. There is no way you can do without cheap and treated seeds. These seeds must be there in time. Please, hon. chairman of the Committee, look into ways of getting our people cheap and well-treated seeds. When I was growing up, these things were free. It is in the interest of the markets and in the interest of the ginners that this cotton is produced. So, they must give us the seeds.  It is useless for them to expect us to grow cotton when they are exporting the seeds. And who allows them to export the seeds, anyway, is it the Minister for Agriculture?  Who allows them?  It does not make sense.   

Thirdly, to me, this guarantee is a stopgap measure. It should never be an everyday affair. I also urge the Committee of Agriculture to urge the farmers to form themselves into associations so that when we give out these guarantees or loans, we target them through the Ministry of Agriculture. I might be wrong, but I think it was a fundamental mistake for us to have destroyed the foundations of the co-operative union. That being the case, we must re-think how we are going to have our farmers get an organised voice. They do not have organised voices, except for us who are here. If we were not here, they would not talk, but they should also be able to talk in their own ways. So, the chairman of the Committee on Agricultural should find ways and means of getting us to go back to the villages, to the farmers and organise them into viable associations, where they can speak for themselves. 

Number four, besides this sort of guarantee, I want to re-echo what hon. Kutesa said, Government must get more involved in the agricultural sector, and much more involved in the cotton sector. We have passed a lot of loans here for poverty alleviation, but you do not tackle the real cause of poverty. We talk about modernisation, if you cannot even produce seeds, what are you modernising? Get more involved in what really concerns you most, and that is agriculture. Agriculture is the mainstay of the economy. Why do you run away from it? I know other Members want to talk. I support this because I think it is a stopgap to what we are aiming at.

MR.BUTELE ANTHONY (Madi-Okollo County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to support the motion. I would like to refer this motion to the original ten-point programme -(Laughter) - to point number 5. Even though it was amended in the 15-point programme, number five still remains as building an independent, integrated and self sustainable national economy. We shall never ever build this economy without the cotton industry.  

What were that three Cs previously? They were cotton, coffee and copper. Now cotton is down and the others are limping. Copper is dead, if cotton dies, then we shall never implement point number five. The three T’s were tea, tobacco and tourism. I would like to take on from where my hon. colleague left on the issue of the co-operative movement. The farmers have been weakened because of the hostile attitude, the hostile policy of the National Resistance Movement towards the co-operative movement. There was a Ministry called Co-operatives and Marketing, and it was done away with. Secondly, the co-operative bank was murdered. Therefore, the representatives of the farmers are being muzzled daily by the policies of the Government.  

You are talking about liberalisation, you cannot liberalise everything, and that is why we are not liberalising political parties here, because we know there will be danger -(Laughter). So, the question of liberalising everything does not arise. 

This resolution here will at least put us in the north in line with the rest of Uganda. The resolution we are going to pass for 7.1 billion shillings will help over five million people who know nothing, but cotton, in this country. You were talking about poverty eradication.  When this country used to gin half a million bales, there was no poverty at all –(Interruption)

MR. MWANDHA: Mr. Speaker, according to information available, it is money from cotton that erected this building.

MR. BUTELE: Thank you. Now you can see the importance of the three C’s. We in the north have gone to school because of cotton, as hon. Ben Wacha has said. The issue here now is not to talk about internal weaknesses. What we want now is to approve this thing so that the drugs and chemicals can be imported and cotton growing should be spread. I spent 20 years in the cotton industry. If we delay now, we are going to lose the cotton once and for all. 

The question of price fixing can be dealt with afterwards. It is the second time this motion is being brought here. The Executive brought it here on 16th December, just one week before Christmas, that is why we could not make it. This is the second time. I think it is high time we approve this, so that the problem does not lie with us, the MPs. 

Farmers do not know what the world market price is. CDO says pay 330/= but we, the middlemen, go and pay our own people less than 330/=. Who is to blame? Black middlemen cheating black Ugandans. Let us now do this and see how things can work out.  

The other thing I would like to comment on is the 10 million SDR that has been rotting in Bank of Uganda since 1994. We did not know that there was money rotting there.  The investors had to come, only to find out that there is money left here. So, there is something wrong with our banking system. The Ugandans were not aware of this money.  Now, we are aware of this money and we are saying no, let us not pass the resolution. Why? This is not the first guarantee we are approving in this Parliament. 

I know other people would like to speak. I would like to strongly recommend that we approve this guarantee so that farmers can grow their cotton. Other internal weaknesses in the CDO, Bank of Uganda and other schemes can be dealt with later on.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think this cotton problem has been well articulated, but I will allow the hon. Minister of Health, hon. Balemezi, hon. Ikote and hon. Dick Nyai. If we have time, I will adjust accordingly. I think the issue has been sufficiently covered, but let us cover certain areas. I will reduce each one’s time to five minutes.

THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr. Kiyonga Crispus): I thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I would like to very strongly support the motion on the Floor. 

As colleagues have said, cotton growing is one economic activity that a large section of our population is engaged in. Indeed, in certain parts of this country, without cotton, we would find it difficult to eradicate poverty in those areas. But it is also true that cotton benefits the whole country and all of us stand to benefit if the cotton industry can effectively be revived on a sustainable basis.  

I agree with colleagues who have spoken on the need to re-examine the cotton industry right from the seeds through to ginning, marketing and industrialisation, so that what hon. Butele has just said can obtain. All of us know how many of our children are going to school with poor quality clothes imported from out – second hand clothes – in a country that has the potential and a record of producing good quality cotton. 

We really need to speedily support this resolution, because, now, in different parts of our country, farmers are at different stages of preparing the ground. Some farmers are already weeding and others are planting. The success of the cotton industry requires every stage to be operational, including ginning. I agree that ginning, by itself, is not a solution, but without effective ginning the efforts of our people are going to be wasted. The seeds, as hon. Ben Wacha said, need to be looked at. We should look at them not only in terms of well spread seeds, not only in terms of cheap seeds, but actually, in terms of improved seeds to help the farmer, as hon. Hyuha was saying, who is getting 56,000/- after a year of toiling. This is because of poor quality seeds. These seeds can be improved, and indeed CDO has made a start.  

In my home area now, the average production from one acre, ranges between 800 and 1,000 kilograms, because of improved seeds. These seeds can be spread all over the whole country. So, we must focus on the issue of seeds.   

I will not say much more about marketing and ginning, but I want to jump to industrialisation. Once we can link our cotton production to industrialisation, that is a sure way of sustaining this industry. So, Parliament should be concerned about Nytil, Lira Spinning Mill, and what we used to call Mulco. These were the industries that used to change our cotton into either cloth or yarn, which used to be exported at a much higher value. So, in supporting some aspects of what hon. Ben Wacha said I would like to say that Government should pay more attention. Members of Parliament should take more concern. I think this is one area where we could be radical. We should even have a Standing Committee on nothing, but cotton, so that we are able to examine how are we going to produce these linkages from production through to the seeds, the marketing and the industrialisation. 

I would like to appeal to Members. Although subsidies can be one of the approaches, let us not burn out the midnight candle. We can examine, first, whether it is possible to have cotton running without subsidies now or in the future. And if we examine this and find out that subsidies can be an interim measure, we should urge for them. If we discover there is an intervention that can be made, and makes it unnecessary to have the subsidy, so be it. What is required is sustained activity by Members of Parliament to work towards reviving the cotton industry.  

I want to end by urging all my colleagues to really support this resolution, and without wasting more time, we should vote and the farmers make progress. I thank you.  

MS. BALEMEZI LYDIA (Women Representative, Mukono): I thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute on this motion. Before I support the motion, I would like to inform the Members that many times Mukono District is regarded as a typically central region area, but we have some areas that have characteristics of other neighbouring districts, for example Bbaale County.  

Bbaale County’s cash crop was mainly cotton, but it was so neglected that in the process of doing so, Bbaale turned up with no cash crop. Some time back, in 1996 we had a lot of cotton in Bbaale and exporters were attracted to there through the farmers’ association. These buyers came and promised our people that they would buy their cotton and give them seed in return. But after taking all the cotton and cotton seeds, they never returned the seeds. So, up to now, there is no cash crop in Bbaale. 

As you all know, Bbaale is an area inhabited by people from various areas. In Mukono, I represent all those people. All those people you talk about as suffering because of poverty have carried it to Mukono by depriving them of a cash crop. This makes Mukono become even poorer than any other region –(Interjections.)- Mr. Speaker, I am well informed about the Mukono situation. We have so many Banyole in Bbaale, and they came purposely to grow cotton because of the good soils, but now, the other part of Mukono is trying to sustain all these other tribes living in Bbaale.  

When we come to consider a loan of shs.7.1 billion, I will readily welcome the idea, provided Mukono is considered as one of the cotton growing areas. Many times when you think of crops grown in other areas, say Northern Uganda or Eastern Uganda, Mukono is never considered. But I would like to have this put on record. When we authorise this loan, Mukono District should also be considered. Mukono District should also benefit by attracting these exporters and the input we are going to put in to enable the ginners carry out this activity in the country. 

Up to now, Bbaale has no income, as you are also aware that the bananas and sunflower are also extinct in the area. So, when Government makes this input, it should consider coming down to Mukono as one of those areas, which needs support in cotton growing. I thank you.

MRS.IKOTE ALLELUYA (Woman Representative, Pallisa): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I shall begin by saying that I support this motion. It is like giving a starving man rotten eggs and if he eats, he might continue to survive, if he does not, he will starve to death. I say this because, either way, the people who grow cotton will be losers. 

I do not need to labour on what my colleagues have already laboured. We have been getting these seeds, we have been getting these pesticides, but you have heard the figures. You have heard the situation. So, this loan is not going to produce any miracle, but on the other hand, we still lose because, why are we being asked to guarantee this loan? These Cotton Ginners and Exporters are a private entity. Why can’t they go to the bank and put their sureties there and get their money? 

For the last two years, money has been going out for the purchase of these seeds and pesticides. In the first year, Shs. 5.7 billion was released for the purchase of cotton and seeds. Now some money is deducted from the price that the farmer gets, and this money is supposed to go in to assess what is collected and then paid back. In the first year, from 5.7 billion shillings, only two billion was got back. In the second year, some – (An. hon. Member rose_)- Mr. Speaker, you said everyone is going to get a chance to make a substantive contribution. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: She has declined, please.

MRS.IKOTE: In the second year, 5.4 billion shillings was released and up to now, nothing has been given back. In the third year, we are being asked for 7.1 billion shillings. What assurances are there that this money is going to be collected and paid back? Absolutely none!  It is because of the bad performance of the other two years that Standard Bank is demanding for a guarantee from this Parliament. So, either way, the farmer or his children will end paying back this money, because it is a loan from World Bank. He loses, on one side, if we get it, and yet we lose if we do not get it. It is in this light, and with a lot of convincing from my sister here, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, that I support this motion. Thank you.

MRS. ZZIWA: Mr. Speaker, I beg that the question be put.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will now put the question to the motion that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that this House approves the resolution.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you very much, but I take it that the Minister of Agriculture and other Ministries concerned have taken note of what the Members have said.  Hon. Members, we shall have some small business to do tomorrow, otherwise after that, we shall adjourn for some few days so that the Committees can work on the Policy Statements. The business we intend to deal with tomorrow is small. It is an amendment to the NPART Law, so that we include people in Uganda Development Bank. Therefore, I ask you to prepare for debate tomorrow. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.07 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 3rd August, 2000 at 2.00 p.m.)
