Wednesday 8th August, 2001

Parliament met at 2.49 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I will start by announcing the sad news of the demise of the former Prime Minister of Uganda, Eric Otema Alimadi, who died last Saturday at Mulago. The late Otema Alimadi was the Prime Minister of Uganda between 1980 and 1985. Earlier, he had been Minister of Foreign Affairs between 1979 and 1980. Before that, he was in the foreign service, representing us at the United Nations. There will be a funeral service at Mbuya Church on Friday at 9.00 a.m. and then after that, he will be taken to his ancestral home for burial.  

A minute of silence was observed in memory of the Late Otema Alimadi.

THE SPEAKER: I will allow two or three people who may want to make some limited contribution. This was not on the Order Paper, but as soon as I got the news, I thought it would be proper to announce it. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr. Okumu Ringa): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand to make some brief comments with regard to the news you have just broken to this House. Indeed, the late Eric Otema Alimadi was a patriot; he was a civil servant, and he was a diplomat. He was a leader whose actions and temperament cut across the political, religious and tribal divides.  

Those of us who heard about him when he was still in active service, and when we were young at school, the name of Otema Alimadi was synonymous with the leadership stature of this country those days. When the Movement Government came to power, and later on, the late Otema Alimadi and other leaders from the North decided to come back and join hands with the Government to build the new democratic process of this country, he played an active part. 

It is against this background that those of us who are in leadership today give him the credit of a patriot and a peace builder. I know wherever he will be, the good Lord will take care of him, and he will wish that we continue with that approach of building Uganda on a firm basis of constitutionalism, the rule of law, and indeed making Uganda a country for all of us, without any discrimination or bias.

The Ministry of Public Service, of which I have the honour to serve as Minister of State, is traditionally responsible for past leaders through the newly established Act which takes care of past leaders.  However, this Act does not include the position of Prime Ministers. So, the support being given now will be given because the Government values past leaders. And on this note, I would like to thank His Excellency the President, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, and the Office of the Prime Minister for giving the support that has been given for the burial arrangements for the late Eric Otema Alimadi.

I would like to convey my personal condolences, the condolences of the people of Padyere County, Nebbi District, and indeed Uganda, to the family of the late Eric Otema Alimadi.  May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

MR. OGOLA AKISOFERI (West Budama South, Tororo): Mr. Speaker, I stand to speak on behalf of my constituency, West Budama South, Tororo District. (Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Sorry, hon. Members, the problem we have in this situation is that, although I announced the sad news, it was informally done; there should have been a formal motion. You can now turn it into a motion to pay tribute to the late, but I am going to limit it to about four people, so that at the end of the day, we pronounce ourselves to what has been said. This will go in the records as a tribute by the House on the services of the late Otema Alimadi.

MR. OGOLA: Mr. Speaker, thank you very much for your guidance.  You referred to hon. Otema Alimadi’s capacity as Prime Minister, and also as ambassador of this country. I am one of the people who worked very closely under and with -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: So, hon. Member, you are moving that we pay tribute to the late Otema Alimadi? Let us formalize it. (Interjection).

MR. OGOLA: Mr. Speaker, I would like to move a motion of paying tribute to the Late Otema Alimadi by this House.  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Seconded?  Proceed.

MR. OGOLA:  Mr. Speaker, I thank the House for seconding this motion. As I said, I am one of those people who worked very closely with the Late Otema Alimadi. He was Uganda’s ambassador and permanent representative to the United Nations between 1967 and 1970.  At that time I was a young officer and I was posted to New York to work under him. I was a political officer and indeed, I found the Late Otema Alimadi a very receptive person. 

He was alert, very broad minded, extremely nationalistic and patriotic. He was also an internationalistic person in that, he looked at the world at the time in respect of the forces. He had to play with, especially the forces of colonialism, imperialism, neo - colonialism and the problem of independence that were facing many countries in Africa.  

He had to articulate the policies of Uganda at the time, especially in the United Nations Special Political Committee, which dealt with the territories of South Africa, the countries under Portuguese colonial power like Angola and Mozambique, and especially the question of Rhodesia at the time. 

Indeed I do remember that just before the coup in 1971, he was called from New York to come for consultations in a meeting in Kampala; and they told me to give him a position with regard to the problems which were facing Uganda at the time, which was a threat of a coup.  The fears were that perhaps Uganda was unsafe.  But I did write to him a paper, which he later appreciated to be very true and indeed within a short time, a coup took place in 1971. Eight years later, when the liberation war in April 1979 took place, I was pleased to meet him again, and he said to me “Mr.Ogola, I wish I had listened to you”. 

I remember him to be a very gentle person, and very appreciative. I think many of us and this country shall miss the Late Otema Alimadi. I pray that his soul rests in eternal peace. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

PROF. KABWEGYERE (Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for allocating this time to honor one of the great sons of this country. Often on an occasion like this, truths are said about the departing person. Sometimes exaggerations accompany the dead. But I think when we are talking about the Late Otema Alimadi, there is a number of sobering experiences that one can draw from, to establish that really this country has lost a great son. 

Many of us heard of Otema Alimadi when we were young; but in my own experience, the most intimate time I had with the late started in 1979, when we converged in Moshi at the conference which produced the UNLF.  
There were only three people who were invited by the Tanzanian Government to attend that conference, who did not have to go through our Credentials Committee.  These were the late President Lule, the late Paulo Mwanga and now, the late Otema Alimadi. 

These three did not have to go through credentials; they were brought in very clearly as people who were identified by the host – Tanzania, as people who were known already to have contributed to the liberation of Uganda at the time.  It was therefore, not a surprise that the Late Otema Alimadi was one of the five people to lead what was called directorates; the directorate of Foreign Affairs.
 
No sooner had the conference ended, than he was appointed the Minister for Foreign Affairs, fully recognizing his contribution. He was a gentleman and diplomat going to help the newly formed organization, to create good relations with the countries abroad. 

Indeed the removal of Amin was made with support, through the efforts of a man of such an experience as the Late Otema Alimadi. Even when we came back here and we were involved in the wrangles - when I say, when we came back I am talking about those who were in exile - in political rivalries and so on. The late Otema Alimadi remained above all that; his smoking pipe, his stick, occasionally a cigar and once in a while a hat, simply produced a man you respected as an elder. And when he became a Prime Minister, it was obvious that his contribution was being recognised. 

On this occasion when we say bye-bye to him, I think we should also recognise that here is a man who when he was angry showed his anger, but when he felt that his anger had been understood, he reconciled. It is not therefore, strange; it should not surprise anybody that among the past leaders the late Otema Alimadi is here. He has died at home and he is going to be buried here.

The last remark I want to make is to put on record that for a country to have dignity, it must respect the past leaders; and the past leaders must also have the dignity of respecting themselves and the country that has produced them. 

In this regard, the return of former President, Godfrey Lukongwa Binaisa, is the most welcome act on his part. I think the country did very well to receive him back.  Those leaders, whatever mistakes they made, if they can reconcile with themselves and with the country, I think reconciliation should be made. 

Therefore, on this occasion, not only will we be respecting an elder statesman, a man who made a contribution, we are also reconciling with our own selves, that mistakes are there but goodness can replace mistakes. 

I think on this occasion when we say bye-bye to the late Otema Alimadi in dignity, and in recognition that everyone has a place in this country, this country is large enough for those in power and for those outside, and even those to come should find that there is a tradition of respect for those who have made a contribution. May God rest his soul in eternal peace.

MR.OKUMU REAGAN (Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of my constituency, Aswa County, I would like to thank you for giving Members of Parliament this opportunity to accord their honour. 

The late Otema Alimadi hails from my constituency. For some of us, the young people, we were inspired into leadership by the name of the late Eric Otema Alimadi. We were born a little bit late when the late had already joined Ugandan politics, and it is common knowledge in our village that Otema Alimadi was among the people who fought for independence. 

He was a member of the Uganda National Congress that eventually fought for the independence for this country. After independence, he contested for leadership but he was not elected at that time, but he joined the Foreign Service. His name remained very popular in Gulu. 

We were also told that the late contributed a lot in the 1979 liberation. The Acholis were subjected to a lot of suffering during the 1970s and many of our people who eventually formed the bulk of the liberation fighters in the UNLA found their way out of Uganda through what was at that time code-named yango lyec.  

This was a way to mobilise people who were closer to the border of Sudan, to quietly move into Sudan and organise themselves into a guerrilla war. Very many of our people were ferried into the Sudan clandestinely for all those years. From Sudan they were ferried to Tanzania, and eventually, we were told that much as the Acholis formed the bulk of the liberation fighters in Tanzania, among the sober leaders who accepted the leadership of the UNLF were the late Gen. Tito Okello and the late Mzee Otema Alimadi. 

They told the Acholis who were based in Tabora that their contribution was not for the liberation of Acholiland but for the liberation of Uganda, and therefore, they should accept any leadership that would bring them back home and restore order, sanity and democracy in Uganda. I think this was above the petty thinking of smaller communities, that when you have contributed to a struggle for a country like this, you should preside over it yourself or take the bulk of the share. 

When I was growing up after the 1979 Liberation War, I also came to learn, during the campaigns of the 1980, the name of Eric Otema Allimadi. We used to stand along the road and clap as the late Alimadi passed us going for his rallies. Eventually when he won the elections, he became the Prime Minister of Uganda. I must also say that he played that role as a Prime Minister of Uganda diligently. Everybody in Uganda at least knows that the late Otema Alimadi visited all corners of Uganda when he was a Prime Minister of Uganda. He treated Uganda as one. He never thought of serving only his constituency, Aswa County, which was by then called Gulu East Constituency, but he served Uganda. Maybe this could be a lesson to our leaders in Cabinet that when you are appointed to Cabinet, even if you have been elected by the people of your constituency, your service should be above that, you should serve Uganda, because that is the role you are supposed to perform.

The late Alimadi joined the UPDA, which fought a war between 1986 to 1988, and he was very instrumental in talking down the rebel force to negotiate with the Government of Uganda and eventually he returned from exile and lived here. 

We are very grateful for the contribution of the Government of Uganda from the time the late returned from exile; accommodating him, housing him, and transporting him. The people of my constituency are very grateful. We are also very grateful, on behalf of the family, for the contribution the Government is giving to cover the burial expenses.

In conclusion, as a point of information, there will be a funeral service on Friday at 9.00 a.m. It will be at Mbuya Catholic Church. Thereafter, the body will be transported to Gulu, and burial will take place on Saturday at mid-day in Bungatira sub-county, just about 6 kilometres outside Gulu town. May his Soul rest in eternal peace.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We agreed that four Members will contribute to this debate, which was not arranged. I now want to put the question to the motion by hon. Ogola to pay tribute to the late Otema Alimadi.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I had not finished my communication. I will adjust the Order Paper because hon. Hilary Onek, from Lamwo County has a personal statement to make.  

Hon. Members, today the Business and Welfare Committee sat for the first time and decided on how we should proceed up to October, when we are supposed to complete the Budget process. Therefore, the general debate on the Budget, which will be initiated by the hon. Minister of Finance, will start on 14th and end on 23rd August.  After that, the various Committees will consider the Ministerial Policy Statements pertaining to estimates of various Ministries, and this will start on 28th August to 13th September. During this period, we shall not have any plenary sessions. Members will be working from morning to evening.  

The presentation of the Committee reports on Ministerial Statements will start on 18th September and will go on up to 4th October. There is a suggestion here that the Business Committee, for purposes of debate, may select key Ministries instead of dealing with all Ministries. 
They may identify statements of a controversial nature or big Ministries for full debate, but in respect of others, there will only be executive summaries presented to the House.  

Consideration and approval of the Estimates in the Committee of Supply will start from 10th October and end on 18th October. The passing of the Appropriation Bill, 2001 will be on 23rd October, and the passing of the Finance Bill, 2001 will be between 24th and 25th October.  

We may have some interruptions in this programme, depending on the urgency of the matter, because the Executive or any other person may have a very urgent matter. We may interrupt the programme, but if that does not happen, this is what we are going to follow. The Budget process must be completed by October. We must do this, otherwise we will create a constitutional problem.

During their deliberations, Members of the Committee may also have something to discuss on the issue of Members’ welfare. As you all know, the duty of dealing with Members’ welfare is given to the Business and Welfare Committee and the Parliamentary Commission. But of late, there are some Members who have formed groups that are advocating for the welfare of the Members. The Committee has noted that this has complicated the issue, and in fact, it is prejudicing the Members’ interests.  

Therefore, there is an appeal to trust the Committees that you have elected, the Business and Welfare Committee and the Parliamentary Commission, to deal with this matter. We have handled Members’ welfare before. We know whom to negotiate with.  But if you start making statements that are attributed to the entire House when they are not from the House, the other people whom we will go to negotiate with will be poisoned, and the public itself may be confused. You would have prejudiced your interest. So, give these Committees time to deal with the matter. I am confident we shall take care of your interest rather than prejudicing it.

MR. MAO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Following what you have been communicating to the House about Members’ welfare, I noted that offices are being distributed. 
I have been seeing pieces of paper pasted on doors in the North Wing and East Wing, and I learnt that each district is getting an office. 

Given the fact that we have not elected the Parliamentary Commission, I wonder who is doing that; maybe it is your office. We have lots of unfinished construction in this complex. If you look at the North Wing, you find that the columns have already been built. All that is needed is some money to be budgeted, and then each Member can even have an office. 

The next Commission which we are going to elect, if we elect serious people, should insist that we should have money budgeted to ensure that our working environment should be a priority, rather than these controversies of vehicles all the time. I wish we could insist on our working environment; desks, chairs, where we can meet our constituents, and where we can meet foreign delegations that are visiting. I think those should be our priority.  I really think that is an angle from which your office can also support us. I hope to see something in the next budget concerning the improvement of our working environment, especially building additional floors on top of the building that we have. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, maybe you have not had the opportunity to look at the Commission’s Budget.  If you do, you will find that what you are advocating for has been taken care of in the current Budget which we shall discuss and approve.

In respect of allocation of offices, it is true that the Commission is not there. There is a Commission, but this Commission has some vacancies which you will have a duty to fill tomorrow.  In spite of that, there is what we call the ‘Board of Management’. The Speaker does not allocate offices, but there is a Board of Management which has the responsibility of doing this kind of allocation. 

Yes, you have seen offices being given according to the districts. It is true, we think there is a formula and our initial duty is to allocate offices to Members of Parliament. The formula which was devised was to allocate offices in accordance to the districts; so that Members coming from a particular district have an address where their constituents can meet them.  Because if they come here and say, “I want to meet a Member for Manjiya”, then we say, “You go to room so and so, and you will find him or her”.  He/she may not be there, but at least that is his/ her office.  

You may find that one district has one office, whereas another district has two offices.  This has been determined according to numbers. For instance, my hon. friend, Awori, from Busia – they are three people – then they get one office.  But you may find my district where they are ten Members of Parliament, they may have two or a bigger office than the other.  So, if you find this disparity, this is the cause.

MR. AWORI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On a slightly different note, I wish to elicit a statement from Government, on a matter from Maj. Kakooza Mutale.  This morning I saw a big headline in the Press; this former candidate for a Ministerial post, attacking Ministers whom my Committee had approved. I wish to confirm with the Government whether they do concur with the statement made by Maj. Kakooza Mutale, that indeed, the two Ministers mentioned in his statement are causing confusion and insecurity in this country; or are they going to deny his statement?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I do appreciate your concern, but since I speak for one branch of Government, namely, Parliament, I take note that maybe the Executive where Maj. Kakooza Mutale and the other Ministers work, I think if they think so, they will make a statement. But I do not think Maj. Kakooza Mutale is really within our jurisdiction; and we have nothing to say. But we have noted your concern.

MR. AWORI: Mr. Speaker, this same gentleman attacked one of our colleagues in this House, on remarks made with the privilege of Parliamentary circumstances. He was not just answering my colleague, hon. Kazoora of Kashari; he was actually indirectly attacking this House.  

Mr. Speaker, as you are aware, there is a Committee of Presidential and Foreign Affairs. This particular gentleman, as a Presidential Advisor, comes under our powers to fire or hire him.
THE SPEAKER: So, what I think hon. Member, is that since you have rightly said, in this House we have a Committee of Parliament known as Presidential and Foreign Affairs. I think I will refer this matter to that particular Committee to consider and deal with appropriately.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On top of what has been ably articulated by the hon. Members, Uganda is a member country of the United Nations, the OAU and related institutions. On top of that, the Members of Parliament of Uganda, have internationally connected themselves to various viable institutions of respect and dignity; namely, the sphere of fighting corruption and the human rights and environment; and it is on record that I am the Vice President of the Environment International.  The question I am putting, noting that that is so, is the present arrangement going to cater for offices related to the international linkages?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Members. We are aware of this and we are aware of your position as a Vice President of the Environment International; and you remember we congratulated you when you were elected. We shall also take into account such organizations when we are distributing the accommodation.  But I think you will agree with me that, the priority should start with Members of Parliament in their role as Members of Parliament, representing constituencies. When there is other space, we shall definitely do so. There are organizations which had already been given accommodation.  We shall find solution to this; so do not get worried about it.

MR. OKUMU REAGAN: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My concern is with the Parliamentary Library. For some time, the Parliamentary Library has been closed, and yet some Members are interested in accessing it. When I move from the North Wing, on the third floor on your left, there is a whole space left there. I wonder whether the Parliamentary Library should not have been transferred to that place, in order to give Members enough space and time. At the moment, we are finding a lot of difficulties accessing the facilities in the Library, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: We shall look into this matter and see whether it is feasible.

THE MINISTER OF STATE (PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS) (Mr. Okot Ogong):  Mr. Speaker, I would like to respond to what hon. Awori has said.  As a Movement, we have a forum where we discuss our matters. The issue that has been raised by hon. Awori will be squarely addressed; and I want to inform him that the Leader of Government Business, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, will come here and make a statement on behalf of Government.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much. As I said, we adjusted our Order Paper to accommodate our friend, hon. Hilary Onek.  Hon. Hilary Onek, could you make your statement?

MS. KIRASO: Mr. Speaker, without pre-empting the statement from my colleague, hon. Hilary Onek, I rise on a point of procedure.  If the personal explanation the hon. Member is going to make, which he must have brought to your attention by now, because you should know what he is going to talk about, is related to the matter which was reported in the papers yesterday, that the hon. Member is not a Ugandan but a Sudanese; I rise on a point of procedure to safeguard the integrity of this House. For such a matter which is before courts of law, should we even accept to hear his defence! I would like to be clarified whether it is procedurally correct, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I do not know the facts surrounding the matter. Yes, I agree that he is going to talk about his citizenship, but whether it is in court or not, that fact is not known to me. I do not know whether it is a court matter, since I do not really operate by reading newspapers. I read newspapers, but I do not react from what they write.  

What we can do this time is to maybe advise hon. Onek.  If he knows that this is a court matter, he better reserve his defence rather than open it before he is required to do so. But it is entirely up to him. If it is a court matter and it is going to prejudice the court proceedings, I would definitely stop it, because it will be subjudice, and it would be prejudicial to him, because he will reveal his defence before his opponent has adduced sufficient evidence. It is up to him. 
Hon. Onek, you have heard this, and you know the circumstances.  Should you feel that this is part of the defence you are going to raise in court, as a lawyer I would say do not open your defence. But if you are not aware that this is a court matter, you are free to make it.

MR. ONEK: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Actually, what I am going to inform the House about is to kind of clear the air; it is not in any way related to my evidence. There may be areas that suggest information, but really it is not going to be what I am going to present for court purposes 

THE SPEAKER: We are saying that you are not obliged to say anything, because what is being reported in the newspapers or what has been stated in court will not stop you from being a Member representing Lamwo County. Even when judgement is given against you, before you have exhausted the appeals, you will continue to be a Member. But the fear is, by making one statement or another, you may be giving a clue to those pursuing you to your detriment. 

I am not stopping you, I am only following up on what hon. Kiraso raised. Since you are not obliged to make a statement, why do you prejudice yourself? Why don’t you keep it to yourself? I have seen the statement, but Members have not seen it. It is up to you really. I am just advising you. You are not obliged to make a statement one way or the other.

MR. ONEK: Mr. Speaker, my lawyers fully concur with what I am presenting to Parliament, and they are my defendants.  I do not think they would advise me otherwise.

THE SPEAKER: Make your statement, hon. Member.

PERSONAL STATEMENT

MR. ONEK HILARY (Lamwo County, Kitgum): Mr. Speaker, I would like to make the following statement to the House. You must have all seen and read the article appearing on the front page of The Monitor newspaper of 7th August 2001, sponsored by my opponent, Dr. Okullu, who lost the election for Member of Parliament for Lamwo County in Kitgum.  Among many things, the article states that I am a Sudanese national, born in Sudan, and not qualified to be a Member of Parliament.  

The article states, in bold headlines, “Acholi Elders Reject MP Onek as Sudanese”. I have bothered to find out who the elders are, and I have discovered that the persons named as elders are all merely 30-year-old and 50-year-old individuals, compared to my age of 53. I am actually older than them. But more importantly, they are persons here in Kampala, who are not known as elders in Acholi. They are residents in Kampala and they are not known in Acholi.  

What these supposed elders are talking about is clearly based on hearsay, because how could they know about the citizenship of my father born in 1916 and my mother in 1931, more than 20 years before any one of them was born? Nobody has come from Sudan to say that my father was sub-county chief there. Nobody has come from the alleged Banyikwara tribe of Sudan and claimed that I am his relative or belong to that tribe.  

Assuming, for arguments’ sake, that this is true and that I am born in Kangole, Moroto, as they partly say, and not in Awere in Kigtum, isn’t the distinction merely for academic consumption since both places are in Uganda? The 1995 Constitution of Uganda is very clear on who is automatically a citizen and the criteria of acquiring citizenship, perhaps my opponent should bother to see what it says before embarking on a wild goose chase.  

The Constitution establishes a national citizenship and immigration board, whose function is to register citizens.  It also specifies under what circumstances citizenship shall be null or revoked. The board, which has received these complaints of my opponents before, has not annulled or revoked any citizenship, whether before or after elections. 

My opponent has accused me of never filling citizenship verification forms. Would it not be best if the allegations were made by the immigration authority? How did Dr. Okullu get access to immigration records? Hasn’t he either misrepresented or falsified the contents therein? In fact, during the recent Parliamentary election, he sent out posters throughout the constituency attacking my identity or citizenship.  This was rejected by the people, including those of his own sub county, Marupe. 

In my humble view, two or three alleged elders, one 30 years old and the other about 50 years old, cannot and should not outweigh the thousands of elders, meaning those older than the two, amongst the 12,119 Acholi citizens who heard this allegation but nevertheless voted overwhelmingly for me.  

Before and after the nomination, my opponent wrote to the Electoral Commission seeking to disqualify me as a candidate, and his appeal was rejected. He was advised to go and appeal if he was dissatisfied. He never appealed against the decision of the Electoral Commission, and yet the law entitled him to do so. 

Our Constitution guarantees freedom of expression in the country, and my opponents are entitled to say what they want in private or during elections. But since they have taken their discontent to the press, my lawyers and I are considering the appropriate steps for legal redress when the appropriate time comes. 

Lamwo County is a border constituency like many other counties in Uganda.   It is not surprising that political opponents use this citizenship allegation when they have nothing else to say.  The guiding principles in my view should be awareness of the Constitution and the spirit of acknowledgement of defeat after losing election.  I have really served this country for numerous years; 16 of them as managing director of National Water and Sewerage Corporation.  Never before has anybody questioned my identity or that of my parents or grandparents until this election.  Since this is subjudice, I would humbly request that my opponents and their sympathizers should let the court determine the matter without undue interference.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MOTION FOR A DEBATE IN REPLY TO THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION DELIVERED TO PARLIAMENT BY HIS EXCELLENCY, THE PRESIDENT ON THE 27TH JULY 2001 

(Debate continued)

MRS. IDAH MEHANGYE (Woman Representative, Kamwengye):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise to support the motion, and my vote of thanks be registered to the President for the State of the Nation Address. The people of Kamwengye would like to thank this Parliament for having given them the status of a district. This seemed to be contentious and that is why they are grateful to the Government and indeed to the President for having brought services nearer to the people.  

I want to talk about the violence that took place in the recently concluded Parliamentary elections.  I must condemn this violence in whatever form it happened. Some did fight with words; others with guns, and the fighting is still following us in this Parliament.  The Member who has been on the floor is a victim of this kind violence, and unless we condemn it, we are bound to have trouble in the next elections. 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank you for the good words you have given us about the welfare of the Members of Parliament, because Back Benchers were beginning to get worried about the attack we got from the media and the general public.  We had thought that while the Members of Parliament were being attacked, the Members of the Front Bench, and possibly the Speaker, were just looking on, as if they are not part of the Members of Parliament. I wish the media could pick the right things to say.  It has shown us that you just don’t look on; while you protect us in the House, you also protect us against the strangers.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

I would wish to comment on Universal Primary Education that Kamwenge as a district has benefited. While we appreciate that a number of children are going to primary school, I have a fear that there will be a battle neck when it comes to the universal secondary education. When I imagine one secondary government aided school in a sub-county, I see a crowded and congested classroom, and wonder whether there will be teachers and resources to cater for the growing population. 

I was working with GTZ on adolescent reproductive health in Kabarole, before l came to Parliament. I saw few street children, but in Kampala, the number is great. 

I wonder whether there is a policy to rehabilitate and get these children off the streets, and put them in school.  What worries me is that some of these street children are beginning to have babies; so soon we shall have parents on the street, and this is a dangerous situation. 

DR KEFA SEMPANGI:  I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor, that the Ministry of Gender passed some guidelines concerning street children; but the police cannot re-enforce the law.  There is no policy or NGO dealing with street children.

MRS. MEHANGYE:  Thank you for that information. I would like to say that while we are worried about these children having babies, it is clear that they may be infected with AIDS/HIV. So there is need to plan for the children who might be infected. The problem is that some of these street children have started raping girls and women. 

Finally, let me talk about agriculture.  In Kamwenge, a bag of maize costs as much as I spend on a meal in the Parliamentary canteen; and this is caused mainly due to lack of roads in Kamwenge District.  We have no markets mainly because the infrastructure in terms of roads is very poor. People make roads by what we call bulungi bwansi, but there are areas with valleys and swamps where we need culverts but they are not available in Kamwenge.

While in Kamwenge people grow so much maize, it is stored in their stores. I wonder how we will go back to say, ‘now you grow coffee’. They have grown the maize, they cannot sell it. They are so poor, there is nothing in the pocket, and now we say the crop that will bring in money is coffee. How can we convince these people that while they failed to sell the maize, they will be able to sell the coffee? So, Kamwenge has problems. It is poor like the North which we have talked about. 

It is very sad that in the speech of the President, we have retrogressed in three areas. One is the poverty in the North which has moved from 60 per cent to 66 per cent. It is very sad when people begin going backward instead of forward. 

The second issue where we have retrogressed is infant mortality rate, from 81 children per 1000 born alive to 88. When anything concerns life and loss of life, it is a very serious issue. It is very sad that we should move from protecting and having our children live, to our children dying more and more. 

The third one is the immunisation percentage. We moved from above 70 per cent to 38 per cent. There are two others which are not in the speech. One is corruption, where at one time we were the eleventh corrupt country and we moved to being the third corrupt country in the world. 

The other one is about the election -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you have really eaten into other people’s time. 

MRS.MEHANGYE: All right, Mr. Speaker, I will stop here.  Thank you.

MRS. RUTH TUMA (Woman Representative, Jinja): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before I make my contribution to the President’s State of the Nation Address, allow me to congratulate you and the Deputy Speaker upon your assumption of this high office and the Members of this august House to have been elected by their faithful voters. Congratulations. 

Let me also bring a message of gratitude from the people of Jinja whom I represent.  They were very happy on Friday last week when President Museveni visited Jinja district. He was able to give them some words of comfort and support after the bombs which terrorised our town. The people of Jinja were pleased and commended the Government for the attempts being made to ensure that the society gets on the right footing.  

Back to the Address, if we look at the top of page three, the President said, “Ours is a young democrac, which should be given every opportunity to grow.” Indeed we are. We, therefore, need to work harder to achieve perfection. 

For example, the Electoral Commission should make election timetables well before time to allow preparations for proper electioneering to be carried out. 

In the last election, civic education was inadequate, yet given the young nature of our democracy, most of our population would have benefited from the exercise. It is little wonder, therefore, that the last elections had several weaknesses. In future, the Electoral Commission should put out all the relevant information several months or even years before the election time. I am glad to hear that they have started mobilising people for the registers to be put right. 

Regarding the Programme for Modernisation of Agriculture (PMA), the people of Jinja are very happy and they commend the Government for that effort and for putting in place such a well thought out plan. We feel Government should also encourage the development of small agro-processing industries in order to add value to the various crops and fruits, which will be finding their way to the external and local markets. Also silos are needed for storage to avoid wastage. 

The opening of the American and European markets, which his Excellency refers to on page 13 in his address, comes as welcome news to the women and youths of Jinja and indeed, the women of Uganda will benefit from that. But we would also like to encourage the organisations or bodies concerned, like the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry, to encourage training for perfection and to have quality. The NGOs like Uganda Women Entrepreneurs Association come in handy to help women improve on the quality of their products. 

I would also like to observe that I was very surprised, that there was no mention about tourism in the President’s address, yet tourism is one of our potential foreign exchange earning activity. I appeal to the Ministry concerned to look into that. 

Jinja district has got industries but they have been frozen in the fridge. Can the Ministry concerned think about us? We need employment, could these industries be revitalised? Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. THOMSON ANANG-ODUR (Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to contribute to this debate. First of all, may I bring to you congratulations from the people of Kwania for having been elected Speaker of this August House. Your brilliant performance in this House is a testimony that intimidation-free and problem-free election can yield flawless and desirable end products. For if Major Kakooza Mutale had been here to influence this election, I am sure the result would have been very different. 

Because of lack of time, I am going to restrict my time to one or two areas only. First, I wish to thank the President for a job well done generally. The paper is a good working paper, which is a stimulus for the search for nation-building and economic development of our country. 

In his search for developing Uganda, the President presented two important documents, the PMA and the PEAP and there are some programs, as documents, which can accelerate development for Uganda within the next five years.  

Pages 8 to 10 of the President’s Speech gives his projections of coffee, cotton and other products between the year 2001 and 2006. I note that in the year 2001 coffee production is now 3.5 million bags and it is projected to grow to 12 millon bags in the next five years, which is 243 per cent. 

For cotton, the figures are 400 bales to 1 million bales in the five years span which is 150 per cent. For beef, among other things mentioned, from 107 to 150 tonnes representing 40.1 per cent. 

I have difficulties with these figures. As an economist, I have not found such a phenomenon growth in any country within a similar period of time, even if take into account those Asian tiger economies. Indeed, even if there was one example outside Uganda, I think the present condition in Uganda cannot produce these wonderful projections. First of all, Uganda’s labour productivity is very low, being unskilled and untrained. We need massive investment in terms of education and training for us to raise the productivity of our labour to realise these figures we are talking about within the time span the President mentioned. I do not think we can do that within that time.  

Secondly, the finance sector in Uganda is underdeveloped and it is anti-agricultural oriented. For us to invest in agriculture and to realise the figures the President was talking about, we need to re-mobilise, re-organise and mobilise massive funds. I do not think this can be done within the five years we are talking about.

Thirdly, in Uganda, we know there is very serious corruption and graft and some at very high levels of Government. There are some Government personalities - we remember the scam of UCB, the helicopter junk, the valley dam and the railways looting and what has happened to similar organisations. I find it impossible for Uganda, because of these three factors, to raise sufficient funds to implement these programmes to the scale the President has outlined. I think these projections were based on preferences that were not well researched. The figures were based on things which were, to me, guess work; and my fear is, when our President presents such important issues, I think the figures should be realistic, believable and the targets should be realisable. We stand a danger of making the President look as if he is not telling the truth, and that can bring frustration and a lot of misunderstanding in the population. That will not go down well. I advice the advisors of the President to look into this matter more seriously and ameliorate the situation. Thank you very much.

MR.BIKWASIZEHI DEUSDEDIT (Buhweju County, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since it is my first time to speak, I would like also to congratulate you and the Deputy Speaker upon your assumption of those offices. I also congratulate other Members who are appointed to senior posts and, of course, my colleagues.  

I will start with the issue of violence during our elections. We did not experience this in Buhweju, luckily enough, but I suspect one of the major causes of this was the high cost of politics. If someone has invested very heavily, he or she will try by all means to make sure that he or she wins; hence the violence. 

On the economy, I thank the Government for taking stern measures, especially the micro economic policies which have stabilised the monitory sector. Inflation is controlled.  The figures which indicate the poverty percentage may not hold for rural areas. I will quote a case of my constituency, Buhweju. They say the poverty in the North is around 66 per cent, but on average, elsewhere it is 35 per cent. But if I give you my situation, you will realise that it does not hold, especially if you use other indicators. In Buhweju, for example, we have a problem with education and I am happy the Minister of State for Primary Education is here. But I want to inform her that in Buhweju, say for example the PLE results, last year the whole constituency got only 5 pupils in first grade. 

Buhweju is one of the disadvantaged constituencies. We have no through road. A road of 22 kilometres was started by the Obote I Government between Buhweju and Bunyaruguru, but since the mid-1960s up to now, the Government has been able to construct only three kilometres of that road. So, in that case you cannot say that the other areas are okay. 

In terms of higher education, Buhweju has got only two Government-aided schools with no A- level and these are housed in improvised former primary schools. I request for affirmative action for areas that are very disadvantaged, such as giving equalisation grants to districts. I appeal that such grants be extended to disadvantaged constituencies like Buhweju.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, they tell us that you have gold in the area.

MR.BIKWASIZEHI: I will come to that, Mr. Speaker, if you give me opportunity. 

On the question of poverty, the President stressed the importance of PMA as one way to liberate this country from poverty. But much as we have that programme in place, we need to be focused in our investment in trying to fight poverty. 

I will give an example. We have got a crop like tea. Uganda started planting it before Kenya, but as I talk now, tea is the leading export earner for Kenya whereas in Uganda it is not ranked among the first three. Kenya has got 83 factories of tea, but Uganda has got only 23, and out of the 23, only 4 are smallholder whereas in Kenya they have got 45.

The President said -(Interruption).

MR. BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the hon. Member for giving way. 
The hon. Member talked about poor infrastructure in his area, poor education with the low turn-up of few grades in primary; and he earlier talked about non-violence during the Parliamentary Elections. Could it be because of that, that even the competition was only left to one person who is educated, and that is why there was no violence? 

MR. BIKWASIZEHI:  Mr. Speaker, we were five candidates, and four of us were university graduates.  So, it was not because of that, I should say. I was still continuing on this question of poverty alleviation.

Tea is one of the crops that can fetch high income for this country; it is one of the best employers, because one hectare of tea can employ about 20 people. But as the President said, we have only tapped 10 percent, whereas we have the capacity to raise 200,000 hectares. At present we only have 20,000 hectares, although we are capable of raising 200,000 hectares.

The President has confined himself mainly on the issue of using agriculture, as the only route that will eliminate poverty, but we have got other resources. We have the minerals, my other colleagues have indicated industry, and to be specific, we have gold in Buhweju. 

I appeal to Government to make a comprehensive programme to mine these resources for the benefit of the areas and Uganda as a whole. I even heard that there is oil, but nothing was said about it.

Lastly, Mr. Speaker, we have got a problem as a country, which problem if not addressed, might cause us a problem.  This is the problem of unemployment. When I move up-country or in town, I find a lot of redundant youth. Some of you who know a bit of history of the First and Second World Wars, the people who fought those wars or who were spearheading them, took advantage of the redundant youth. I am afraid this might cause us a problem.

Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank you for the opportunity and I support the motion. 

MRS. Beatrice RWAKIMARI (Woman Representative, Ntungamo):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let me echo my colleagues by congratulating you and your Deputy, for having ascended to these prestigious offices in the august House. Let me also congratulate my dear colleagues for having made it to Parliament.

I stand to support the motion, and thank the President for his elaborate, and visionary State of the Nation Address. I wish also to take this opportunity, to appreciate the strides made by His Excellency, the President, towards the restoration of peace, security and respect of fundamental human rights, in most parts of the country.

As for the President’s speech to the nation is concerned, the people of Ntungamo District have asked me to make only two comments on health and poverty. 

My people have asked me, through you, to inform the President that we do not have a single hospital in our district. We have only three health centres, one dispensary and 14 sub-dispensaries. There is serious lack of qualified staff; for example, midwives, nurses and lab assistants. The doctor - patient ratio is one doctor per 74,200 patients. The nurse and midwife ratio to the patients is one per 16,882 patients, compared to the nation average of one doctor per 18 patients.  

The mortality rate by 1999 was 2,000 per 100,000 women per year, as compared to the national average of 500 women per 100,000 women per year.       

The infant mortality rate has increased to over 88 per 1,000 live births per year  -(Interruption). 

MS. NAMUYANGU: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I thank my colleague for giving way.  The clarification I am seeking is, are those ratios to patients or to people?

MRS. RWAKIMARI:  These are ratios, one doctor to people; it is doctor to people. 

The percentage of stunted children is more than the national average of 38 percent. Although, AIDS is considered as the major problem in this country, as number one killer in this country, in Ntungamo District, malaria is the major killer disease. 

From the statistics above, the health status in Ntungamo District is extremely poor, and I am calling upon the Government especially, the Ministry concerned, to come to our rescue.  

The second point is about poverty.  There has been some improvement in the living standards of the people, especially during the 1990s, when there was a coffee boom in the country. As we talk now, people no longer borrow shoes or clothes to go to church or for parties. However, as I have already explained, the inadequacy of medical facilities in our area has rendered the people very unhealthy, such that they are not in position to carry out developmental programmes in the area.

Mr. Speaker, let me also inform the President through you, that alongside the strategies highlighted in his speech to alleviate poverty, considerations should be made in addressing gender imbalances and inequalities in this country. I know something is being done about this, but at a slow pace.

It is important to note that research by the Uganda Participatory Poverty Assessment Project has established that gender imbalances and inequalities are some of the issues that perpetuate poverty in this country.  For example, statistics show that although women in Uganda constitute 70 to 80 percent of the agricultural labour force, only seven percent own land, and only 30 percent have access to control of proceeds.  

Women productivity is further hampered by inadequate access to credit. For example, a survey on women’s participation in the Rural Farmers’ Scheme of UCB of 1992 revealed that out of the 27,237 women who applied for assistance as individuals, only 5,117 were assisted.

There is need for Government to address gender imbalances and inequalities if we are to contribute to the overall national development, and to our goal of eradicating poverty by the year 2017. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. ORECH MARTIN (Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I stand to support the motion.  

His Excellency the President’s address on the state of the nation was very clear, very lucid and comprehensive. 
I would like to say that the people of my constituency welcomed it. What now remains is one challenge; the challenge to implement all the policy proposals which were outlined by His Excellency the President in his address. 

You should be aware that there are many players in the implementation exercise, including Members of Parliament themselves. They are very important and crucial in the implementation exercise, because Members of Parliament come from the grassroots. We are with the people, and we feel that we can play our role, and play it very effectively in the implementation exercise. As Ministers move around the country marketing the policy proposals to the population, it would be very useful if Members of Parliament are fully informed and alerted on their tours, so that the Members of Parliament can also make their contribution to the implementation of these very important policy proposals.  

Another group of people who are very important in the implementation exercise are the civil servants. Civil servants are key to the implementation of Government policies, of course under the general guidance of the political leadership. Having regard to the fact that civil servants are important in the implementation exercise, it is very important that this group of people, who help the Executive in the implementation exercise, should always have their interests, especially their terms and conditions of service, constantly reviewed. It is important that they are looked at, so that these civil servants are motivated and encouraged to serve the country with zeal and commitment. 

In that connection, it is also important that in reviewing their terms and conditions of service, Government should look into a matter which has been voiced over the years; that is the matter of the salaries and emoluments of the civil servants. Civil servants’ emoluments are still inadequate. I am aware that Government has been addressing this problem, but a lot of room still remains for improvement.  And in regard to the salaries which are being paid -(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr. Okumu Ringa): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to recognize the contribution of hon. Martin Orech, Member of Parliament from Kalaki County, and a former Permanent Secretary and head of the Civil Service. I would like to give information to the effect that my Ministry has embarked on a comprehensive program to review remuneration of civil servants and to review remuneration of pensions and gratuities. This is in effect, and it is contained in the Policy Statement for this financial year.  

I would like to inform the hon. Member that when we come to debate the Policy Statement from my Ministry, he should take keen interest so that we could interface on some of the issues.  I thank you.

MR. ORECH: Mr. Speaker, I thank the honourable Minister for his information. The honourable Minister has just indicated that there is a comprehensive program for the review of the salaries and other terms and conditions of service of civil servants. I was not aware of these policy proposals which are being brought to Parliament. What I was putting forward is what I know is obtaining as far as the terms and conditions of service of civil servants are concerned. I was merely trying to draw the attention of the Government to the need to address these areas in regard to the terms and conditions of service.  

I also want to highlight the fact that, although some salary increments have been put in place by Government, there is still a problem. There is still a problem of the payment of these salaries. I am aware that it is Government policy to pay the salaries of civil servants by the 28th of every month. While that policy might be working in Kampala, when one goes upcountry, there are a lot of complaints, particularly from teachers and the health workers, on the delay in the remittance of their salaries. Considering that what these servants are getting is small and Government is addressing the matter of increasing the emoluments, I feel that their money should be remitted to them in time, because it can create a lot of unnecessary temptations like corruption.

Let me talk about cash crops that His Excellency, the President, dealt on at length in his address. I have a very strong request from the people of Kalaki, that when it comes to the production of the cash crops, Government should consider introducing some of the crops that are traditionally not grown there to the areas. I am particularly talking in terms of Clonal coffee, which is a paying cash crop, but it is not grown in Kalaki County, and yet the ideal conditions for the growth of this crop exist.  So, when Government talks of boosting the production of cash crops such as Clonal coffee and rice, they should consider Kaberamaido District also.

In conclusion, let me raise the issue of electricity.  The Minister for Energy, the other day was giving us information about the steps the Ministry has undertaken to ensure that electricity is provided for in every county. I am afraid, my district is one of those areas without this service at the moment. I would like to strongly call upon the Minister in charge of the Rural Electrification Program to ensure that Kaberamaido District is not forgotten.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR.  PATRICK MUSISI  (Busiro South County, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I thank the President for the State of the Nation Address, and I have a few things to note.  One thing he observed is that there was definite massive violence in the whole electoral process.  I was not spared    in this violence that characterized this election; a Minister went out canning, bribing, and ordering all sorts of arrest and my campaign agents were victimized in the process.  I tried to draw this to the attention of the Electoral Commission; I wrote to the CAO; I reported to the Police, but no results.  My humble request to this august house is that for the good of this nation, let us try as much as possible to cut down on violence. We are the architecture of violence in this House, let us avoid violence. (Interjection) No, no, may I correct the impression that I had created that we are the architects of violence. (Interjection-) The violence in the previous elections, I am sure Members have the will and the power to stop it.

The next point concerns the President’s address on AIDS.  I acknowledge that Government has put in some effort, but there are some partners like the religious organizations that Government need to facilitate in order to fight the AIDS scourge; for sure they have done a commendable job.  You cannot miss any of these reverends tell their believer to lower their appetite.  I think government should come up with a policy to facilitate religious organizations in the country. 

I have got a problem in Busiro South, especially in the islands of Bussi and Kavenyanja; UPE program has not reached there. On Kavenyanja we don’t have a single school irrespective of the growing population. In Bussi we don’t have toilets for the schools.  So I pray and hope that the hon. Minister of Education for Primary Education will come to our rescue -(Interjection)

MRS. BITAMIZIRE:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I thank the hon. Member for giving way.  I would like to inform the Member that the Local Councils are responsible for identifying areas where there are no schools under a program known as SFG. I wish to request him to discuss it with the Local Council; I am sure the district has been allocated this program.  I thank you.

MR. MUSISI: Thank you, hon. Minister.  Let me talk about the insecurity on the island.  We have been badly hit by pirates on Lake Victoria. Besides that, whenever there is a foreign dignitary to this country, and His Excellency is to travel outside, the policing of the waters prohibits any movement.  We have heard deliveries of children on the lakeside in Bussi. I pray and hope that the Ministry concerned can try to remedy this situation.

Lastly, I refer you to the Presidential speech where the President said that there was some form of commercialization in the electoral process and that’s what caused violence. I do not know whether this is what he wanted to mean, but I also realize that the President said he spent 13 billion Ugandan shillings only. In Luganda we have a saying that, “Enyonyi enkulu, yeyigiriza ento okubuka”; meaning that, “it is the older birds that teach the young ones how to fly”.  So, I realise that, Shs. 13billion, means that he had to spend within a range of Shs.60million for each constituency.  So, I believe that he should also try to see it from that end, so that we uniformly address the situation.

Lastly, there is a Presidential message that I noted. He wanted reconciliation amongst Members of this august House, but in his last sentence on page 20, he noted that, “by ignoring all negative forces and voting for me, Ugandans showed that they greatly cared.”  So, anybody who did not vote for the President was a negative force and I believe that anybody who did not vote for us was also a negative force.  

So please, what is good for the goose is also good for the gander. I believe it is a common responsibility that, we learn to tolerate each other in this process.  For an election, definitely, there must be more than two candidates; and it was the same in our constituencies, so must it be for the Presidency.  Hon. Aggrey Awori was not at all a negative force nor hon. Kiiza Besigye or the rest in the race. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think to be fair, I would think let us give more chances to the new Members of this House. I am not saying that I am not going to give a chance to the old ones, but it will also help me to know their names.

MR. Elijah OKUPA (Kasilo County, Soroti):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate you upon being elected the Speaker of this august House. On the same note, I would like also to congratulate your Deputy, the MPs in this august House, and the Ministers upon their appointments to the Cabinet positions and State Ministers. I would also like to congratulate His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda upon his election.  

I do support the motion. Indeed, the speech to the nation was quite a good one. It was elaborate, expounded on a number of issues, but I felt the people of Teso were ignored on a problem that has hit them to the marrow. That is the issue of the Karimojong rustling affecting mainly Northern Teso, and particularly the district of Katakwi. 

Over the weekend, we visited a number of camps in Teso; and the situation, dear Members, is pathetic. There are over 57 camps in Katakwi District, with over 80,000 displaced people. I will speak of one camp - Aketa - it has 5660 displaced persons. The life in that camp is horrible. The sanitation is very poor. Action Aid tried to build four toilets; within only one week, they were full.  So, as we speak now, the sanitation as regards the disposal of human excreta is horrible.

UPE is non-existent in that place –(Interruption).

MR. ACHILLA:  Mr. Speaker, the information I would like to give to the current speaker is that, as much as he visited the camps, the most important thing that I think the Members in this House who are neighbouring Karamoja should get to know, is that Section 9 of the Local Governments Act empowers Local Governments to find ways of solving their problems amicably. I would like to inform the hon. Member that, the Local Government of Katakwi and Moroto, should have sat down to look at the matter other than suggesting the likelihood of a hunger strike.  

These are not matters of the 7th House, but they should give power to our own people, to argue issues than shouting in the House and misleading this nation. Thank you very much.

MR. AMURIAT: Mr. Speaker, on a point of information, I would like to inform this House that, the district of Katakwi does not have the capacity, it does not have the guns, neither has it got the manpower to contain raiders. There has been a lot of noise made by Katakwi, and indeed, Teso Members of Parliament, relating to this issue, but it has never been attended to.  

MR. ACHILLA:  Point of Order.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, when we are discussing this issue of Katakwi, Moroto and so forth, let us not be defensive.  I think what we need is to solve a problem.  A problem that has arisen between, not only Katakwi, because this issue of Karamoja and neighbouring districts is not only to Katakwi.  It has been common to Kitgum.  So when a suggestion is made, I think let us explore it instead of brushing it aside, because, maybe the people you are representing will be offended if you do not defend them.  So let us be really constructive so that we get a solution, because the situation has been there for some time, and every time we talk about Karamoja rustling and so forth; let us now in this 7th Parliament try to work together to find the solution.

MR. LOKERIS PETER: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  What the hon. Member has been saying is really a very touchy issue. I have just returned after addressing people from one of the counties bordering Kapelebyong in a place called Iri-Iri. I have reported back to this place to inform the hon. Members from Karamoja to accompany me to those bushes and mobilise people against the bandits who have caused accidents to our neighbours in the camps. 

I have also informed some of these Members who are now talking. So, we are on the move, and thereafter, of course disarmament is on. But we want those people to stop so that these people go back to their homes as soon as possible. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Kagonyera): Thank you, Mr. Speaker and hon. Member for giving way.  Some of us have been in this House for quite a while. The Members should not trivialise the problem at hand; they should treat it with the seriousness it deserves. I do not stand up to trivialise the matter. I have been to the areas that are being talked about and every time - you are right, Mr Speaker - the question of Karamoja raids into the neighbouring district is raised in this House, emotions rise (Mr Awori rose_). We are tired of ex-presidential candidates (Laughter).

MR.AWORI: Mr. Speaker, knowing very well that the hon. Minister on the Floor is part of the Cabinet which has undercapitalised the Minister responsible for Karamoja, is he in order to stand up and accuse us of trivialising issues when this Government cannot give enough resources to undertake the duties or make the place peaceful?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, before I rule somebody out of order, I must be availed with facts to be the basis of my decision. Since I am not aware of under-capitalisation, because it has not been an issue, there is no way I would say, he has, and therefore, he is out of order.  So, he is in order to proceed.

PROF.KAGONYERA: What I was going to say is that it is not true to say that the Government does not pay due attention to the problems in this area. As a matter of fact, we have a multi-sectoral programme, not project, but programme for this region which includes special educational programmes – mobile units to educate people in the region on how to live together.  

We also have projects that involve intervening by creating semi-permanent conditions in the Karamoja region, because we have had studies suggesting that the nomadic nature of life in Karamoja tends to make it much easier for these people to go to other areas. So, consequently we have programmes to educate people to become permanent.

We also have programmes to improve agriculture in these areas.  As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, you remember that the Vice President had to spend several weeks in this region distributing seeds, educating people about agriculture and so forth. We have programmes for special education, we have programmes on health, we have programmes on rural micro-financing which are targeting low-income areas in this region. 

Therefore, what I want to tell you and the hon. Members is that, the issue is not lack of Government will or resource provision for these problems.  It is just a problem that will need long term involvement of everybody, especially with what you have just told us, that we should be very objective in our address of this issue.  Emotionalism tends to breed lack of focusing. 

We appeal to hon. Members of this House to work together with the Government to ensure that we minimise the suffering of the people resulting from raids from Karamoja. But certainly, Government is aware of this, and those of you who listen to the radios and TVs should have even heard what hon. Mukula – I know he may not be able to talk about it because he is from the Teso Region. We also have the Minister in charge of Disaster Preparedness. These people have even of now been attending to these problems. So, it is not true to say that Government is not paying due attention to the problems in this region. Thank you, Sir.

MR.IMUMET: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to inform the hon. Minister that as far as the security situation in Teso is concerned, Government is responsible. I have been there all the time. Even before I came to this House, I was talking with the Army. I have worked with the Army before.  The situation is that the Army is saying they have been told to be on the defensive. They are not supposed to attack the Karimojong. Even those who have crossed the border, instead of saying, let us get these guns they have come with, the Army says, they are not allowed. When our LDU try to respond, they are arrested, taken to the Third Batallion, tortured and thereafter released. So now, even the LDUs are scared.  

I asked who had specifically given the Army that order and they said it was the Chief of Staff. 
I was with my friends. I got surprised because the Chief of Staff was in Congo, while the Third and Fifth Battalion are here. I have no information to that effect. But as of now, I blame Government for it because of the information I got from the field. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this issue is becoming very contentious and I think in our programme, we may have to have a special session on it. I know we had one in the last Parliament and I think it took two days or so. You Members with new mandate might have come with some ideas.  I think we shall accord you an opportunity to specifically address this issue instead of treating it in this general debate, whose time is so limited yet we have to talk about other issues. 

So, I suggest that we prepare ourselves one day to deal specifically with this issue which has been coming to us now and again.

MS. AKELLO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to inform my hon. colleague from Jie. He said that the local governments of Katakwi and Karamoja should get together and resolve these problems instead of bringing them to places like this or to the national level for discussion. I would like to inform him that indeed this has been the approach of the Presidential Commission for Teso.  We encouraged this kind of dialogue. 

I do know how many times the people of Katakwi, Kumi and Soroti went to Moroto and vice versa. At the end of it all, I do not know how many times I went to Moroto as chairperson of the Teso Commission to try and promote this dialogue. At the end of it all, the forces that are bent on cattle rustling and raiding in Teso simply ignored all this and started all over again. So, I think it is about time that the Karimojong society came face to face squarely with that trait in them which enables them to raid, rape and loot other people. (Ms. Alaso rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Alaso, I quite anticipate what you are going to say -(Laughter)- you are going to contribute on the same issue. It has heated up, but as I promised, we shall find suitable time to address ourselves on this issue only. So, please bear with us. Now we are moving from the general debate on the President’s speech to this Katakwi, Kitgum, Kumi and Karamoja issue. But I promise I will do that. So, let us wind up with this.

MR. OKUPA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for that excellent ruling. However, I want to briefly give you an impression of the life in the camp, but I will not allow any information now.   

UPE is not working because people are in the camps. Three and half parishes are in the Akeeta camp. There is no school, there is no hospital, sanitation is bad, there are cases of rape, and people are dying of all sorts of diseases.  

We want Government to be serious on the issue of disarmament. There is the issue of saying that the leaders of Katakwi and Karamoja will sit down, but this is a national issue! The issue of disarmament cannot be handled locally. It is the nation at large that should take part in this issue. We are wasting money on restocking because the animals will be taken. We would rather put this money somewhere else. We would rather use it for toilets or for medicine. The situation is too bad!.   

We visited one of the UPDF camps. The soldiers themselves have a problem. They are complaining that they lack facilitation, there is no communication equipment and there is no transport. Government should think seriously of equipping the soldiers who are there. 

I remember very well, during the referendum time, His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda categorically stated in Kumi that the Karimojong are going to stop raiding. He said, “if the Karimojong continue raiding, hair will develop on my bald head”. But what do we see? The rustling is continuing and the hair is getting off. Government should take this seriously. 

I want to caution the Government that it is their role to protect the lives and property of their nationals. Where the Government fails to protect the lives and property of its citizens, then there is no Government. If the Government of Uganda fails, we are going to drag it to the courts of law. 

This should be taken seriously. 

There was an ambush yesterday on a bus, and our Sister, hon. Christine Aporu Okol, had her brother, who is a Manager of UCB Moroto, shot at, and he is in the hospital now. On Saturday, there was another raid in Magoro as soon as we left. So, Government should take this seriously.  

Aside from that issue of the Karimojong, I felt it was necessary for His Excellency, during his address, to mention something about rural electrification. I thought he should have hinted on the new electricity tariffs. He talked about increasing investments in this country, but what happens once the cost of production goes up? Electricity is a very important component in the investment in this country, but what do we see?  We are seeing the tariffs going up, and the electricity bills going up. I felt His Excellency should have mentioned something on that.   

On this note, the people of Kasilo are requesting the Government of Uganda to rehabilitate the power line from Serere to Bugondo. For the past 15 years, that line has been down. Hon. Minister, that is the request from the people of Kasilo. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MS. MUKABERA ANNETTE (Woman Representative, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since it is my first time, like the rest, let me take this opportunity to congratulate everyone for all that you have achieved. I would also like to support the motion that we are debating. I appreciate His Excellency the President’s speech.  I only have about three issues I would like to comment on.  

One issue is election violence. I know that there is a lot of violence involved in the election process, but I would like to point out that I would be much happier if all candidates involved in elections could influence their agents to have some restraint. It is normally the agents who cause this violence in the electoral process, and I would like to appeal to everyone who stands, to impose some restraint on their agents, so that the violence does not continue.

On poverty, the poverty that I see in my home district is mainly caused by lack of markets for the little that we produce. 

We would like to export to other areas, but one of the reasons that we cannot is the lack of a good road so that people can go there and buy the commodities that we have. 

I call upon Government to take the tarmacing of the road to Kisoro very seriously. Once it is a rainy season, there is no way heavy trucks can go there, because it is expected they will fall over because of the nature of the terrain, and the roads that we have. I really wish that the tarmac road to Kisoro could be considered, and then people can be able to come and buy the commodities that we have, particularly vegetables and fruits which we have in plenty in Kisoro. But now, most of them rot because we do not have markets outside.

The other issue is on tourism. Kisoro has got potential for tourism. We have the mountain gorillas, we have scenic views; we have everything that could really make someone’s holiday very good in Kisoro. But there is one thing that is affecting tourism there, and that is the Bwindi incident. It has greatly affected tourism in Kisoro District. I call upon Government to really check on the issue of tourism in Kisoro very seriously, because that is one form of employment that we have for our people.  

I would also like to call upon Ugandans to take an interest in tourism and take holidays. One of the scenic places that you can visit is Kisoro District. I also encourage you to go gorilla tracking, because you can also give us some money and jobs. 

On the issue of corruption, one of the reasons that Uganda is rated highly on corruption matters is because Uganda has come out in the open to talk about corruption, and more and more people know about it. The whole truth is that there could also be other countries that are worse off in terms of corruption. You can also look at the HIV status; when Uganda came out in the open to talk about it, we were rated as the country with one of the highest number of people having AIDS. But later on, it was discovered that there are other countries that are worse off. This is because of our openness. So, we can accept that there is a lot of corruption, but the fact that we are rated so high is also because of our openness in talking about the rate of corruption in Uganda.  

Finally, on health matters, I have noted with concern the doctor to patient ratio. I know that it is one of the Government’s aims to increase on that ratio, such that the number of patients per doctor lowers. One of the appeals I would like to make, concerns the brain drain that we have.  In Uganda, we train doctors; we have so many doctors, but it is unfortunate to note that a large number of them go to look for greener pastures elsewhere. In a way, Uganda could be training for other countries to have better health facilities. 

I would like to emphasize that Government should put in place measures to also make Uganda a greener pasture, such that we can have more and more of our trained personnel staying in the country. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. RWAMIRAMA KANYANTOLE (Isingiro County North, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let me take this opportunity to congratulate my colleagues for their achievements, and the newly appointed Ministers in their respective portfolios.  I wish them good luck in the course of their duties.  

On behalf of the great people of Isingiro North, I support and appreciate the State of the Nation address that was delivered by His Excellency the President. However, I wish to react to some issues; the election violence, livestock farming, and provision of water for farms and agriculture.  

The issue of violence is of great concern in our constituency. It has taken a dramatic twist. The elections themselves ended fairly well, with minor incidents of violence as compared to the past. I would say that there was a better record in Isingiro North. 

However, as the elections ended, we got into two phases; phase one is the early post election days. I did initiate a programme for reconciling with people who stood with me.  I first of all talked to all the candidates, and we talked about a good relationship. We organized functions at every sub-county, and everybody was invited, including some of my opponents, and things settled down. However, there are some new developments that followed that brought good news and bad news.

I will start with the good news. The good news is that one of the members who lost in the election was appointed a Minister. I was very happy that we now have two people from the same constituency. I demonstrated my solidarity with my fellow members on the Appointments Committee, and His Excellency the President who made the appointment, by coming here with my brother, hon. Peter Kasenene, to this House. However, in some circles, this issue was mis-interpreted and people with a contaminated agenda started spoiling the constituency, and this has led to loss of lives.  

One of the people on my colleague’s task force started using bad language and started inciting the people. He started saying, ‘you people elected badly, we told you that this was the right man’. And in one parish, Namuyanja, one of my supporters was beaten to death. He got a ruptured spleen, liver and kidneys, and the people who killed him have not been arrested. They are on the run. I want to tell this House that when I heard there was a problem -(Interruption)     

MRS. ZZIWA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the Member for giving way. I wanted to share the pain the hon. Member is expressing, because post election violence has also caused a lot of pain in my constituency. In my constituency, after the Presidential elections, there were very many bombs thrown around and many people were killed. I can quote the case of one lady who was walking along Nakivubo channel and a bomb was thrown at her. She died instantly. She had a three month’s old baby on her back, but surprisingly the baby was saved. 

What are these kind of people going to salvage? I am talking about a person like the one I have talked about, and a person like the one the hon. Member has mentioned. I think we need to call upon Government to put in place a fund to compensate these people who have lost their lives. They are very many, and they are in a very vulnerable situation. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR.RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, hon. Zziwa. Mr. Speaker, when I heard -(An hon. Member rose_)  On condition that it is not going to eat into my time.

THE SPEAKER: It is going to. You are about to conclude, so conclude.

MR.RWAMIRAMA: Mr. Speaker, when I heard this thing was escalating, I went on radio, visited my constituency and talked to people. I even took some Members of this House and we comforted the people. We told them that there was no problem and people picked it. But up to now people are being harassed because of those few individuals who have a different agenda. One of them is our former Ambassador to Rwanda, his Excellency Katitigiwe and what he is saying - I am very serious; I am speaking facts, so it is not good to use such language because it has caused a problem. Some people who belong to the Roman Catholic Church have been isolated for having supported somebody who does not belong to that religion. To me, this is a very dangerous development. You must help me to calm the situation there.  I am looking forward to any assistance from any Member.  Mr. Speaker -(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PRIVATISATION) (Prof. Kasenene Peter): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Whereas it is true that there has been violence in the constituency the hon. Member is talking about, it started during the elections. There was a lot of shooting and a lot of violence went on. But for the particular case the hon. Member is referring to, of the person who died, the fact is that there was a fight between two individuals. The gentleman who died went home after the fight and drank waragi and died. The Police was invited and it was found that there was no case to answer. That is why there have been no arrests.  But we share the same concern, we have talked with the hon. Member and we have agreed we must go together to the constituency and try to reconcile the people.  

MR.RWAMIRAMA: Mr. Speaker, I am really surprised to hear from an hon. Minister that somebody dies and they say there is no case to answer. I want to raise my concern about this issue because people’s houses were damaged and when Police went there, they arrested these people and they were later released. These people came home and said, “you see you people cannot manage us. We shall do whatever we want because the Minister will pick the telephone and we shall get out”. I did not believe it, but now I have reason to believe. If a person dies and somebody tells us that there is no case to answer -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, I think you have misunderstood the explanation. My understanding of the explanation is; I think in your earlier submission your contention was that the deceased died as a result of violence applied to him. But his explanation is that this person who died unfortunately drank waragi. I do not know whether drinking waragi is violence. But if it is true -I am not saying it is true - if his version that they found out that the cause of death was excessive drinking, then you do not blame this on political violence. But I think the Police will definitely be able to investigate, because this House cannot verify these facts so as to say so and so is telling the truth and the other is telling lies. I think let us just leave it at that. We agree with you that violence in your area should be stopped, and that leaders in the area, whether you are an opponent or not, should sit down and try to solve this tension. But as for other criminal activities, I think the Police should take its duty, investigate and punish whoever is found having committed these offences.

MR.RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The truth is that the post mortem was done and the man was found to have died of rapture of the spleen, kidney and liver. All I am asking is the indulgence of the relevant Ministry to help me because there is a problem. I talked to hon. Kasenene about it, that we should go and talk to the people, about four days ago. I hope the events will turn around. 

Let me also take this opportunity to talk about livestock farming which is in the President’s speech. In Mbarara and in Isingiro in particular, dairy farming is no longer making economic sense because farm implements and acaricides are very expensive - they are not subsidised. As a result, for people who rear a few animals, the cost of output per litre of milk is more than what they get when they sell on the market price. I appeal to Government to subsidise for these items so that farming can be meaningful. (Interruption).

DR.NKUUHE: Mr. Speaker, I thank the Member for giving way. I would like to sympathise with you and I will use my good office, as a neighbour, to try to reconcile the two candidates. But the information I have is a disturbing document we got from the Office of the Vice President. 
It is a critical review on the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture. Essentially what this document is saying is that the plan we have is not a plan and that a new plan should be written. I can quote from page four. “The PMA is not a Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture and neither is it a Government strategy and operational framework. It is characterised by lack of continuity, misconception of the PMA framework, misinterpretation of donor response, statements at the end of 1998 Kampala CG meeting, misunderstanding of key concepts and lack of clarity and logical activity focus.”  

The conclusion of this document is on page 18 says, “Agricultural modernisation is a national challenge that must be fulfilled. However, hard strategic choices have to be made and the journey started.  These choices are not contained in the current PMA document” –(Interjection)- “PMA Task Force should therefore be appointed to re-define, articulate a new PMA”  (Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, do you not think we need to verify this because it is scandalous. If you are saying that is it an address from the Vice President’s Office to the Minister of Agriculture - what is it?

DR.NKUUHE: It was circulated this afternoon to us.

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr. Mutebi Kityo): Mr. Speaker, this document, although it is labelled Vice President’s Office, it is not coming from her office. It is from the consultants who were asked by the office of the Vice President to evaluate the PMA document. What is contained here are the ideas of the consultant, but not the ideas of the Vice President.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, but now what is the purpose? If it was advice to the Vice President and they are to co-ordinate this in Cabinet with the Minister concerned, how is it that they sent it to us? Who are supposed to consider this document? How shall we reconcile this document with the policy statement from the Minister? Do you not see the problem?

MR.MUTEBI KITYO: Mr. Speaker, one of the authors of this document is a member of my Committee, the Committee on Agriculture. When we were deliberating the PMA in the Committee, he said he had another view of the PMA. The Committee asked him to give us his other view and this document has been distributed only to Members of the Agricultural Committee to consider and compare with the Government Policy. So, I think my Committee Member, Dr. Nkuuhe, should not have raised it here; he should have waited for the Committee to air it out.

THE SPEAKER: I think let us leave this matter because it is likely to poison our minds. But let us accept the explanation from the Chairman of the relevant Committee that these are views expressed by one of the Committee Members, not a document originating from Government, that is, the Vice President’s Office. Otherwise, it would cause an easiness that we would not know what to follow, whether the Ministry of Agriculture or this particular document. But from what I have understood from the Chairman’s explanation, this document is not from the Vice President’s Office.

MR.RWAMIRAMA: Thank you Mr. Speaker. My time has been eaten up. However, I also want to raise our concern about water. Our area is very dry, we did not benefit adequately from the famous dams and most of our community lives in hills.  During the dry season, people have no water, not even for bathing. They just wet their body to avoid the pealing of skin. I am, therefore, appealing to the relevant Ministry that when they are considering the problem of water, Isingiro county North should be a priority because we are really faced with immigrations. Every dry season people shift looking for water. Those who live in the mountains come down near where there is water.

Finally, I would like to say that the past election violence should be a concern for all of us. We should find remedial action and maybe contain it. Otherwise, it can turn things down; it can disorganise the community and slow development. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Now, why do we not go to the mountains? We shall have the hon. Member from Mbale, then go to hon. Omodi Okot and see how we proceed. 
But I assure you that if you do not have the opportunity, I will start with you during the debate on the Budget.

MRS.WONEKA OLIVER (Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to add my voice to congratulate you, the Deputy Speaker, hon. Ministers and my fellow Backbenchers for having made it to wherever they are. I stand to support the motion of thanks for the President’s Speech. I would like to make some observations in connection with two particular issues.  

The President in his speech gave great emphasis to Agriculture and the role it has to play in improving the economy of our country. I quote “ Agriculture holds the key to the improvement of the conditions of the majority of Ugandans”. I took particular note of the following, that among other things, the Programme for Modernisation of Agriculture aims at achieving the following: 

·	Increasing farm productivity (the output per acre should go up).
·	Government intends to play its part in agro processing and access to markets

Our economy is to be private sector led, but the President rightly said the biggest problem is that our local rural producers are not part of the private sector.

Let us look at coffee. We cannot talk of eradication of poverty in Uganda without talking specifically about coffee. In light of the increasing farm productivity, Mbale district, which I represent, and our neighbours from Kapchorwa, grow Arabica coffee whose contribution to the national production is 10 per cent. The total area under mature coffee in Mbale is 15,500 hectares. The annual production has been dropping steadily from 15,000 metric tonnes in the 1970 to a mere 8000 tonnes in the last few seasons. The biggest problem has been a total lack of control of pests and diseases that affect the quality and quantity of the coffee.  

Arabica coffee on Mount Elgon is not only susceptible but it is also infested beyond permissible thresholds by antestia bugs, lacey bugs, stem borers, berry borers, root mealy bugs, and leaf rust. 
Previous spray attempts by the Bugisu Cooperative Union, Coffee Rehabilitation Project and farming systems support programmes in 1992 proved that spraying results into increased production by 50 percent. To carry out a blanket spray cover in Mbale and Kapchorwa twice a year costs Shs. 1.5 billion; it is expensive for Government to carry out blanket spray knowing that there is no private sector to do it.  The President advised us to sell our coffee to markets where we can fetch high prices.  I am glad to report to this august House that Bugisu Arabica Coffee as it is known on the world market, has already been accepted as original. The market is there; the premium is US 30 cents above the usual prices per kilo.

The President said liberalisation is good, but it is not enough. Government intervention is absolutely necessary and the time is now.  I must recognise the contribution from Government for providing coffee seedlings in a bid to increase production.  My worry is to plant more when you cannot control the pests existing in the gardens.  

With the dwindling world coffee prices for conventional grades, I urge Government to do the blanket spray in Mbale and Kapchorwa, in order to improve quality and quantity, better incomes for farmers, more revenue to Government through UCDA; I am sure it will motivate the people.

I would like to refer you to the clonal coffee gingo that runs on the radio.  It says everybody should grow clonal coffee, but so far, no arabica clonal coffee is there, particularly for Mbale and Kapchorwa Districts.  So, that gingo is particularly misleading the people of Mbale and Kapchorwa and other arabica growing areas to think that they can also grow clonal coffee.  We look forward to an arabica coffee variety in terms of clonal or whatever variety that can be resistant to diseases and produce high yields.

My hon. friend from Pallisa apparently is not aware that there are nine coffee nurseries producing seedlings from a lead seed in Pallisa.  It is not clonal coffee that is grown in Pallisa; I would like to urge them to pay attention to the development of coffee in Pallisa for purposes of their votes in 2006.  Thank you.

MR. OMODI OKOT (Kole County, Apac):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Let me also begin by congratulating you and your deputy for attaining that high position in this House.  I hope you will use your vast experience to protect the image of this House and give us - the international recognition as you have always done.  I have been with you in many Committees; I remember what you did when we were on the Privileges and Discipline Committee; you did perfectly a good job. I have no doubt that you will continue to do the same.  

I want also to congratulate Members of Parliament, especially those who have been able to make it here again. You remember I was on that side of your hand; I was in the fourth row. I am no longer there. I have run away because the whole set of that row has had Members who have gone through casualties. So, I find myself alone.

THE SPEAKER: It means you are lucky, because you are sitting there.  

MR. OMODI OKOT:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also want to thank new Members who have just joined this House and say they are welcome; the responsibility ahead of us is collective. I hope we shall make it together.

Let me also thank my brothers and sisters who have been entrusted with extra responsibility to make the Cabinet and the Executive of the Government of this country.  The members of the Sixth Parliament with whom we have been working together, my hope is that we shall continue.  The new members, please, get to know what happens and where you are; I am sure we shall be together.

I want also to thank and congratulate His Excellency the President for balanced assessment of the State of the Nation Address.  This provides us an opportunity to give in suggestions to perfect our Government.  

Having said that, I want to go straight on some of the issues that His Excellency the President was able to raise in his address.  Sentence number one says: “I congratulate the hon. Members on having been elected to the 7th Parliament. Unfortunately, though, there were some unsavory incidents during the recently concluded Parliamentary elections, especially violence, bad language and so on”.  

I would like to recognise that violence, bad language and the rest of the problems we went through during the recently concluded parliamentary election, was not to do with Parliamentary elections alone; it started with Presidential elections. Unfortunately, the President did not mention anything about it.  

I want to recognise that it is important for us to have peace; it is important for us to have unity; it is important for us to have prosperity and that can only be possible when we avoid violence; when we avoid fighting each other; when we come to understand the value every one has in our society.

Mr. Speaker, you have seen in this House, when you begin to talk about Karamoja and Soroti, there is always an up charge. When you begin to talk about our brother Bright and Kasenene, a new phenomenon now, there is going to be an up charge. This means that we need a sober mind; we need people who can control themselves; we need security; we need peace; and we need prosperity. 

I want to recognize that, during the presidential elections, there were things that were done, which warranted violence in the parliamentary elections. There were languages that were spoken during presidential elections, which created violence.  There were things that happened during presidential elections, which created violence and uneasiness in the people. 

I would like to suggest that, we trace the beginning and the source of violence, down to the time when we had the Presidential elections. I would like therefore to suggest that the President be told that he was the cause of some of the problems that came up during the Presidential and Parliamentary elections.

We heard about violence in Rukungiri and in Lira. Some of these were caused by people who incited others.  Mr. Speaker, yesterday, I gathered from sources outside this House that Mr. Kakooza Mutale was requesting you to restrain us from talking about him. 

We do not talk about Kakooza Mutale; we talk about things that he did. He went to Lira, beat a boy called Ojok and broke his arm; then, why can we not talk about that in this House? It is important to condemn it, so that if he is prepared to learn and adjust, he can do so.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, for giving way. The information I wanted to give to the hon. Okot Omodi is that, while the President talked about or condemned the use of bad language in the campaign, it is on record that he himself during the Presidential elections, was a source of bad language; he went to the extent of telling everybody in Uganda that one of the people contesting was an AIDS victim or patient.  I do not want to elaborate on that. But his opponent found it difficult to convince the electorate that he was worthy being voted for, after being pronounced a victim of the scourge without proof.

MR. MALINGA JOHNSON: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The hon. Member has just informed us that, the President gave a balanced statement on the State of affairs in the Nation.  However, I saw an imbalanced vision in the sector of education especially, in University education. 

The President said that there are two public Universities and the Government is in process of setting up other three, one in Gulu, the Open University, and another one in Kyambogo. The other two of course are Makerere and Mbarara. This indicates clearly that there is no future plan to put a university in Eastern Uganda; and I am sure this is an imbalance in the University education.

THE SPEAKER: You see, when you talk about balance, it is an assessment of the totality of the statement. You take into account that there are good things and there are bad things; then you say, but on the balance of it, this is the position. So, I do not think he was saying that everything said was okay. But I think it is a balanced statement. 

I think the point that you are trying to make is that, in promising Universities, Eastern Region should have been considered. That is another matter, which has been taken into account. 
But there is Mbale, and I understand there is the Aviation University at Soroti.  I think things will really come.

MR. OMODI OKOT: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Can we now look at the state of things during Parliamentary elections?  We, in Lango Region, we generally enjoyed some process of good campaign, though here and there, you could get a situation that would make things ugly. What I am saying is, we need total peace; and for us to arrive to a state of total peace, we have to find the cause of this violence. Let us get the cause of this violence, so that we can fight it and kill it there and then.  

These days, the law and the rule of elections in this country, is that we face election in the Movement spirit.  We go for election, under Movement cover. It was unfortunate that a time came when the Office of the President announced that, a given number of Movement candidates in a given constituency, should sit down if they were more than one. Others had to step down for one person. That was to stand against who? I mean, if we are all in the Movement, and you get only one person, are you saying that person will be unopposed or whatever the case?  I think these are double standards which sometimes create problems, violence, and uneasiness in a given place.  

Unfortunately, the President himself went to some of the places, including Lira Municipality to campaign for candidates of his choice. My fear was that he became an election virus, because people left their candidate, and supported the person who was a little weak and that person won. 

So, I am of the opinion that, it is important for us to avoid double standards in some of these things, because the cause of our problem maybe double standards. I would like to -(Interruption).

MR. SEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank you the speaker on the Floor, for giving way. It is true the President visited several areas, during the parliamentary elections. But the case of Lwemiyaga stands out clearly, that the President did not seek support for any individual candidate. 

It is true, word had been spread around the whole county, and the district that the President was coming to throw out a particular candidate- myself.  But the President stood his ground and told people to vote for a candidate of their choice. So, it was not particularly for Lwemiyaga, but for the whole country. I stand to support the President.

MR. OMODI OKOT: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let me now summarize. I am going to say something about corruption.  Corruption is a dangerous disease that we have got in this country. It is eating up even the good things that we have started building. Let us take the aspect of UPE funds alone. These days the funds are dispatched from the centre, and sometimes they go intact to the district headquarters, but it is when they reach there that you do not understand how these funds are handled. The schools that these funds are supposed to serve do not get a positive impact from these funds. 

I would like to suggest that the Ministry concerned revisits the whole issue, because this is failing the Government.  The parents in the respective schools think it is the Government, together with the DEO’s office, which are allowing the head teachers to eat this money, and in so thinking, there is perpetual disagreement between the parents, the teachers and all concerned.  So, I would like to suggest that.

MR. SSEBAGGALA LATIF (Kawempe North, Kampala): Mr. Speaker, let me thank the President for the State of the Nation address. Due to the limited time, and given the fact that so many colleagues are very eager to contribute, I will confine myself to only two areas, health and the economy.  

Colleagues who spoke before me talked a lot about election violence, but I would like to inform this august House that in my constituency, Kawempe North, we never experienced this kind of violence during the Parliamentary Elections. But indeed, our campaigns were blessed by the presence of His Excellency the President, when he came physically to campaign for some members who were in the race. The people of Kawempe North need to be thanked so much for having known that Article 1 of our Constitution clearly stipulates that power belongs to the people; and that is the reason I am here. Thank you very much.

Secondly, we all know that –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Maybe he also campaigned for you. We do not know.

MR. SSEBAGGALA: It was a blessing in disguise. Turning to the health sector, we all know that the President, in his manifesto, made various pledges. I am more than willing, together with all Members of Parliament, to ensure how effectively we can implement the President’s manifesto.  

In the health sector, he talked about scrapping cost sharing in the Government hospitals. In various districts now, drugs have run out of stock. Mulago Hospital, which is our major referral hospital, has now turned into a referring hospital. People move from distant places to come for treatment, knowing that the President promised that the unprivileged people are going to be treated free of charge; but on reaching the hospital, the drugs are not there, even the basic pain killers like Aspirin and Panadol.  

I believe that we cannot talk about the Plan for Modernization of Agriculture and the Poverty Eradication Action Plan without seriously dealing with the health sector. All these programmes are geared towards enhancing the livelihood of our people. It is against such a background that I appeal to hon. Members to ensure that we work at how effectively we could assist in implementing the President’s manifesto, especially as regards the health sector. 

If you go to Mulago Hospital these days, the only thing they can do for you, that is if are lucky to be attended to by a kind doctor, is to prescribe for you the tablets, and maybe tell you what you are suffering from. If he or she is kind enough, he can direct you to a city pharmacy where you could buy the drugs that you require. So, it is a serious situation. It is our major referral hospital; but let us work hand in hand in order to save the lives of our people.  If it is means foregoing some of our privileges so that we can ensure that all our health sectors are facilitated, I believe, as Members of Parliament, it is high time we think about foregoing some of those privileges in order to ensure better lives for the people we are representing. I believe you will support me.

Turning to our economy, the President informed us that our economy is one of the most vibrant on the continent, but I am yet to be convinced. If you look around the business community, day in day out, our colleagues are dropping out from engaging in business. In Kampala District, faces are changing day by day. 

I carried out my own survey to find out why our business community is not as vibrant as our economy. They told me that taxes are killing them. Therefore, it is my appeal to the Finance and Budget Committees to investigate as to why these days Ugandans are more of shop attendants than proprietors, so that the Government can come in to assist the would-be potential businessmen and businesswomen. We could really ensure that our economy goes on well with the involvement of all the indigenous people. I thank you.

MS OKOT SANTA (Woman Representative Pader):  Thank you very much, hon. Speaker for giving me this time.  I first of all like would like to send my sincere thanks to the President.  My people have requested me to thank the hon. Members of the 6th Parliament,for having given them a district in the name of Pader.  I would like also to thank the President for his great message to the nation with some amendments.  

On page 15, the President said: “Since 1986, the Movement Government has worked hard to improve health of the population through preventive as well as curative measures.” It is true, because I was one of the members who participated in the campaign for Polio immunization when I was still a councillor in Kampala. When the President went to campaign for votes amongst the people of Pader District, he made a speech rubbing off the cost sharing in the Health Centres.  This was a good idea for our poor people in the constituencies; but this has also created disaster in government hospitals.  It will take time to implement the manifesto of the President, of establishing Health Centres with a resident doctor in all the sub-counties; and yet the Health Centres in place do not have medicine. Yesterday the State Minister explained here that – (Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTHCARE):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker and thank you hon. Member for giving way.  First of all I wanted to correct the information that the President said that we shall have Health Centres at each sub-county with resident doctors.  The plan is that resident doctors will be in a county or constituency health unit.  This is the main hospital for each constituency; we call it sometimes Health Centre.  At the sub-counties we shall have Health Centres that will not be manned directly by Medical Officers, but by Clinical Officers.  So that is a fundamental correction that I would like to make, and then the rest will come when we discuss the Policy Statement.

MS OKOT:  Thank you very much, hon. Member, but that is not my concern.  My concern is that the Health Centres that are there do not have drugs and the rate of patients dying everyday in government hospital has increased.  I do not see the reason of having cost-sharing, because when you go to the hospital, a doctor can prescribe for you the drug and he tells you go to Wandegeya or to a certain mango tree to buy it. I do not know when this will take off, because people are dying in the villages. Leave alone that I have a direct example last week I had a patient in Mulago Hospital who was not attended to.  Every receipt sent to me instructed me to buy medicine from Wandegeya until the patient passed away. I saw many people dying in the corridors before the doctors. This is my concern.  There is no need rubbing off the cost-sharing before putting in – (Interruption)

MR. KITYO-MUTEBI: Thank you very much, hon. Member for giving way.  I want to give her information that patients who are attended to in Mulago have to pay 200/= at the gate.  That makes it worse.  

MS. OKOT:  Thank you very much, hon. Member for adding on that information.

THE SPEAKER:  Do you want information from Nakasongola?

MS. OKOT:  My time is going – be fast.
MRS KOMUHANGI:  The Member of Parliament has a concern that really touches my district.  It is true, since cost sharing was scrapped off, the number of patients doubled, but the medicine supplied has not doubled; so there is a crisis that we need to address. Regarding the Health Centre grade IV, the hon. Minister mentioned the problem of the Medical workers. I do not know why all of them have pharmacies in the suburbs of the hospital, and l wonder why there is no mechanism to curb it. So it is a problem.  Thank you.

MS. OKOT:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Please my time is going and I will not be able to finish.

THE SPEAKER: There is information from hon. Lokeris.

MR. LOKERIS: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to give this information.  In my constituency, all the visitors who come to visit me have their medical forms written “out of stock” in the hospital and yet most of them are seriously sick.  Some have been in the hospital for the whole week and they have never been treated, because there are no drugs.  So this issue of removing the cost sharing has worsened the condition.  Thank you very much.

MS. OKOT:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My time has been eaten up and I think you will add me some two minutes.  I would like to appeal to the President through the Minister concerned, that something should be done immediately, because this is like stopping people from drinking water that is contaminated in a well without putting a nearby a borehole to substitute it.  

My second point is on poverty.  He has also stated on page five that poverty has increased in the Northern part of Uganda. The people of Pader have requested me before and during the President’s Campaign that the reasons as to why there is poverty is not because of the war, neither was it because of the Karimojong who raided their animals; but in 1986 when the NRM government came into power, most of the military detaches put in the sub-counties and in villages stole animals and properties of these people. 

In the President’s address, he explained clearly that people whose animals and properties were taken by the NRA would be compensated.  People sent their complaints in 1986, but up to date they have never been compensated.  The people of Pader have requested me to inform the President, through you, that what belongs to Caesar should be given to Caesar. I think that was the reason why the people of Pader never gave him their votes simply because it is already a culture in this country, that if somebody is looking for votes, he should be the one to give, but not to take away from the people.  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker.

MS. Harriet. KAGABA (Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to add my voice to the rest of the Members, to thank His Excellency the President, for the guiding speech he gave to this nation.    Indeed, it was so guiding.  If at all we could go by it, by the end of the five years, I think we shall have done something good to this nation.

I would like also to express my sincere thanks, and that of the people of Kyenjojo, to the Members of the 6th Parliament who put Kyenjojo in place. Indeed, the people of Kyenjojo realized the task you went through, to put Kyenjojo in place. That is why they have sent a special message to those who managed to make it again to this parliament, and those who did not. 

I would like to comment on three issues in the President’s speech.  One is education. It is true UPE has really taken root and people have appreciated. All the stakeholders are quite happy. But there is one thing we have failed to put in account; we have forgotten to mention about the dropout rates.  No wonder, maybe it is because the dropout rate is one sided; it is on the girl child.  

It is the concern of the women of Uganda, and the well-wishers, to condemn the dropout rate of the girl-child in this country. It is true it may not be recognized as a disaster, but according to what we are seeing down, the girl-child is almost leaving school completely. You will be surprised, that we are taken by events as it is on page 15 – what happened to immunization.  

THE MINISTER OF STATE (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Mrs. Namirembe Bitamazire): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  The hon. Member on the Floor is talking about the high dropout rate, especially for the girls. May I inform her that on the 15thAugust, 2001 our President is launching a big scheme on the girls’ education in this country. This is a global movement, and it is being launched here in Uganda to address issues concerning the girl-child education. That is one.

Secondly, the research that was conducted in 1998 indicates that, the highest rate of dropout is caused by sickness. With that finding, we are addressing the issue of sickness of the kids who are attending school.  But that is an issue which we have to handle or address together with the parents, the medical departments and so on. 

So, I am just drawing her attention to the fact that, the reasons for dropouts are many; and many of them can be handled through combined co-operation and working together. The House is informed that a massive programme is to be launched next week, to address girls’ education in Uganda, in Africa and throughout the world. Thank you.

MS. KAGABA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am aware that, there are so many causes of the dropouts; and I was coming to some of them. I would like to inform the hon. Minister that, I was one of those who used to make research in the district, when I was the Secretary for Gender, Health and Education; and we used to report to the Ministry the causes of dropouts.  I was going to that, but I thank the Minister for the effort she is putting in, to alleviate the problem of the dropout of the girl-child.

I would like to add on the reasons she has given which causes the dropout. One of them that has really disturbed my mind, is the defilement of the girl-child. It is true there are efforts being done to make sure that defilement is really curbed; but instead it seems to be rampant.  I am wondering. Some men have resorted to doing nothing, but defiling the under 18. It is really absurd; and we do not know what we are going to do!  Mostly the victims are the kids from P.4 up to P.7; this is where the rate is high. I would request the people concerned with defilement to be vigilant and help.  
Otherwise, it is becoming too much, it appears as if there is no existing law at all.

I would like also to mention on roads. When the President was campaigning in March, he assured the people of Kyenjojo and Toro that the road from Mubende to Kyenjojo will be finished by next year. It is true the company which took the contract, promises us that it will be handing over the road to the users in May, next year. 

But we are perturbed. The road is tarmacked from Mubende to Kyegegwa, which is 48 kilometers, and from Kyegegwa to Kyenjojo, which is 64 kilometers. They say from Kyegegwa to Kyenjojo, it will be first class murram. That one perturbs us; that the road is going to be handed over to us, partially tarmac and partially murram. It is true they have already started laying first class murram from Kyegegwa to Kyenjojo.  The people of Kyenjojo and Toro want to know from the Minister concerned, what will be the fate of the remaining untarmacked stretch?

Mr. Speaker, allow me to talk about health also – (Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Please there are so many people interested to contribute.

MS. KAGABA: Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about the sub district health hospitals. We have a health centre in Kyegebwa, it has the theatre, the doctor’s house and the doctor is there and some instruments are in place, but there is neither electricity nor water to enable the doctor operate within that theatre. I just do not know whether the Minister concerned is aware of this. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MS. ERIYO JESSICA (Woman Representative, Abjumani): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for giving me the chance. I would like to thank the President, for the State of Nation Address he delivered to us. I stand here to comment briefly on behalf of the people of Adjumani District. 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, most of the things in the speech have been commented on, but I would like to add my voice on the poverty situation in the North, which is really pathetic. 

The 66 percent is just an average. If one went on the ground, you would really appreciate that poverty is a big problem there. The Vice President did appreciate, when she came to campaign for His Excellency the President; and I think she saw that the situation was really bad. 

She pledged to give the women of the sub county, one cow per parish, and I hope she is going to honour her pledge very soon. It is actually the women who are most hit, by the poverty situation especially, because of reasons of inadequate necessary services or utilities –(Interjection)- Mr. Speaker can I be protected, I can hear a lot of comments. 

THE SPEAKER: You are protected.

MS. ERIYO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The second reason is the insecurity which is obvious. The third issue is the refugee scenario. I am going to talk about these issues.  

First of all, I would appreciate the idea that we are tending towards private sector led growth in Uganda, but the inadequate necessary services or utilities in some parts of this country, is going to make it very difficult for the people - I am telling you the poverty situation in some of these areas may even widen.  

As I speak now, we do not have electricity in our district, and in West Nile in general. Just before the presidential campaigns, some electricity poles were put there, but right now, you cannot even see them, because grass has grown around them; and for us in Adjumani the sign is not yet there.  

Some of these projects are long-term projects - 10year projects. I appeal to the Ministers concerned to make sure that they consider West Nile as a priority, and the Northern region as a whole.

Secondly, Mr. Speaker I am worried about the issue of the UCB, because as I talk now, we only have one bank in Adjumani District, and that is the UCB.  I do not know; if the case is not handled properly, then we might not have this services in the district at all.

The question of water.  We have about 47 percent coverage of water in the district, but that average is brought about because the water coverage in the refugee settlement is over 90 percent. You can imagine bringing 90 percent down to 47, how much water is available for the local population down there.  

The issue of schools.  We do not have any tertiary institutions in the whole district. I hope the construction of technical schools at sub county level will solve the problem. We only have one Government secondary school, which has just introduced A-level recently. The Government is also going to support only one private school, which is a missionary school. You can imagine the problem of secondary schools for our people; yet they are so poor they cannot send their children to distant schools. I studied throughout within the region, and I am telling you it is very difficult for one to go through those schools and go to the University. The situation is bad.

About communication services, we do not have any telephone communication centres installed in the district.  Somebody went there privately, to start a branch of the post office. So, in the offices and everywhere, we do not have telephone services.  

I appeal also to the private sector especially MTN and Celtel, to come to our rescue, because we have a very big problem. We do not have televisions, the whole of West Nile do not receive television programmes.

The issue of roads. The President told us, when he came there, that the road from Gulu to Nimule, will be tarmacked, and that the road from Atiak to Adjumani will be made first class murram.  I do not know, because of the insecurity situation, whether the work will be done because the road from Rarubi to Moyo was being worked on, but the constructors ran away when one of their drivers was killed, and some of their vehicles were burnt. 

Those are the big issues there. We have a big bridge which links us to Sudan, but the district cannot construct that bridge. We hope the Government will look into that. We already put that in the district Budget framework paper, and I hope the Ministry of Finance will consider it.  
The second issue is about insecurity.  Since one of the sub counties cried to the Government and at least 50 guns were given to the vigilantes, the rebels have not attacked that sub county. But some of the sub counties occasionally get attacks from the rebels. We hope they will look into this issue.  

I hope disarming the Karimojong maybe on the other hand could be supplemented by giving guns to our people, because we can protect ourselves. We are not the notorious people they used to refer to. I used to hear comments that, the Madi are very notorious; but the Madi are very friendly and are very good people. If you come there, you will appreciate it. 

About the refugee scenario.  In Adjumani we have over 72,000 refugees and the situation is bad, because the disease prevalence is so high.  We only have one hospital, and I really appeal to you Members, in this House, that when the issue of Adjumani getting a second constituency comes up, please you back us up. That is one of the conditions that will enable us to get a health sub district. 

We have only one hospital with 100 beds. There are so many people who get admitted there, and when cost sharing was scraped off, people come from Sudan, from Moyo, from elsewhere came to get treatment from that one hospital.  This is really a big problem and we have a fear of the wild polio which has been sighted in southern Sudan. The refugees move up and down, in and out of Sudan. We hope that we will not get an outbreak of another disease just like the ebola, which threatened people in Gulu. With only one hospital in Adjumani, I do not know how we shall handle the situation there?

Just to wind up Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank you very much.  There is the issue of the integration of the refugees, which I hope Members will seriously look into, since it will affect a number of districts, because it is a very contentious issue right now in our district. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, yesterday it seems it was the consensus that we end the debate at 6.00 p.m.  Now, we have gone to 6.30 p.m, do you think we can push on?  
No, you are tired.  Okay, if you are tired, I want to remind you again that tomorrow at 10.00 a.m, we shall convene here for purposes of electing the three Commissioners to the Parliamentary Commission. 

Once this is done, we shall leave the counting. Then instead of starting at 2.30 p.m, we shall start at 2.00 p.m; that will give us more time to see how far we can go with this debate – (Interruptions)- Okay, we shall start at 10.00, and then after the first exercise, we shall see as to when we shall resume, after suspending the proceedings.  The House is adjourned until 10.00 a.m. tomorrow.

(The House rose at 6.34 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 9th August, 2001 at 10.00 a.m.)


