Tuesday, 5th August 2008

Parliament met at 2.47 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to welcome you back to the plenary. I am sure you have been very busy and I want to thank you for the work you have been doing in your committees. Hopefully, we shall start the general debate today and deal with the committee reports next week. 

I also want to inform Members that the weather forecast continues to improve. The clouds –(Laughter)- are gathering and I am sure that we might have some rainfall and thunderstorms by the end of the week. So, please continue doing your work. 

I wanted to remind the honourable members that the money for the medical insurance is available but it will not be given to you; the Commission issued instructions that the money will be paid to the medical service providers. So, this is to ask you to inform the accounting officer who the medical providers are going to be and those who are interested in IAA will be able to receive a presentation this afternoon, I think in the Conference Hall. Thank you.

On the draft estimates, the texts are at the reception, but you need to sign for them. So each of you can go and sign for a copy of the draft estimates. Thank you.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO 
A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

(i) The revised revenue and expenditure estimates for the Fiscal Year 2007/08 and;
(ii)  The budgetary proposals for the estimates of revenue and expenditure for the Fiscal Year 2008/09

2.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move that Parliament do resolve itself into a Committee of Supply for the consideration and approval of the revised revenue and expenditure estimates for the fiscal year 2007/08 and budgetary proposals for the estimates of revenue and expenditure for the fiscal year 2008/09. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Seconded? Okay, justify it.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker and hon. Members, this motion was moved by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 12 June 2008 and I urge Members to approve it.

2.52
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, it is true on 12 June 2008 the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development presented to this House and the nation the government policy proposals for financial year 2008/09 under the theme: “Strategic priorities to accelerate Prosperity for All.” This was the third budget statement allegedly aimed at implementing Prosperity-for-All, which is the central theme and message of the NRM election manifesto of 2006.  

This theme followed the two previous ones about enhancing economic growth and household incomes through increased production and productivity and re-orientating government expenditure towards Prosperity-for-All for the financial year 2006/07 and 2007/08, respectively. 

However, as usual, the minister did not address a wide range of issues raised by the opposition in the last financial year. 

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, last financial year the minister indicated that the strategy was to address the entire range of constraints, which often stand in the way of production, marketing; access to financial services and the cost of capital. The year is gone and the minister was only able to tell the nation that the real GDP growth, in the financial year 2007/08, was estimated at 8.9 percent as opposed to the projected growth rate of 6.5 percent.

The questions honourable members should ask themselves are: if the Ugandan economy is growing at an impressive 8.9 percent per annum, what does the common peasant in our villages have to show for this growth? Assume for a while that you have visited your rural village to consult with your constituents as an MP and now assume that you wish to break this good news to them in your local language that finally the economy has grown and as a result there is a reason to celebrate. What is your speech going to be like? This is the only way representatives of the people can test what we do and say by checking if we share our understanding with the people we serve.

Madam Speaker, the minister failed to inform the nation to what extent he managed to address the constraints that stood in the way of production, marketing, access to financial services and the cost of capital as identified in the last year’s budget. The minister has failed to tell Ugandans how far government has succeeded in fulfilling the promises contained in the NRM 2006 manifesto.

We in the Opposition did not expect any miracles from the minister because in his State of the Nation Address, the President, apart from recalling the Ten Points Programme, which became a 15-Point Programme for his information, neither outlined his government’s achievements so far nor gave the nation the legislative priorities for the financial year 2008/09.

Madam Speaker, as usual, the minister did not address the imbalance in the distribution of resources between the three arms of government, that is, the Executive, Parliament and the Judiciary and the discrepancy in the share between the central and local governments.

In the financial year 2008/09, the percentage shares to the Executive, the Legislature and the Judiciary is 97.61 percent, 1.47 percent and 0.92 percent respectively. The percentage share to the centre and local governments is 68.42 and 20.74 percent respectively.

Analysis of the share of the national budget between the three arms of government for the last 12 years shows that on average, the Executive receives 97.51 percent, Parliament, 1.43 percent and the Judiciary 1.05 percent. This imbalance and the discrepancy undermines the oversight function of Parliament and the effectiveness of the Judiciary in checking excesses of government as the Executive tends to overshadow the other two arms of government.

The imbalanced distribution of resources between the centre and local governments undermines the effectiveness in delivery of services and equitable distribution of resources among the population. We, therefore, recommend that measures be instituted in the budgetary process to reduce this imbalance and weakness in budgetary allocations. On the contrary, measures that will ensure expenditure controls and boost resource allocations to the poorest and most vulnerable will enhance rural transformation.

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, we reiterate that performance figures, which conceal the brick state of the economy, will not assist Parliament to advise government on how to improve its failed policies. In performing our constitutional duty of giving an alternative voice to this nation, we in the Opposition wish to make this response to the budget statement to highlight where loopholes are and provide policy alternatives on salient issues that we hope will provide solutions to the increasing household poverty. Our duty on the alternative policy proposals will be contained in the sectoral responses to the ministerial policy statements by the respective shadow cabinet ministers.

Although our policy alternatives are free of charge, whenever adopted, courtesy demands that government acknowledges the contribution made by the Opposition as partners in good governance.

ECONOMIC GROWTH

Madam Speaker, the minister appeared upbeat about the reported economic growth of 8.9 percent and held high hopes that Uganda is becoming an African tiger. However, the minister failed to inform Ugandans that the growth talked about was not pro-poor growth, but growth without poverty reduction. This is clearly demonstrated by the increased levels of poverty in the country. Pro-poor growth is that growth that enables the poor to actively participate in and significantly benefit from economic activity. This growth should occur in that sector and/or in regions where the majority of the people use the factors of production. In the case of Uganda, this growth should be in the agricultural sector. So, our view is that growth that does not translate into welfare of the people is meaningless and suspect.

Several scholars have established that growth in Uganda had induced important employment shifts out of agriculture, which has deepened increase in poverty. In the last ten years, the number of people living below the poverty line increased from eight to nine million. Economic growth in Uganda only benefits 20 percent of the population thus widening the gap between the rich and the poor.

Evidence from the national household’s surveys suggests that income inequality has been on the rise. Between 1992 and 2003, income inequality measured by the Gin Coefficient, which hon. Kamuntu can crosscheck, increased from 0.35 to 0.43 and only declined modestly to 0.41 in 2006. On the other hand, from 1999 to 2003, poverty rose by an annual 1.3 percentage points at national level, 0.9 points in urban and 1.4 points in rural areas. If the growth figures are that high, why is the number of people below the poverty line increasing? Who is benefiting from this growth? 

Dr Kaberuka, a senior African Economist and President of the African Development Bank, points out that while sustained economic growth is necessary for poverty reduction, it is an insufficient condition. He further asserts that “the pattern and composition of growth matters enormously”. The GDP growth, which the minister and the President boasted of, has not helped in reducing poverty among the people. It has only widened the gap between the rich and the poor. Growth that is meaningful should be accompanied by rapid decline in poverty and inequality in incomes of its nationals. 

The major sources of economic growth in Uganda averaging over 7.4 percent over the last five years (2002/03-2006/07) were mining, construction, hotels, transport and communications. Construction alone accounted for over 67 percent of this growth. However, the agricultural sector, which employs almost 78 percent of the Ugandan population, had almost no growth at all in the financial year 2006/07 as it was estimated to have grown at a modest 0.7 percent during the financial year 2007/08. 

Our major concern is that, instead of deploying resources where the majority of the population is employed, the minister has instead reduced the sector share of agriculture from 4.3 percent in the financial year 2007/08 to 3.8 percent in the financial year 2008/09.

The view of the Opposition is that in order to tackle poverty, policy interventions should be geared towards the sector where the majority of the poor live. From the national household surveys, the absolute poor are known by name and location, whether rural or urban, are mostly in the rural areas, that is 96 percent and are mostly engaged in crop agriculture. Interventions should, therefore, be designed to target agriculture and the rural economy if the intention of government is poverty reduction among the population. We recommend implementation of household-centred strategies for economic growth and rural socio-economic transformation with a focus on production, productivity, profitability, progress and sustainability.

INVESTMENT

Madam Speaker, the minister reported that in the Financial Year 2007/08, private investments grew by 15 percent while public investment grew by 23 percent in the last five years. However, he did not inform Ugandans whether growth in private investments was a result of improved savings. Members will recall that in his Budget Speech for the Financial Year 2007/08, the minister promised to increase the proportion of savings from 10 percent to 20 percent of GDP so as to stimulate private investment. We advised him then, that investments are a natural result of savings and that without savings we could not talk of investments. In this financial year, the minister decided to avoid talking about savings and did not report on his promise to increase savings to 20 percent. In the same vein, the minister avoided to answer our concerns on the high-lending rates and the high cost of borrowing.

Madam Speaker, the view of the Opposition is that private investments can only be driven by a sound savings culture. We would like to remind the minister and the NRM Government that investments will only be sustainable, improved, when impediments to savings are addressed. 

These impediments include, among others: 

a)	Low returns on commercial bank savings.
b)	High consumption levels caused by inadequate government expenditure on public goods such as roads, hospitals, schools and security.
c)	Low education, that is, illiteracy levels.
d)	The regressive tax system, which has now caught up with the rural people in form of Local Government Tax.
e)	Insecurity.
f)	Increasing poverty, which has trapped the rural people.
g)	The spiralling population growth, ranked among the highest in the world, leading to high dependency ratios.

TRADE (EXPORTS AND IMPORTS)

Madam Speaker, the minister has consistently failed to effectively address the problem of the trade deficit, which is projected to widen from US $993 million in the Financial Year 2006/07 to US $1,636.6 million in the Financial Year 2007/08. Last financial year, the total import bill was estimated to increase by about 35 percent from US $2,513.6 million in the Financial Year 2006/07 to US $3,391.9 million whereas total export proceeds were projected at US $1752.3 million. Our view is that this makes Uganda an import country and this has serious implications as it raises doubt about the figures of economic growth given by the minister.

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, last financial year the minister celebrated the performance of traditional agricultural exports, that is to say, cotton, tobacco, tea and fish. However, one year down the road, the same minister reports, “Fish exports to both regional and international markets are expected to decline by about 11.1 percent from US $182.9 million in 2006/07 to US $162 million in 2007/08.”

He further reports that the export earnings from gold, cotton, maize and beans are expected to decline by 47.8 percent, two percent, 9.4 percent and 1.4 percent respectively in the same period. Of course with this disastrous trend one is left wondering as to what is the basis of the “economic growth” figures the minister talks about.

The second largest industry after coffee is tourism. Despite its contribution, the government continues to pay lip service to this industry. This is evident in the figures of the ministry where the percentage share of the sector that overseas the tourism sector has been reduced from 0.9 percent in 2007/08 to 0.5 percent in 2008/09. 

The contribution of tourism in poverty alleviation and social economic development through creation of employment and enterprise formation cannot be overlooked. We recommend that government increases the share of the tourism sector in order to improve the country’s attractiveness and the sustainability of the tourism industry. This is consistent with our policy position of building road infrastructure, airstrips and sound communications linking all national parks.

We also propose that government encourages partnership with the private sector in development of this much needed infrastructure so as to attract more revenue from the tourism industry.

There is a big cause to worry for the country’s export sector. Even as it dwindles away leaving the country to grapple with how to service our external debt, the minister neither has a strategy nor focus on how to reverse the downward trend. Members will recall that a few weeks ago, concerns were raised in this House about the plight of the cotton sector in Uganda. Available statistics indicate that cotton production has fallen from 135,000 bales in 2004 to only 65,000 in 2007. Unless a deliberate effort is initiated to promote the export sector, this trend of persistent trade deficit is worrying indeed! The effect of such a trend includes inflationary shocks that have to be absolved using taxpayers’ money and in effect this increases household poverty.

Madam Speaker, our view is that when the government attempts to export everything, it ends up doing badly in everything. Government must, therefore, select a few core exports in which the country has a comparative advantage over other countries and concentrate on them. In the past, focus was on coffee and cotton, but now we should change to new combinations in a bid to improve our exports. We, therefore, recommend that government should pursue new markets for exports and create opportunities through bilateral, multi-lateral and global trade agreements.

The minister should explain to Ugandans what role the export guarantee facility in the Bank of Uganda is playing in stabilising and boosting the export sector. We had earlier on recommended that this facility be moved to Uganda Development Bank for effective management, but to date the minister has not responded to the recommendation of this House. We continue to recommend that the minister urgently implements the recommendation. We also recommend that a comprehensive report be given on the performance of this facility. 

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, we do appreciate that the minister has at last recognised the contribution by the Ugandans in the Diaspora as per our recommendation in the Financial Year 2007/08. As a follow-up measure, government must expedite the law to formalise acquisition of dual citizenship as per the Constitution of Uganda, and initiate appropriate policies to encourage further remittance and investments in the country. This is consistent with our policy position of formulating special programmes that will attract investments from Ugandans outside, support them and guarantee these investments with proper policies.

THE BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT

Madam Speaker, the minister informed the nation that the objective of government was to make Uganda a leading, competitive destination for private investment in Sub-Saharan Africa by reducing the cost of doing business in the country. Our view is that unless competitiveness bottlenecks arising out of political uncertainties, corruption, limited access to finance, inadequate physical and regulatory infrastructure, prohibitive tax rates and the poor working ethics among national labour force are resolved, there is no way the minister would enhance Uganda’s competitiveness beyond his fertile imagination. The cost of doing business will not reduce until government develops the political will to tackle the matter of corruption, root out tax evasion, political influence and economic patronage and stop employing incompetent people simply because they are NRM cadres. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, our humble contribution is yet again to remind the minister of the operational bottlenecks arising out of the relationship between Uganda Investment Authority (UIA), the Uganda Export Promotion Board (UEPB), the Public Private Partnership (PPP) and the investment department under the ministry. Two years down the road, the minister has deliberately refused to implement the recommendations of Parliament that require him to resolve these institutional and legal impediments that cause redundancy and duplication of effort. Unless the minister adopts a holistic approach in addressing constraints to doing business, Uganda’s quest to become a leading competitive destination for private investment in Sub-Saharan Africa will not be realised. We, therefore, recommend that the minister urgently resolves these institutional impediments.

TRENDS IN THE MACRO-ECONOMIC INDICATORS

Interest Rates

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, we commend the minister for recognising the structural constraints that have made lending rates prohibitive in this country, and welcome measures aimed at reducing interest rates such as the launch of the Credit Reference Bureau (CRB). However, we wish to know the impact of the Shs 20 billion that was allocated to the Uganda Development Bank (UDB) as capitalisation to assist SMEs access short and long-term financing by ensuring that the lending rates at UDB are lower than those of commercial banks. We request the minister to lay on the Table the list of beneficiaries of the Shs 20 billion, detailing the procedures that were used to access these funds. Available records show that the alleged capitalisation of UDB was just a conduit to benefit companies with state connections and the recovery of these monies is doubtful.

This financial year the minister proposes an additional Shs 20 billion, through the industrialisation bond managed by UDB for small and medium enterprises and co-operatives. We recommend that Parliament stays the approval of this fund until the minister tables the list of the beneficiaries of the previous funds and how he intends to recover the said funds for further investment. We also recommend that proper guidelines on how the funds can be accessed be given and that UDB handles appraisal of businesses without due political influence from government. This will protect the money from fraudsters who use political influence, and ensure that the fund revolves to many more beneficiaries.

Credit to the private sector

Madam Speaker, the minister reported that commercial bank credit continued to grow despite high interest rates. However, he neither explained the contribution of this trend on the poverty levels in Uganda nor sympathised with Ugandans who have lost property to unscrupulous commercial banks as a result of failure to pay back loans that were injected in production, particularly in agriculture. The Opposition recommends that the government should implement measures aimed at availing low interest, long-term rural credit for agriculture.

FINANCIAL SECTOR DEVELOPMENTS

Micro-Finance

The minister reported a remarkable achievement in the expansion of financial institutions, the SACCOs. However, he failed to address our concerns of last FY as to why these SACCOs should not be spearheaded by the existing Apex institutions such as the Uganda Co-operative Alliance under the relevant ministry. He also failed to explain to Ugandans as to how these SACCOs will bring down the lending rates. Our view is that formation of SACCOs should not be politicised as these are member-based organisations formed to serve the interests of their members. Politicising this well intended programme will lead to its collapse as was the case with the Entandikwa scheme. The government should only assist them establish proper governance structures to oversee implementation of the policies and strategies formulated to reach each SACCO’s objectives.

Madam Speaker, the Opposition welcomes the consultations being made with various stakeholders to enact the regulatory legislation for micro-finance institutions. Government should aim at establishing a legal environment that will encourage the development of micro-finance institutions and ensure their expansion in rural areas. In a similar vein, we recommend that money lending be streamlined by amending the outdated Money Lenders’ Act.

The Anti-Money Laundering Bill

Madam Speaker, for over five years the minister has been promising Parliament that government would introduce an Anti-Money Laundering Bill but every year he has a different programme and excuse. The Opposition is suspicious that government could be buying time to enable its senior members to exploit the loopholes within the present legal framework. Our suspicion is strengthened by the recent arrests of senior State House members in London with lots of hard currency, transported using diplomatic passports. As Parliament and a nation, we should be broad and support regional initiatives to combat financial crime, fight against terrorism and enhance corporate governance and accountability. We, therefore, recommend that the minister specifies the date when this long awaited Bill will be tabled in Parliament.

SOCIAL SECURITY AND PENSION REFORM

It is four years since the Social Sector Transition Group (STG) recommended necessary reforms and innovations in the social security sector. The minister only reports about approval of the regulatory framework and the Bill being drafted. As we observed last FY, the delay in reforming the social security sector seems to be a deliberate move by government to deny our senior citizens the possibility of living a decent life after retirement. We recommend that a comprehensive social security sector system be developed for all Ugandans. This should also cater for all the elderly above 70 years as a special pension group.

Madam Speaker, we commend government efforts to clear pension arrears. However, the view of the Opposition is that pension arrears should be given first call on the Budget and should be 30 June 2009. The promise by the minister to have all pension arrears cleared in the next financial year is, therefore, not supported. We reiterate that if government fails to clear these arrears, interest on all accumulated arrears should be paid at commercial rates because of the continuous borrowing from pensioners without their consent and clear agreed terms. Pension arrears payments will encourage savings and stimulate investments, which the minister talks about.

REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE OUTTURNS 

URA Performance

The minister has continued to celebrate star performance of the URA. However, he does not clearly explain whether this was as a result of star performance or as a result of inflationary trends. The question that remains unanswered is as to whether this efficiency is not foreseeable so as to be included in the targets. The concern of the Opposition is that lack of rational target setting of revenue levels is a cost to Ugandans because part of the alleged surplus is paid to URA staff in form of bonuses. We recommend rationalising of the target setting process and that URA is subject to independent annual performance audits. 

The only way of enhancing revenue performance is through development of a comprehensive, highly targeted, highly integrated, clearly mapped national plan. This can only be done when we support measures aimed at strengthening and consolidating the economic planning functions and performance. 

Again, we reiterate our position that the planning function be transferred from the Ministry of Finance to a separate ministry. This will allow the National Planning Authority to become independent and efficient in developing long-term, comprehensive national plans out of which short term plans will be made. The current NPA is inefficient and has never submitted any single report as per the law to Parliament and should be disbanded. Employing people who have failed elsewhere in NPA is very bad and should stop immediately. 

Bank Balances at Year-End

At the end of every financial year, accounting officers are required by law to transfer the unutilised bank and cash balances back to the Consolidated Fund. Despite calls by Parliament to have these substantial resources accounted for, the minister has not responded as yet. As it has been in all previous years, the minister does not reflect this money in his budget balances as part of public funds for the new financial year. 

The view of the Opposition is that this money should always be reflected as part of the resource envelope for the new financial year. As a deterrent measure and to have these funds accounted for, we recommend that the approval of budgetary allocation to the Ministry of Finance be stayed until the minister produces a report of all the balances returned to the Consolidated Fund for the last ten years. We strongly recommend an activity-based budgeting to avoid wastage with incremental budgeting.

OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES

The minister highlighted the demand for goods and services, which has outstripped supply, leading to high prices. These high prices are inflationary and affect mostly income earners such as civil servants, workers and pensioners. Our view is that the minister did not institute measures to increase production to meet the increasing demand. The major challenge remained the meager budget allocation to the agricultural sector for production. The concern of the Opposition is that nothing was mentioned on long-term agricultural financing yet commercial bank interest rates are high and unaffordable.  

In line with our policy position of embracing agriculture as the country’s engine of economic growth, we recommend that in order to increase production to meet the current demand, the sector share to the agriculture sector be increased from the current 3.8 percent to at least 10 percent of the national budget. We also recommend that efforts be put in place to enable farmers to access low interest loans and long-term rural credit for agriculture instead of relying on SACCOs as a means for agricultural loans. 

The Opposition commends government’s effort to reduce the cost of using the Internet by connecting the sub-marine cable. However, the core effort of the ICT ministry should be to explore how connectivity can be utilised to improve its infrastructure and services. We recommend that as a national strategy, ICT should be promoted for improved governance to reduce poverty and social inequality, to improve access to education and health and to attract foreign investments. 

PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS

The Uganda Poverty Reduction Strategic Paper strongly supports different forms of partnerships in service delivery. It recognises that public-private partnerships play an enormous role in availing the much needed finance and expertise to projects. While we recognise that the private sector does best in some areas, in others the public sector has more to offer. However, government retains the responsibility and democratic accountability of deciding between competitive objectives, defining them and ensuring that they are delivered to the required standards and the wider public interests are safeguarded. 

Public-private partnership must demonstrate that public interest will be served and value for money achieved or else the project must not proceed as a partnership. However, the concern of the Opposition is that despite the much needed role, the minister only mentioned public-private partnerships in passing. This concern arises from recent experiences or projects run by government such as the Global Fund implementation process in Uganda, the Palm Oil Project that is depleting our valuable environment, the Nakawa Housing Estate project that is likely to create internally displaced people within Kampala, the mess in the re-development of markets in and around Kampala, the CHOGM hotel projects, the Kenya-Uganda Oil Pipeline Project, and the Bujagali Hydro Electric project - they are stealing fuel.

Our observation is that most of these projects are initiated in an adhoc and uncoordinated manner. There is little public awareness and in most cases, Members of Parliament are not informed about the role of government in the projects and their benefits to the nation. We recommend that government deliberately promotes public-private partnerships to crucial industries; develops export processing zones as anchors for industrialisation; provides initiatives for rural investment, economic integration and balanced national development and promotes lower commodity costs and rapid income growth to spur domestic demand. 

We also recommend that a law be enacted to govern partnerships beyond the traditional road sector, industrial parks, energy, mineral and oil exploration to include construction of government offices and referral and health centres. A central body to govern this partnership should be developed with sufficient capacity to avoid the mess that has been experienced in previous partnerships. We recommend that all partnership agreements such as those in petroleum exploration, hydro-electric generation and transmission be urgently tabled in Parliament. This is the only way that this august House will promote objectivity, transparency and fairness in handling public funds. 

THE BUDGET STRATEGY FOR 2008-2009

The Strategy of Prosperity-for-All

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, as a government strategy to implement Prosperity-for-All, the minister again proposes to address constraints that stand in the way of production, marketing, access to financial services and the cost of capital. In addition, he promises to address both private sector concerns and provision of public goods and services such as security, law and order, energy, roads, education, health and water. In our view, there is nothing new because the basic responsibility of any educated government is to provide public goods and services to the electorate.

Land

Last year we were told in this House that there was no need to have a special facility for people to acquire land because you cannot theoretically increase the quantity of land by purchasing more for those who do not have. Our view is that land as a factor of production has never been a constraint towards poverty eradication. The major constraint has been lack of infrastructure necessary to commercialise land use and enhance productivity of the land. Lack of land does not inhibit land use because communities have mechanisms of renting land to each other on a commercial basis. 

We, therefore, recommend that the government initiates transformation in land use through a national land use policy and legislation that will promote land titling, long-term renting, effective, rational and sustainable use and enhanced productivity of agricultural land. The initial programme should cover surveying of all public land to avoid encroachment.

Labour Extension and Mechanisation

As the Opposition, we have always asserted that NAADS is one of the white elephant projects that have had little impact on the lives of our rural people in spite of large chunks of funds allocated to this programme. We noted that NAADS has been reviewed and restructured after the President raised concern. We demand that a new policy framework be tabled in Parliament to enable representatives of the people who have had the benefit of interfacing with the beneficiaries of the previous NAADS programme in its implementation add their voices to the policy review.

The ministry also reported commencement of a nationwide move towards modernisation of agriculture through distribution of 500 walking tractors with standard implements. Our view is that doom awaits any government programme whose focus is to distribute, bearing in mind that such many programmes have failed before, such as the Rural Farmers’ Scheme. Programmes that lack the element of ownership by the local populace will fail and we are very certain that the free tractors will be viewed as belonging to government, which must therefore take responsibility for their operation and maintenance. 

We, therefore, recommend that government adopts a national programme for the acquisition and use of tractors and farm implements but should stimulate and encourage development of cooperatives that will own and take responsibility for the maintenance and repair of these tractors. We also recommend that accountability for tractors that were given to each sub-county in the earlier scheme be made public and that culprits who may have taken advantage of this scheme be held responsible.

Capital Micro-Finance

Last year, we made recommendations that the handling of SACCOs be transferred to the Ministry of Cooperatives so that funds are disbursed through the Uganda Cooperative Alliance, which have the expertise in the formation and operation of cooperatives. In this financial year, without regard to our concerns, the minister wants to inject an addition of Shs 22 billion to the same. We, therefore, ask the minister to inform Parliament about the impact of the Shs 10 billion he injected into the SACCOs last year upon the average interest rate charged by SACCOs before injecting further funds into the programme. We recommend that a detailed report on the operations of the programme also be tabled before Parliament for debate.  

Cooperative Development

The basic principle of cooperatives is that they are voluntary associations. They are member based organisations formed to serve the interests of their members. We welcome the move to amend the Cooperative Societies Act, 1991 but reiterate our earlier position that this programme be transferred from the Ministry of Finance to the ministry responsible for overseeing cooperative development in Uganda. 

However, we believe government is making a mistake by pushing cooperatives down the throats of the population. Politicising the creation of cooperatives will lead to their collapse, as there is already public outcry that some of the SACCOs closed and in some cases founders ran away with peasants’ money. The perception among the population was that joining SACCOs was the only sure way of accessing free funds for Prosperity-for-All from government.

Processing and Marketing

Madam Speaker, last financial year the minister promised to address issues of value addition and marketing. Specifically, Shs 8 billion was appropriated for acquiring land, buildings, and the necessary infrastructure for industrial estates. In addition, the minister had promised to assist Uganda Development Bank and other development banks with at least Shs 50 billion for small and medium enterprises and cooperatives involved in processing. The minister neither reported the progress made nor mentioned the number of firms or individuals helped to set up processing plants and their allocations. He instead proposes a further injection of Shs 16 billion for construction of industrial parks and an additional Shs 20 billion for small scale and medium enterprises and cooperatives involved in processing.

We support measures to make agricultural credit available to farmers and investors in agro-processing to strengthen local markets and promote value addition. However, given the background of the funds injected in Phenix Logistics and Tri-Star through Uganda Development Bank, our view is that the approval of additional funds for small and medium enterprises be stayed until the minister informs Parliament how the funds appropriated were utilised.

We reiterate last financial year’s position that in order to strengthen science and technology in industrial development, additional resources should be channeled through the Uganda Industrial Research Institute to enable the institute train and equip our small scale industrialists to improve our agricultural products. We also recommend that government strengthens collection and dissemination of market information.

The minister reported that this financial year, government will support a loan guarantee scheme for commercial banks that provide credit to agricultural and agro-processing projects. We wish to remind honourable members that most of the loans to Tri-Star and Phenix Logistics were guaranteed by government and in all these cases, taxpayer’s money was lost in the process. The view of the Opposition is that the problem facing agriculture and agro-processing projects is the high interest rates, which are a problem in most agricultural projects. We recommend that government creates a free and fair competitive environment in the private sector devoid of economic patronage.  

The minister has never informed this House under what law or authority the Shs 22 billion was transferred from the Consolidated Fund and paid to Basajjabalaba. In our view, this is a criminal act that called for action against the minister. The authority to withdraw funds from the Consolidated Fund is vested in Parliament through the approval of the Appropriations Act. If Parliament watches as the minister usurps its powers without any action, then the population has cause to worry because our nation’s resources will be put at risk.  

We recommend that the minister tables before Parliament a detailed report concerning the Shs 22 billion and how he intends to recover it. We also recommend that details of the loan guarantee scheme envisaged by the minister in the Budget Speech be tabled before this Parliament for scrutiny. This is to avoid giving blanket authority to the minister, which is likely to be misused to give quasi loans to political colonies whose enterprises collapse immediately the money is injected.

Transportation Infrastructure

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, we commend government for having realised that development and maintenance of Uganda’s road network is a top priority. This is consistent with our policy position of supporting measures that will improve the transport and communication network of roads, railway and air transport, storage infrastructure services, nationwide telecommunications, IT and media linkages. However, going by deliberations in the State of the Nation Address that Ugandan roads last for only 15 years, our concern is the extent to which government applies transport and infrastructure economics in designing and negotiating contracts for our roads since most of the loan financing for roads is repayable after 40 years.  

The Opposition supports the move to construct, upgrade and rehabilitate other roads and the move to buy road equipment for all districts. This is consistent with our policy options for instituting measures to improve the transportation and communication networks of roads, railway and air transportation. However, our concern is that districts with equipment have failed to maintain them due to lack of resources for repairs and maintenance. We recommend that districts be availed enough funds for repairs and maintenance of the equipment.

We keenly note that the minister has at last discovered the importance of railway transportation in reducing transport costs and plans to open the Tororo-Gulu-Pakwach and the Kampala-Kasese railway lines. The Opposition also notes that government plans to develop and finance a master plan for the further development of the national railway network and provide resources for development of an alternative route through the port of Dar-es-Salaam. However, our concern is that the NRM government watched over the collapse and deterioration of the railway that had worked well even under Amin’s regime. To add insult to injury, the current concessionaires, that is the Rift Valley Railways (RVR), which was to invest US $18 million to improve railway infrastructure has not done so. 

We recommend that government makes a comprehensive report on how RVR has performed on their contract. We also recommend that a comprehensive audit be done on the assets of the former Uganda Railways to update Ugandans on the losses as a result of neglect on the part of government and corruption.

Energy

Since the establishment of the Energy Fund, Shs 230 billion has so far been appropriated as follows: 

•	Financial Year 2005/06, Shs.20 billion 
•	Financial Year 2006/07, Shs.99 billion 
•	Financial Year 2007/08, Shs.119 billion 

This gives a total of Shs.238 billion. 

In the Budget Speech the minister only reports on Shs.208 billion of the Energy Fund as carried forward from the Financial Year 2007/08 and proposes to appropriate an additional Shs.109 billion for the fund. On the other hand, the Budget Committee reported that government had saved up to Shs 215.6 billion for the Energy Fund. This contradiction in the figures raises serious concerns about the management of the Energy Fund. The Opposition, therefore, supports the recommendation of the Budget Committee that a legal framework spelling out parameters for the utilisation of all the funds appropriated under the Energy Fund be put in place. 

We further recommend that the minister tables before Parliament details of the funds so far used which has led to the shortfall in figures. 

We commend government on the efforts in commencement and development of construction of the Karuma Hydropower dam, the critical power transmission lines and the feasibility study for the 100 megawatt Isimba Hydropower Project. This is consistent with our policy position of construction of the bigger power schemes along River Nile –(Interjection)– that is true - increased micro, hydro stations, exploiting other new and renewable sources of energy, lowering costs of power, improving transmission and extending electricity to all parts of the country. However, our concern is that the minister did not mention the progress of Nyagak mini-hydropower project, which he promised would start last financial year. 

The minister reports that government has made intensive and extensive consultations concerning the optimum policy to manage and regulate the oil industry. However, our concern is that the reported consultation has not been inclusive. Most Members of Parliament have not been involved in the policy process and are not privy to the details in the concessions. We recommend that inclusive consultation be carried out with all stakeholders. This will reduce resistance and increase the likelihood of support from the affected population.

Rural Development

The minister has promised to provide additional resources to increase employment and incomes of rural households. He specifically said that this financial year the budget would focus on interventions that address rural unemployment and under-employment; and in stimulating the agricultural sector through the provision of seed and seedlings, walking tractors with standard implements, irrigation and pesticides. It must be noted that Uganda’s unemployment rate is worsening day by day despite several attempts by government to reverse this trend. 

According to the national household survey, the overall unemployment rate is at 3.5 percent while underemployment rate is at 17 percent. This is widespread throughout Uganda affecting 65 percent of the employed persons, three quarters of whom are in the agriculture sector with 16 percent in elementary occupation and service workers. In 2006/2007, the official employment rate of Uganda was estimated at two percent while the unemployment rate was estimated at 12 percent.

Madam Speaker, our view is that there is an inseparable link between agricultural development and sustainable wellbeing of rural communities. The Opposition is convinced that unless government promotes policies, programmes and activities for rapid economic growth and transformation, there will be no job creation, employment and meaningful income to the people. 

We, therefore, recommend that the following be handled as a way of reducing rural unemployment and under-employment:

•	Putting in place a social protection policy
•	Defining and profiling the informal sector in Uganda
•	Fixing the minimum wage
•	Enacting and enforcing legislation against child labour
•	Initiation of education and training to transform and mould motivated, enterprising, hardworking, highly productive and competitive Ugandans.
•	Promotion of urban agriculture and the land re-distribution policy
•	Enforcement, education and promotion of labour rights.
•	Government reduces its budget deficit by scaling down its rate of borrowing from the public, which lends at higher interest rates.
•	Allow the natural growth of the cooperative movement without Government interference.  

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

Education

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, we commend government for having realised the problem of efficiency and quality education and the proposal to improve inspection and eliminate misuse of resources through pilferage. This is consistent with our policy position of improving the quality of education by putting in place measures to reform the education sector that is characterised by falsification of pupil and student numbers, abuse of construction funds, poor academic performance and lack of balance between post-primary and secondary education opportunities. However, our view is that standards and quality assurance will be improved through setting minimum standards of infrastructure, facilities, welfare and teaching, and through curriculum development, testing of teachers, strengthening inspection and regulatory bodies and upholding international standards where applicable. 

We, therefore, recommend the promotion of private investments in education for the expansion of competitive primary, secondary and tertiary education opportunities through incentives such as tax holidays, lower taxes and rebates for the establishment of quality facilities and location of schools in disadvantaged areas. We also recommend the promotion of adult education, literacy and civil education. We urge government to fulfill the promise of having community polytechnics in every county and a seed secondary school in every sub-county and that the Shs 10 billion for presidential pledges should be handled directly by the Ministry of Education.

Accessibility of education in tertiary institutions and universities cannot be over emphasised. In our view, government sponsorship in universities should not be limited to those who pass well because in most cases these are the children of the well-to-do parents who can afford tuition. 

We recommend that government takes on operational and maintenance costs of institutions and parents are only asked to maintain their children at these institutions. We urge government to implement the student loan scheme and scholarships to enable students from poor families to access university education. 

Health

Madam Speaker, the Opposition is encouraged that government has at last acknowledged that the health system in Uganda suffers from poor service delivery and inefficiency. The health centres continue to have drug stock-outs and attendance by many health workers at their duty stations is irregular. In our view, the starting point to correct a problem is to acknowledge that something is wrong. We, therefore, recommend that the health sector urgently establishes minimum service delivery standards in all health centres. 

The per capita expenditure on the health sector in Uganda is less than US $10, which is far below the United Nations Population Division (UNPD) minimum recommended rate of US $30 to US $40 per person. In line with our policy position on promoting high quality, affordable, reliable and internationally competitive health services, we urge government to increase allocation to the health sector to cater for the improved remuneration and decent accommodation for health workers and actualise the government plan to have well stocked health centres at parish level.

In the last financial year, Shs 8 billion was allocated to referral hospitals as development fund. However the conditions in most of these referral hospitals have not improved as anticipated. We ask the Minister of Health to give a detailed account of the Shs 8 billion allocated to referral hospitals for the financial year 2007/2008. We also recommend that all referral hospitals be provided with a development budget and all allocations to referral hospitals be directly channeled to them and not through the Ministry of Health.

Water, Sanitation and Environment

The Opposition reiterates its position that government pays lip service to the water sector. Over the many past years, funds allocated for water in Karamoja have ended up in people’s bank accounts without doing any substantial work. 

We recommend that a detailed audit be done on all funds that have been spent on provision of water in Karamoja for the last ten years. We also recommend that funds appropriated for water in Karamoja be sent to and managed by the local government and monitored by the centre instead of being managed by the central government. 

We further call for a total audit of the outputs in the water sector for the last 10 years to confirm how far we have gone in accomplishing the water plan. 

Security

We welcome the idea of improving the defence management systems through the Integrated Resource Management System. However, we reiterate our position that you cannot build a modern and professional national defence force without looking into the welfare of soldiers. We, therefore, recommend that the minimum pay for our soldiers be increased to match the increasing cost of living. 

Last financial year the government promised to pay duties on a specific quantity of roofing iron sheets and cement to enable soldiers to build decent homes for themselves at subsidised prices. The concern of the Opposition was that a study be carried out before implementing this programme. In this budget, however, the minister neither reported on the progress of this study nor on the number of soldiers who benefited from the scheme and the amount so far spent. 

Lack of implementation of policy proposals approved by Parliament denies our gallant soldiers a decent living and reduces their morale. We recommend that a detailed report be tabled in the House regarding the implementation of this scheme. 

A government that is riddled with corruption, lacks transparency and accountability, and/or is trying to address threats to basic security will find the development challenge incredibly daunting. Transparent governments that respect the rule of law are more likely to spend scarce resources in the ways that are accountable to their own citizens. We are convinced that given the many cases of corruption and reports of investigations that have been neglected by the NRM Government, it has no political will to fight corruption. We, therefore, recommend that:

a)	Government implements the previous investigation reports and prosecutes all those implicated;
b)	Under-funding of the accountability sector be seriously addressed as national priority;
c)	The internal audit function be streamlined;
d)	Government expedites the formation of audit committees in all ministries as per the provisions of the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003.

In its efforts to meet specific targets in areas of investment, tourism, trade promotion and resource mobilisation, the government should maintain missions abroad. However, these missions are poorly funded, have no development budgets and yet they have capital assets to maintain. In most cases, our missions are embarrassed with threats of closure due to dilapidated buildings and this has resulted in use of non-tax revenue without approval of Parliament, which is extra-budgeting.  

Our view is that the missions, which are supposed to promote the image of the country and attract investments, have been neglected by government. The NRM Government has resorted to fire-fighting methods through hire of lobbyists and international consultants. We recommend that all missions be allotted full budgets, which should include capital development, to avoid misuse of non-tax revenue and to improve the image of our missions and the country abroad.

Graduated Tax Compensation v Local Government Service Tax

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, we concur with the minister that the main challenge facing the operations of local governments is inadequate revenue. This was expected because government hurriedly implemented the proposal to abolish graduated tax without the knowledge of how we, in the Opposition, intended to cover the shortfall. 

The Opposition’s view is that the Local Services Tax is regressive, in particular to the local traders, farmers, artisans, and the poor civil servants such as teachers and workers who suffer double taxation. In our view, the tax is difficult to collect and is a disincentive to savings and investments in rural areas. 

In the last financial year, we strongly opposed the introduction of any new local government tax that was not service based. Our concern then was, and still is, that local governments can adequately be funded from the available resources if government fights corruption and realigns the Budget to increase funding to local governments where the majority of people live. 

Parliament had recommended the setting up of a select committee to review the allocation formula for the equalization grant, but the committee selected by the Speaker to be headed by Hon. Okupa did not take off as a result of confusion created by the Government Chief Whip. We recommend that the committee be cleared to work as per its original mandate. 

PEACE, RECOVERY AND DEVELOPMENT OF NORTHERN UGANDA

Madam Speaker, in the last financial year we raised concern about reports of rampant corruption in the implementation of the Northern Uganda Reconstruction Programme, procurement of resettlement kits and the poor workmanship in the provision of water sources in the Karamoja Region. As usual, the concerns of the Opposition were not considered in providing funds for the programmes. 

We recommended then that investigations and value for money audit be carried out and action taken against officials implicated in the misuse of funds for these programmes. We reiterate our position and further recommend that adequate precautions be taken in the implementation of the new Peace Recovery and Development Plan (PRDP) to avoid mistakes made in the previous programme.

EFFECTIVENESS AND EFFICIENCY OF PUBLIC EXPENDITURE

The Opposition supports improvement in procurement and public finance management through support of the PPDA, the Auditor-General, PAC and other accountability committees to complete examination of outstanding accounts and bring accountability up to date. However, prosecution and punishment of the corrupt should be made swift and urgent action taken on all recommendations made. 

We recommend that in order to improve efficiency and effectiveness in public expenditure, use of government vehicles be rationalised and a zero-based and activity-based budgeting approach focused on activities and priorities be adopted. Supplementaries should be for activities already budgeted for and not new activities.

REVENUE AND TAX MEASURES FOR FY 2008/09

Madam Speaker, in principle, we oppose provision of tax incentives to the traditional business activities such as tax relief on payment of duty and taxes on construction materials for hotels. Discriminative tax incentives distort competitiveness, are subject to abuse, destabilise the tax system and revenue as acknowledged by the Ministry of Finance. However, the Opposition supports the provision of tax incentives and exemptions to those sectors providing public goods such as education institutions and hospitals that would otherwise be the responsibility of the government. This is consistent with our policy positions of promoting private investment in education and promotion of both formal and informal health providers.

We are surprised that the minister is reintroducing tax exemption on hotel inputs terminated last year. We had raised concern about abuse of the facility and we had recommended a forensic audit to establish the loss as a result of this exemption. We recommend that Parliament rejects this exemption as it will drain the economy of income. We reiterate our position that a forensic audit be carried out so as to instituting measures to manage such a facility as and when need arises. 

We support exemption on income on residential airlines from payment of Income Tax and WHT on payment of lease rentals. This is in line with the recommendation we made last financial year that residential airlines also be exempted from tax to increase competitiveness.

Madam Speaker, exemption from income tax of new agro-processing investments for investments 30kms away from Kampala District is acceptable to us.  But the exemption must cover existing investors as well so as not to disadvantage them and edge them out of business. In line with our policy position of promoting a free and fair competitive environment, we recommend that exemption should not segregate against Kampala as a district. That is unfair and unnecessary, since the minister is talking about fairness as a cardinal principle underlying his tax proposals.

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the Opposition strongly rejects the proposal to exempt interest income earned from investment in securities from 15 percent WHT. This proposal will encourage commercial banks to invest in Treasury Bills for bigger earnings at the expense of lending to the needy private sector, thereby crowding out private sector lending. This is inconsistent with the broad strategy to encourage commercial banks to lend to the rural poor and increase agricultural production to meet the current demand for food, goods and services. 

Our view is that this proposal is also inconsistent with our policy position of having a stable macro-economic environment for sustainable economic growth and is only focussed on government’s current manipulation of money supply to control inflation rather than at lowering interest rates and easing private sector access to investment credit.

Madam Speaker, the government proposes to terminate the payment of excise duty on diesel for manufacturers, without evaluating the impact on the general cost of goods and services. The Opposition is of the view that with the rising costs of electricity, termination of this facility will discourage establishment of industries in rural areas where power has not been extended, and will defeat the minister’s move of reducing unemployment and underemployment. We recommend that termination be stayed, particularly in rural areas, to encourage agro- processing.

Madam Speaker, we warned the minister last FY that turning his guns on the local poor by taxing beer from local materials was a disincentive to agricultural production. The Opposition, therefore, welcomes the proposal of reducing excise duty on beer from local raw materials as it is inconsistent with our policy position of providing targeted incentives for promotion of grain production for income and employment. 

We applaud the minister for his proposal on tax exemption on salt. Our concern is that the minister only considered salt, which is used by both the poor and well-to-do and left out paraffin and soap. Honourable members will recall that last financial year the minister removed tax on Liquid Petroleum Gas (LPG) which is mainly used by the well-to-do. Maintaining high taxes on kerosene and subsidising LPG is not pro-poor as the minister appears to be rewarding the rich and penalising the poor. The high prices on other essential commodities such as soap and paraffin remain a thorn in the side of both the rural and urban majority poor. We, therefore, recommend exemption of taxes on paraffin and soap to make them affordable by the majority poor.

The proposal for a blanket write-off of tax arrears is suspicious and is not acceptable to us. There is a possibility that the defaulters are well known individuals who must not be allowed to cheat the country. The proposal will also encourage tax evasion with a hope of benefiting from future write-offs. We, therefore, recommend that a list of defaulters be provided to the Auditor-General to audit for recoverability and to accordingly advise Parliament on the course of action. We further recommend that the matter be addressed on a case-by-case basis.  

The minister increased environmental levy on used motor vehicles and motor vehicle spares from the 10 percent introduced last financial year to 20 percent this Financial Year 2008/09. However, the minister did not introduce any tax incentives for purchase of new vehicles. These would include, among others, reduction in import duty, establishment of assembly plants and introduction of a hire purchase scheme. 

Members are aware that in this House not more than two MPs have bought new vehicles because most of us cannot afford brand new vehicles -(Interjections)- that is true. All taxis and most cargo vehicles in the country are second hand. Our view is that increase in taxes on these vehicles and spares will increase the transport costs to the poor who use these taxis and cargo vehicles.

Madam Speaker, although we welcome any measures that will enhance environmental management to qualitatively improve the country’s attractiveness, the measures adopted should not make the Clemencia’s poorer. (Laughter) We, therefore, recommend that the minister’s increases on the levy on old vehicles should be accompanied by waivers/ reductions in taxes on brand new ones to make them affordable. Purchase of new vehicles will help to reduce transport costs and save foreign exchange that is spent on purchase of spare parts for the old junk.

REPORT ON TAX EXPENDITURES FOR FY 2007/08  

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the minister reported that using the powers conferred upon him by the Income Tax Act and the Value Added Tax Act, he waived Shs 4.7 billion in taxes. We would like to note that whereas the minister is granted powers to waive these taxes, he is required constitutionally to account for the exercise of that power to this House. 

Reporting the amount of taxes waived without providing a list of beneficiaries does not amount to the expected accountability. We, therefore, strongly recommend that the list of beneficiaries of these tax waivers be tabled before Parliament for scrutiny. This is consistent with our policy position of ensuring that there is objectivity, transparency and fairness in exercising political responsibility and in handling public funds.

The minister further reported that government paid taxes amounting to Shs 21 billion on behalf of NGOs and private enterprises involved in the hotel sub-sector. Since it is the constitutional duty of this House to ensure that all funds appropriated are put to good use, we also recommend that the full list of beneficiaries of this facility be tabled before this House for scrutiny.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker and hon. Members, in this response to the minister’s Budget statement, we have done our noble duty in showing you that the much applauded growth in GDP is not pro-poor growth given the fact that the majority of the population is getting poorer. 

We have strongly argued that growth without interventions that target the majority poor, and that is based on policies that are not fully owned by all stakeholders, will not enable us to meet the expectations of Ugandans as the rich will become richer and the poor poorer. 

We have expressed our deep concern about the bleak picture of our balance of payments - hon. Kamuntu, have you heard? - and on the loopholes in the tax proposals that we must seal before passing the Budget. The duty of the Opposition is to advise, while that of the ruling party is not only to listen but also to act. We rest our case, and the ball is now in the court of this Parliament. Madam Speaker, I thank you. For God and my country! (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you hon. Nandala, the Shadow Finance Minister. Can I invite the Chair of the Budget Committee if he does have anything he wishes to respond to?

4.34
THE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Mr William Okecho): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have very little to say because as Members will recall, on the 7th or 8th of July, I presented a comprehensive report, which was supposed to have been a response to the National Budget Framework Paper, which has been presented by the Ministry of Finance, which same report had been submitted to the President on the 14 May, as part of parliamentary response to the National Budget Framework Paper. At that time, the committees were just about to proceed on the scrutiny of the policy statements and that report was intended to guide them in that exercise, which exercise is about to end, and they are supposed to be presenting their reports for debate in the plenary here. 

With that - and I know everybody was given a copy of this report, both the long copy which was submitted to them through their e-mails and also the abridged version which contained many recommendations was presented in hard copy here. And Members of the Opposition who were both in the Budget Committee meetings and also in Parliament here had the opportunity to look at those recommendations and I am sure it is on the basis of that that some the recommendations by the Shadow Minister of Finance were based.  

In view of that, Madam Speaker, I wish to call upon the Members to go back to the copies that we distributed to them and use them as a means of debating from now on under the Committee of Supply. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson. Hon. Members I will soon be opening the matter for debate but I want to inform you that I would like to give opportunity to the Members who did not speak to the State of the Nation Address; those are the ones I will give priority first. If there is any other time remaining, I will come back to the other Members but I want the ones who did not speak to the State of the Nation Address -(Interjections)- I know them. (Laughter) 

4.38
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When my Shadow Minister for Finance was making his response to the minister’s Budget, at the beginning many of us on the Opposition side were not there, including me and the Opposition Chief Whip. This could have been mistaken as a lack of interest on the part of the Opposition on our own response. 

The truth of the matter is that this afternoon we were at Kololo. We the members of the five opposition parties in Parliament and their leaders signed a protocol of cooperation amongst the opposition parties. (Applause) We know that Parliament is equally important but we were caught up in that business, which is also national business. Therefore, I would like to take the opportunity to thank the Shadow Minister of Finance and the Members who held fort when we were not there and also the Members on the Government side and the ministers who endeavoured to be here to listen to our response. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, are Members ready or they want time to go and read? Are you ready or should we start the debate tomorrow?

HON. MEMBERS: Tomorrow. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, it seems that Members need time to get back their reports from the Budget Committee and the minister’s statement and that of the shadow minister. So we adjourn the House to 2.00 p.m., tomorrow. 

(The House rose at 4.40 p.m. and adjourned until, Wednesday, 6th August 2008 at 2.00 p.m.)

