Thursday 2nd August, 2001

Parliament met at 2.00 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms. Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair)

The House was called to Order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, a delegation of this Parliament is in Nairobi, Kenya, for a two-day meeting of the East African Inter-Parliamentary Committee, which started this morning. The delegation is led by the hon. Edward Ssekandi, Speaker of Parliament. Part of the agenda is to operationalise the Legislative Assembly for the East African Community. The Speaker is accompanied by the following Members:  

-	Hon. Ben Wacha from the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary affairs, who has been very active in making the draft rules of the Legislative Assembly.
-	Hon. Margaret Zziwa from the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs.
-	Hon. Ephraim Kamuntu from the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.
-	Hon. Z. Olum from the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry.
    • Hon. Nathan Byanyima from the Committee on Works, Transport and Communications.

All those are Committees that are related to the treaty for the establishment of the East African Community. The Nairobi Inter-Parliamentary Committees will discuss procedures and other matters related to the formal establishment of the Legislative Assembly. This is in preparation for its inauguration on November 30th this year.   We wish them fruitful deliberations.  

Secondly, I would like to inform Members of this House that the hon. Ester Opoti is hospitalized with some abdominal disorder. She is in the New Mulago Hospital, Ward 6A room 4B. It will be appreciated if you could call on her to comfort her. She is a Member of Parliament for Nebbi.  

Thirdly, we propose to hold elections for the Parliamentary Commissioners on Thursday, 9th August at 10.00 a.m. Those of you who are interested in competing for these posts, please collect the nomination forms from the office of the Clerk to Parliament. Thank you.

DEBATE IN REPLY TO THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION DELIVERED TO PARLIAMENT BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT ON THE 27TH JULY, 2001

(Debate continued)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, yesterday a number of Members had indicated willingness to speak, but I can see that some of them are not here yet. So, we shall skip those and I will pick people from one side, and then move to the other side.  
MR. AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As much as I appreciate the presence of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister in the House, I see a remarkable and very conspicuous absence of his colleagues from the Cabinet. Is it a boycott because Members are contributing to this particular motion, or is there some other intention yet unknown to this House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Prime Minister is the Leader of Government Business in this House. In that capacity, he will be able to internalize what you are saying and present it to the Cabinet, which he is also going to chair. Thank you.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: With due respect, Madam Speaker, it is on record that I did indicate yesterday that I would be interested in speaking. I hope you still consider my application.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, I think you are lobbying. That is not a procedural matter. Let me call upon hon. Namabidde of Mubende.

MS. SINABULYA NAMABIDDE (Woman Representative, Mubende):  Madam Speaker, my first point of concern in the speech of His Excellency the President is his observation on the absence of voter education. In the wake of computerizing the voters’ register, I wish to appeal to the Government to take up the issue of voter education seriously.  

The Electoral Commission has now and again complained of inadequate funding as one of the reasons it does not offer effective voter education. If effective voter education is not carried out, I am afraid that the computerization of the voters’ register may not be successful.  

It is important to note that generally, there is election or voter fatigue in the country. People are tired of the recurrent exercise of updating the register and checking names. So, they have not been coming to check the registers as had been required. If we are to have successful computerization of the register, we should ensure that voter education is adequately carried out.

I also wish to comment on education. I want to thank His Excellency the President for his commitment in ensuring that every child in Uganda accesses basic education.  However, I am skeptical about Government being able to have every child in school by the year 2003. It is unfortunate that the Minister concerned is not around, but the Prime Minister will take note of this. I know that the will is there on the side of Government, but I am not convinced that in these two years Government will have constructed enough schools in areas which do not have any schools.  

I appreciate Government’s efforts towards establishing at least a primary school per parish. But then the method of allocating classrooms or funds for classroom construction to districts is not fair. Some districts are getting a lion’s share and others are getting less. The reason the Ministry is giving is that some districts are not compliant. Those they call non-compliant districts are increasingly getting less and less funds every year, and the so-called compliant districts are getting more funds.   If some districts continue being non-compliant, how shall we ensure that by 2003 every child is in school? There are some areas where the distance between one Government school and another one is something like 20 kilometers. I appeal to the Ministry concerned to take note of this. If we are to realize this vision of having every child in school by 2003, there should be a deliberate policy to assist these non-compliant districts to become compliant.  

I also want to comment on the use of capitalisation grants that are sent to primary schools. I agree that there is equitable distribution of these capitalisation grants because they are given according to the number of children in school but then these funds arrive late to the schools. In most cases, by the time the funds reach the schools, it is holiday time.  So they cannot be put to good use. Head teachers in primary schools are using this as an excuse for not providing learning and teaching materials in schools. 

One thing I have noted in the area I come from is that head teachers are using most of this money to pay for their university fees. In fact, the Minister responsible should research on that. Many of these primary school head teachers have gone back for upgrading. It is not bad to upgrade but you find that in schools where there is misappropriation of funds, most of these head teachers have gone back for upgrading, and they use UPE funds to pay for their costs at the university. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MS.MWESIGYE HOPE (Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you Madam Speaker. Permit me to congratulate His Excellency on his double victory, and to congratulate you and your senior for having been elevated to the highest offices of this August House. I would like also to congratulate my colleagues. It looks like there is an emerging culture in the Seventh Parliament that gives both hope and optimism since everyone seems to be very clear about their visions. I am hopeful that in the next five years we shall all achieve a lot. 

Let me also congratulate the Ministers that have been appointed. We have all the confidence that they will deliver tangible results. As a backbencher, I pledge my total support to the Cabinet (Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the use of mobile telephones in this Chamber is not permitted. Can you switch off your telephones? In fact, if I hear any telephones ringing again, they will be confiscated and detained for offending the rules of the House. Thank you.

MS.MWESIGYE: Madam Speaker, I would like to add my voice to those who have expressed their appreciation for the President’s State of the Nation Address. Indeed, the report is comprehensive and touches a lot of vital aspects in a very elaborate manner. I have been particularly impressed by the distinction he made between poverty and lack of money. Hon. Members you will agree with me that so many people have bought vehicles, have built mansions since 1986, and yet these same people are the ones crying and cursing Government that it has brought poverty. 

I agree with what the President says about the overall increase of household incomes however, I would have appreciated more if he had given us desegregated data on various variables, for example, on gender, on location, social status, disability and so on. As we know, those variables are affected differently by the increase in incomes. 

I would also have appreciated further if he had given us more of the qualitative indicators in addition to the quantitative ones that he gave us because that gives us a clear picture of whether or not the livelihoods are truly improving. 

On the question of northern Uganda, the increasing poverty in northern Uganda, all of us are concerned about this phenomenon however, we need to do a thorough investigation of this increasing poverty. I believe that if we focus on the war and insurgency alone, we may not get all the other factors that are responsible for the increasing poverty.  So, this is an area that needs thorough investigation otherwise war, insurgency, may become generic.  

On elections, violence was highlighted in the speech. In my opinion, during the last elections, both presidential and parliamentary, violence was perpetuated by those who were actually sure that they were going to lose. On the one hand, I would like to commend hon. Awori. I do not think he perpetuated much of that but I am aware that many who were sure that they were going to lose perpetuated violence in a bid to rationalise their loss after the elections. And as you may see now, even the petitions that are all coming, the petitioners are claiming violence even on their part when they are the ones who caused it. So to me, people are trying to start a situation that could later on rationalise their failure. 

On the other hand, all of us were candidates in the last elections. I think we also need to re-examine ourselves. What part did we play in perpetuating this violence? I think in future we need to have a code of conduct for the candidates. It seems the law has not been enforced adequately and a lot has to be done. It has to start with us the leaders, by perhaps going back, especially, those that are from constituencies that suffered a lot of violence, constituencies that are polarised. We need to go back and bring the people together so that we can reduce the violence. 

I realise that the President’s speech did not talk about gender violence nor did it talk about domestic violence, yet we are aware that during the elections, many women were beaten up for supporting candidates that were not the favourites of their husbands or partners. We are aware that many women were chased out of their homes even after elections. 
I know if hon. Bakoko were to be here - she has so many women in her house that had been chased simply because they had supported President Museveni during the presidential elections. 

I am not clear whether it not domestic violence spilling over to the electoral violence and vice versa. So, I think in future these are the areas that need thorough investigation and reporting upon. And again perhaps what that calls for is that in this year we need to do so much more on the issue of the Domestic Relations Bill -(Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you please wind up?

MS.MWESIGYE: I am winding up, Madam Speaker, one minute.  On immunisation, of course, it is a shame that the trend has gone down but this is a global trend. I am not sure whether the Minister of Health has some of the research reports that show that there has been a global trend of immunization going down. I think they need to investigate these reports. Some of them are quite sensitive but they could come up with a solution.  

I would also have expected non-state actors’ contributions to be recognized. For example, we know that the Rotary Movement is doing so much on immunization; we know that other civil society organizations and NGOs are bringing in a lot of money through projects both at national level and at grassroots level. Indeed their contribution to the development of our country should be acknowledged and recognized –(Interruption).

THE DEPUTTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, resume your seat; you have far exceeded the 7 minutes.

MS. MWESIGYE: I was saying, Civic Education should be on a continuous basis, thank you.

MR. KIZIGE (Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Madam Speaker, I am standing to support the motion. I consider the motion to be a very clear and precise executive summary of the manifesto of His Excellency the President. The people of Bugabula North voted His Excellency the President with over 90 percent, and the issues that were raised in the Manifesto have also clearly been raised in the speech.  However, there are certain issues that we in Bugabula North feel that have not been clearly articulated. 

The Plan for Modernization of Agriculture focuses on increased production. Our experience in Kamuli is that, when we have good rains we have a bumper harvest.  Today, a kilogram of maize grain in Kamuli goes for a mere Shs. 70 and for all that it takes to produce 20 kilograms of maize grain, you can only get one kilogram of sugar.  

If the Plan For Modernization Of Agriculture is to focus on increased production, there is urgent need to review and open up markets; open up opportunities for marketing these agricultural products or agro-processing such that we can benefit from what we produce much better.

Recently the Uganda Electricity Distributing Company increased its tariffs. Consequently, to mill one kilogram of maize you need as much as Shs. 70. So if you are to mill one tin of maize, you need to sell one tin to be able to raise the money to mill the tin of maize. This is really not friendly, and the sweat of the people of Kamuli is really being wasted; we are not making anything out of our sweat.  

There is hope in His Excellency’s Speech; When he says that there is going to be focus on increased fruit production, this would be a very good alternative.  In my constituency of Bugabula North, there is Kiige Citrus Farm that was established out of a technical and economic co-operation with the Government of Israel in the late 60s. It has over 100 hectares of land, and in 1993 it had 343 workers. That was the first fruit production establishment in Uganda.  

Today NARO has taken over Kiige farm and has retrenched without benefits all the workers, except 20 and it is only utilizing 3 acres. There are irrigation facilities there but to be able to irrigate, you need to use two drums of diesel everyday; yet there is a power line at Kasorwe Stock Farm only 14 kilometers away, which could be extended to Kiige.  It is important that Government considers the rehabilitation of Kiige Citrus Farm as one of the strategies to improve fruit production.  

In Kamuli we do not have insurgency, but we also have other forms of insecurity. In the last 6 months, Madam Speaker, armed robbers have increased significantly in Kamuli. The Police cannot respond on time because for the District Police office, the 13 Police posts and Police stations in the district from central Police, there is only one old vehicle. So, the police cannot respond on time. Consequently, the citizens have resorted to mob justice. I think this is an issue that needs to be addressed. 

The people of Bugabula North thought that the impact of the statements by His Excellency the President and other presidential candidates regarding graduated tax should have been addressed in his speech.  There is no doubt that local authorities have significantly suffered because of the policies concerning graduated tax.  By the end of the financial year, on average only 8 percent of the projected income from graduated tax had been collected in the various sub-counties in my constituency.  It is now time for Government to move expeditiously to decide whether an alternative source of revenue should be defined for the local authorities and graduated tax is done away with, or the management of graduated tax is addressed such that the local authorities can be able to raise some revenue.  

Lastly, I would be cheating the electorate in my constituency, if I did not mention something about the election violence that almost every Member has talked about in this House. These elections were really very interesting; you could not tell who is in charge of what. It was not surprising to see a candidate coming from somewhere rightly claiming to be sponsored by security agencies, even in the situations where a Minister responsible for Security is the other candidate in that constituency. 

We know of senior Government Ministers who were de-campaigned using funds from Government coffers, either from Local Government or other sources but clear Government sources -  

MR. KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga South, Kampala):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  Many of the hon. Members here have possibly read Julius Caesar, a play by William Shakespeare and I want to borrow a leaf from Brutus, one of the characters in the play. I have not come to praise the speech of the President, but I have come to scrutinize the speech of the President. 

The people of Lubaga South cautioned me to ask the following questions. First of all, they are not happy that so many people in the world, including prominent journals and newspapers, and even donors, have spoken uncomfortably about the rate of corruption in Uganda. They are unhappy to note that His Excellency the President did not say anything about the rampant corruption in this country.  

As a student of comparative politics -(Laughter)- I have started smelling a rat because of the deliberate attempt the President made to avoid the issue of corruption. My impression is that the President of Uganda should accept that the members of his family have let him down in many instances related to corruption. For example, the family of His Excellency the President has been mentioned in almost every outstanding scenario of corruption. I speak about the depletion of the natural resources in the DRC, the questionable sale of UCB to Westmont and another bitter scenarios where the President goes to Malaysia to talk to the prospective buyers of the bank. Lastly, I speak about the purchase of the junk helicopters, which also involved close members of his family. 

To cut the long story short, noting that the President cannot distance himself from those scenarios, I have been requested by my constituents to tell him that he should publicly apologise to the people of Uganda for having got close to the people who have been mentioned in those instances of corruption. If he does not apologise, they have cautioned me to participate in a motion that should move a vote of no confidence in the President. This is serious.

In the State of the Nation speech, on page 2, the President says, “Since 1986 we have held many elections, local and national, and we in the Movement have a lot of faith in elections as a peaceful device for determining and legitimating leadership.” I would like to pose two questions to the President. If that is so, why were so many Movement candidates in the recent parliamentary elections funded by the state?   
Two, if those elections should allay our fears so that we remain intact about what is happening, why do we have continuous wars in this country?

My impression is that the content of the speech is a negation of Article 70 of the Constitution of Uganda, which says that the Movement is supposed to be all embracing. I got bitterly treated in Natete when I turned up to receive my President one time when he showed up. I was arrested, questioned and interrogated at Natete Police Station. I was accused of turning up to receive the President when he was campaigning for one of the candidates, and yet I was a bona fide MP as by the Constitution. Was that not a shame? Was I not segregated against? Am I not a Ugandan? You must speak seriously about the issues in this country. We all know that in the year 2000, we held a referendum and the Movement won the elections. So, I assumed that from then, everyone is supposed to be a Movement person. Why was I arrested if I also subscribe to the Movement? 

Much more exciting is the point that relates to the Cabinet. I do not see any multipartyist in the Cabinet.  Why? Aren’t we all Movement people? But by character, I do not see the Ben Wachas, the Cecilia Ogwals, the Aggrey Aworis, the Ken Lukyamuzis -(Laughter). Where are they? If we went by the content of the Constitution, namely Article 70, the recently constituted Cabinet remains unconstitutional because it negates the contents of the Constitution.  

I know that time is not on my side, but in conclusion, it would be unfair if I did not talk about the environment.  Several people have expressed fear about the dumping by KCC going on in Kyadondo North. Indeed, I would like to condemn that dumping in my capacity as vice president of Global International -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your time is up.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Okay, Madam Speaker, thank you very much.

MR. BAGALANA TOM (Bunya South, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to support the motion that the President’s Address to the Nation be debated. 
I will begin with the point on the elections, which was raised by His Excellency in his address. 
I would like to thank Government and His Excellency for the way the elections were run. They were fairly smooth, except for a few problems that emerged. And because of these few problems, I would like to caution Government to look behind at those Governments that have controlled this nation before.  

The fall of the past Governments have been due to the development of factions in Government. Every strong leader assumed a stance within Government and wanted to have a following around him. This is what has been echoed by one of the people who addressed this House on the sponsoring of people by different people. 

Another issue that marred the past parliamentary elections with violence is the failure of Government to come up with an individual candidate in every constituency. I think this House and Government should note that. You would find about five Government supported candidates in every constituency, so the electorate would fail to know who was for Government and who was for other interests. I think that was a big problem and a big mistake, which Government should not repeat even during these coming elections (Interruption)

MR. EKANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from hon. Tom Bagalana as to whether he understands the Movement principle of individual merit and being broad based, where officially the Government does not have candidates. Everyone contests on individual merit. Whether you are 20 and you are all Movement supporters, the people elect you on that principle. So, can you clarify to us what you mean by saying that they were five Government candidates, others were supported by different people in Government, and there was violence? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ekanya, you are now contributing.

MR.BAGALANA: Thank you Madam Speaker. I think what I am saying has water in it. I think the problem we are facing as a country, especially under the Movement Government is that we lack a political ideology. Every Tom, Dick and Harry says “I am Movementist” and we go by that. 

So, I think we need to sit down as a Movement and chart out the ideology of the Movement so that if we come up, everybody will know who is a Movementist and who is not.

I would now like to touch on the economy. The President alluded to the fact that our economy is one of the fastest growing economies in the world. When the President speaks about our economy, many times he uses the GDP figures and says we are growing. But I want to define some of these concepts like development and growth. Growth is volume and development is quality plus volume. So, when we use the GDP figures and we just say that it is the increase in the volume of production, who is this volume of production benefiting? It is high time we looked at the welfare of society. When we look at the GDP figures and say we are developing because GDP is growing at 17 per cent, how is the population benefiting from these figures? 

The President also talked about the calories intake per household. Many people here were saying that production in their constituencies is vibrant but I want to report that in my constituency there are people who sleep hungry. If you are sleeping hungry that means even the calories intake is not a point to address as a nation. We have to address how people will get what to eat! And here we are talking about Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture but when you look in your constituencies, what is there to modernise in Uganda? We have to come to the roots of our economy and see that now the point is distribution of seeds and agricultural inputs. And here I caution Government that this should go alongside regionally balanced development. 

Some people are getting dams for their cows. For me in Busoga who does not have cows, I go for years and years without a dam. Government does not think of sending me cassava stems. If I could be given the cassava stems and those in Ankole given dams, we shall call it regionally balanced development.  

MR.ONZIMA ALEX (Maracha County, Arua): I thank you Madam Speaker. I am going to concentrate on democracy. That is mainly about the recently concluded presidential and parliamentary elections. 

To me, of all the items the President talked about, I regard democracy the most important of all. I am aware that we have attained some level of stability in this country in the last 16 years the President has been in power, but of course, whatever has been achieved, if we do not sustain the political stability of this country, all will come to nothing. 

Article 1(4) of the Constitution is very clear on the democracy in this country. I quote: “The people shall express their will and consent on who shall govern them and how they should be governed, through regular free and fair elections of their representatives or through referenda”.  But what we saw in the action of the President was a clear abrogation of this Article of our Constitution. 

I have not read anywhere in this Constitution where it says or where the President is empowered to go public and tell the whole nation and indeed the whole world that, for instance, “I do not want to see Babihuga in the Seventh Parliament.” This was reported in our newspapers! 

I have also not read anywhere in this Constitution where it is written that the first obligation of a Member of Parliament is to support the Movement system. The President said that one of the responsibilities of a Member of Parliament is to defend the Movement system. Article 79 of the Constitution is very clear on this. I have never read anything that a Member of Parliament should defend the Movement system. So, it is really very undemocratic for a President of a country to interfere in the exercise of people electing their own representatives to come to articulate their views in the august House. 

I was one of their targets just because I belong to the “Reformed Movement”. But what happened is that my people gave me a larger mandate than they did did give me in 1996 when I supported His Excellency the President.

MR. TIBARIMBASA: Is it in order, Madam Speaker, for the hon. Member to address the House while pocketing?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I did not see his hand. Please proceed.

MR.ONZIMA: I thank you Madam Speaker. In 1980, our gallant soldiers, now the UPDF who were then the NRA, stated clearly that they were prepared to lose their lives on behalf of the people of Uganda because the elections in 1980 were rigged. Fifteen years down the road, we are seeing a situation where, not only is there rigging but now there is grabbing of votes by use of the gun, buying of votes, intimidation and several other malpractice going on. This is a contradiction of the purpose for which these sons and daughters of ours joined hands to fight the Government that was in power then (Interruption).

MAJ. KAZOORA: I thank you my hon. Onzima for giving way.  I entirely sympathised with you when you were targeted by the powers that are, but I have also since learnt that there is another economic benefit when you are targeted in that manner. The money that is put in your constituency to defeat you or the equivalent in Mbarara Municipality or Bukanga and Kashari, can never be the same in terms of economic emancipation from the resources that we put in.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Onzima, please wind up.

MR.ONZIMA: I thank you Madam Speaker. At the end of the presidential elections, the then Museveni Task Force came up with an accountability of the money that they used and it totalled to Shs.8 billion. But when the Movement was here for NEC, the President was reported to have said that about Shs.13 billion was embezzled by his task force, now totalling to Shs.21 billion. While the Monitor on its own investigations found out that the President’s campaign team had used Shs.25 billion. This means these people gave fake accountability to the Electoral Commission.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable. I think your time is up.

MR.APUUN PATRICK (Bokora County, Moroto): Thank you Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion but I will make my remarks when I find it necessary. On behalf of my people of Bokora County and on my own behalf, I congratulate you Madam Speaker, the Speaker of Parliament and the rest of my colleagues. I have already received your congratulatory letters in my pigeonhole and therefore, since you are all here I congratulate you more sincerely for having sailed through to this august House.  

I would like to add my voice to those who have already contributed to this His Excellency’s State of the Nation Address. I am only deeply touched that in his speech the President did not say anything concerning the security situation in Karamoja and the neighbouring districts. This is a very gross and serious omission. On this note, I add my voice to that of the Member from Soroti who yesterday had a similar concern about the President’s omission of the security in Karamoja and Soroti, and other neighbouring districts.

While we are concerned about security in Karamoja, I am deeply touched that Government itself is the one contributing to the failure to contain insecurity in Karamoja region. I remember that in the Sixth Parliament you resolved to vote for some money so that cattle rustling can be contained in that region. I am surprised that that money was diverted. 

On Page 72 of the Auditor General’s report to Parliament it is said that: “There is a diversion of Karamoja funds that were meant to contain insecurity in Karamoja. A sum of Shs.2,965,000,000 was received by the Ministry of Defence to contain cattle rustling in some parts of the country - which means Karamoja and the neighbouring districts - Shs.543,625,000 of this money was diverted and used for buying saloon cars.”  

When you look at all this, you will see that Government neglect of security in Karamoja is really not considerate to what the President himself is talking about Karamoja. The President says he has contained the threats that are actually called state threats, that is; Kony and ADF, which I think, are fighting for State House, but that threat he has contained. What about the threat to property; because even inside Karamoja there is cattle rustling and people are dying?  

I received a letter recently in my pigeonhole from Justice and Peace, a Commission from Soroti Catholic Diocese, regarding the plight of the people of Katakwi because of insecurity caused by the Karimajong. That letter urged the electorate in all neighbouring districts to vote wisely for the members in this House who will effectively solve the Karimojong problem. How can we do this ourselves when the Government itself is the one diverting the fund that should contain the insecurity in Karamoja?  I think that for us Members who are neighboring the district have to pin point a finger to government, in order to hold the insecurity in Karamoja. We cannot develop when our people are fighting.

I know for sure that the 6th Parliament made a resolution for disarmament in March 2000. The Karimojong community told the President that they were willing to hand over the range of about 60,000 guns in Karamoja.  These guns were bought from Southern Sudan at the cost of shs.500,000.  So, the Karimojong are saying that they invested money into these guns and want the government to give them iron-sheets to build their homes not money because they will definitely again buy more guns. 

MR. KABAREEBE (Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to say that the President, for the first time, was sober and gentle when presenting his document.  I think when you see the President becoming sober, you get to understand that the nation is becoming stable.  

MR. BASOGA NSADHU: Thank you very much Madam Speaker.  Is the hon. Member in order to impute that the President has only been sober for the first time when we know that the President is always sober, and he has never been drunk?  Is he in order to impute improper motives?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If the hon. Member meant that this is the first time he is sober, then he is out of order.

MR. KABAREEBE: I will not say anything in connection with that. I must apologize because it depends on how somebody interprets it -(Laughter). I was only talking about the presentation of his speech and not the performance of the President.  I hope I will not be misquoted!

Allow me, therefore, to make a very small quotation from the book entitled Creating a Government that works better and costs less by Al-Gore, the former Vice President of United States.  
In his Book he quotes General George Parton that: “Never tell people how to do things.  Tell them what you want to achieve and they will surprise you with their ingenuity”. You will note that the President has given us this speech and we are supposed to panel beat, add or subtract.  I believe that he genuinely gave us this telling us what he intends to achieve. Therefore, we should go ahead to support him and give a credit where it is due.  

According to me, this is a good document but a few things are not there.   So we can talk about corruption, yes, talk about Karamoja, and talk about insecurity and famine in the North. I therefore, go to page 5, where His Excellency is talking about absolute poverty.  He says that in 1986, 56 per cent of the people were living below the poverty line.  By that time the population of Uganda was about 16 million.   So that means about 8.5 million were living under absolute poverty.   

By the year 2001, 35 per cent are living under absolute poverty, but the population has increased to 22 million.  That means the population is still under absolute poverty. Therefore, we should take care of the eight million people who are still living under absolute poverty and arrange to put a disaster preparedness scheme to assist them. As much as we help the refugees, we should be able to think about our people who are living below the poverty line. We started with UPE, but that may not assist them to get the 3,000 calories required by a person who is working.

Allow me to talk about the economy in this Country.  I am focusing myself on taxation of fuel.  I don’t have the proper figures here but you will note that over one million vehicles are parked and about 60 per cent are big trucks.   They are running out of business because they are making a very small margin of profit and as such, they are not worth operating.  

The government is taxing fuel by a mobile tax arrangement, which I hope is wrong. You can imagine, in Uganda the price of fuel is shs.1,520. It is cheaper in Tanzania, Kenya and in Congo who have problems! We need to look at a system where taxation on fuel is organised.  Otherwise Government will tell us that the price has increased on the World market that is why here the price has also increase, but why not Rwanda? 
Why not Kenya?  The reason is that, they are taxing about 700 shillings per litre and when the price increases in the market this mobile tax also increases -(Interjection) – is it information or order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Will you take the information?

MR. KABAREEBE: If it is information it will take my time, but if it is an order it is okay.  Madam Speaker, this is going to lead me to another point on page 16 where the President was wondering why immunisation has gone down from 70 percent to about 38 percent, and he is asking: “where were all the MPs? Where were all the RDCs? Where were the CAOs? “Awa watu wote walikua wapi?” That is what he said. 

If you look at it, it is lack of facilitation in terms of transport. So the issue of fuel should be looked into, otherwise we shall bring down this country. For instance, in Rwampara area in Mbarara, a bunch of matooke is 200 shillings and in Kampala it is now 3,000 shillings. The problem is transport! Our people cannot access the money because of fuel. 

I therefore suggest that the mode of tax collection by Revenue Authority should be regularised and we should look at the money collected by Revenue authority from these districts. We are saying that the districts are independent but then when it comes to the collection of money, revenue authority takes the money and yet the districts are supposed to collect their own money, which is not enough and the money sent there is conditional. In other words the money which is sent there is to run central government programmes but not the local programmes.  So let us look at the small percentage collected by Revenue Authority to be remitted directly there.

MRS. SSENTONGO (Workers Representative): Thank you very much Madam Speaker.  This being my first time to address this august house, allow me to congratulate you and the Speaker of this House on your success for acquiring that high office.  I also wish to congratulate my fellow MPs for having gone through the hardships, to come to this august House.  I want to support the motion in regard to the President’s State of the Nation Address at the inauguration of this House. 
I want to make some few comments basing on poverty.  

His Excellency informed the Nation that the results from the recently concluded household survey indicated that poverty fell from 44 percent to 35 percent during the last three years. But this statistics leaves a lot to be desired. I wonder whether unemployment was put into consideration when these figures were concluded.  The trend has been that a number of families are in absolute poverty and the evidence available is that some families get a single meal in a day.  They cannot afford to treat the members of their family just because of the expensive drugs in the country. Furthermore, some of the families cannot even afford to buy paraffin for their candles to light their houses.  So what they resort to is to burn the old used vehicle tyres to light their houses -(Interjections). I have evidence.  So, this aggravates the situation because such a family is forced to breathe in polluted air. 

The question of immigration of foreign workers who have the same skills that are available in this country is another problem. This is where you get two workers doing the same type of job, but when it comes to remuneration, the foreigner is paid much higher compared to the Ugandan worker.  So there must be some strategy put to safeguard the immigration of people who come in here under the disguise of expertise. 

This calls for a well-established policy in regard to employment and minimum wage. If this is not done, it means that we are leaving our people’s lives in the hands of the foreigners to decide their payment and the type of conditions that a worker should be in.  We have vivid examples of some Asians who are inhuman and who don’t want to recognise trade unions. 

Secondly, I must say that there must be well-established policy towards job creation because unemployment of new graduates is quite alarming. If it is coupled with down sizing of the already working world, then the situation is badly aggravated.  

I want to talk about cash crops.  Uganda is known to be an agricultural country. We have coffee, cotton, tea and tobacco these have sustained our economy for quite a long time.  

This economy was good during the time when the co-operatives were really at their full capacity in functioning.  The quality of our agricultural produce used to be quite competitive on the world market unlike today. And this is due to liberalisation of business in Uganda.  

It is unfortunate to tell you that these national co-operative unions which were indigenous organisations owned by the peasants of this country, right now the situation has changed. They are operating in appalling situation.  They are just in their economic graveyards. So liberalisation has done less than what we expected because you find that the Co-operative Movement used to employ many of our children and unemployment was not such a big problem as it is today.  So I urge the Government to make sure that at least this liberalisation is accompanied by some good policies that can revitalize the co-operative unions in this country. 

The ginning and the processing of such crops are in the hands of the private processors who do not even mind about the quality of the products. They are just after getting profits, even if it is at the cost of degrading Uganda’s products. This indirectly has a big impact on the growth of our economy, as the prices of our products will always be downsized. In view of that, I urge the Government to put in place strategies to protect and examine the quality of all products of Uganda that are meant for export. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR.SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (Kawempe South, Kampala): Madam Speaker, It has just dawned on me that the chances of speaking here are one in 300. But at least, I am happy that I have caught your eye. 

I would like to thank the President for his State of the Nation Address. However, next time when he is reading it out, I implore him to give it to us before hand to avoid a situation where some of us end up sleeping, especially after a heavy afternoon meal. My constituents were telling me that some of you were caught on TV catnapping. If we had been given this speech, as he was reading it verbatim we would also follow.  

Secondly, the source of information should be indicated to avoid some of the scenarios we had yesterday where Members were wondering where the data was got. And perhaps as a future reference, he could follow up with something like a pamphlet, to see whether the data was not cooked.  

I want to talk about issues that were raised, especially regarding the recently concluded elections. My friends have already delved into this one, but I would like to quote what the President said. He said, “whatever views we may hold, however opposed they may be, I believe all of you have been elected to help make our country more peaceful, more united and more prosperous. You must, therefore, work to unite people and not to divide them.” He goes on to say, “You should put the election behind you and seek reconciliation with whomever you need to reconcile with. We cannot build our nation effectively on hurt feelings and grudges. We must build it on the positive attitudes of forgiveness, reconciliation and love. I, therefore, appeal to you all to sheath your swords and to accept victory with magnanimity.” 

This is why I want to say that during the presidential elections, it was a constitutional duty for every member of the society to stand up for this elective post, but I am surprised, and the people of my constituency have told me to say this before this august House, that the former Presidential candidate, Col. (Rtd.) Kizza Besigye is being alienated and besieged whenever he tries to travel out. The President should lead by example and put his sword into its sheath, and then the rest will follow in line. I understand this is what has also been happening in Mbarara to hon. Winnie Byanyima.  

My people have also requested me to mention before this august House the case regarding voting by the army personnel. They have already got ten representatives in this august House. They do not see the logic behind the fact that the army actively participates in the elections of civilians. If they want to participate, it would be better for them to relinquish their posts and become ordinary citizens. They can start voting after that. We had scenarios –(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, protect me from the hon. Minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are protected.

MR. SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: We heard about the Kalangala Action Plan, where my people were beaten at Mile 2. Some of the furniture makers were also beaten. We are trying to build a national army, and if it is sucked into the doldrums of civilian political elections, I think we will not have a stable nation in future.  You may know about our past; it will not augur well when the army is actually sucked into this sort of partisan, polarized politics, which at times is funded by State machinery.  

When the President was giving his Address, I remember he said that some of us were saying “agende”. I cannot deny that. I was one of those people who were saying, “agende” but these are part of the election games. It is the same as the time he came to my constituency and said, “I do not want Sebuliba; do not bring him here.”  Fortunately, both of us are here. He was elected, and I was also elected.  But the point is, as the father of the nation, he should also try also not to stoop down to tell the people whom to vote for because we are going to lead by example. That is why I was saying at the beginning that he should be the person to put the sword in the sheath.  

I thank him for his Address but we would also like him to delve more into the plight of the workers. As you may know, the people from my constituency have also said that, much as their salaries are deducted to deposit into the NSSF building which he commissioned this year, some of their money gets lost every month. What they need is a monthly statement from NSSF so that they know the exact position of the monies that are deposited there.  

They are also demanding for the Wage Bill. They want to know what exactly is in that Bill so that they can also make a contribution. They also want to know exactly how much money they are supposed to get. They should also lower the age at which they receive some of their money that is kept. They do not want to end up in a situation like the East African Community saga.

His Excellency the President talked about the Amnesty Bill.  He said that somebody who has been given amnesty and then again takes part in planting bombs should not receive amnesty any more. That is true. They are going to bring the Bill but I urge the President and the Attorney General to include a rider on it to say: “unless it has been proven beyond reasonable doubt that this person actually participated in that act.” 

You know the history of our country. When some of our colleagues here were in the bush, some of us were being alienated and besieged. We were branded as bomb throwers.   That was during the Obote II regime. But it makes a U–turn and comes back when people want to settle small scores and vendettas. So, it may not augur well for this country.  Therefore, there must be a rider to that, so that somebody must be proven guilty beyond reasonable doubt.  Let me stop here. I can see you looking at me, Madam Speaker, but perhaps next time you will give me 20 minutes.  Thank you very much.

MR. DOMBO EMMANUEL (Bunyole Couty, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to join the many that have thanked the President for the speech that he presented as he fulfilled his constitutional obligation.  Allow me, however, to make a few remarks about the omissions and some of the things that he did raise.  

Hon. Members, you realize that when his Excellency was closing the Movement Conference, and when he was being urged to stand the second time, he did say he wanted to come to office basically to fulfill three things: The first one was succession, the second was regional markets and the third was professionalisation of the army.  Most of these things were conspicuously missing and the intention was not very properly pronounced in the President’s speech. 

If this is the last term of the President, we should begin seeing vivid steps being put in place to ensure that the commitment he made to the National Conference has been put in place.  For instance, up to now, the Army Statute has not been passed by this House and we want it because many soldiers behind there want to see how best they can either retire or be promoted.  But up to now, nothing of the sort is being done -(Interruption).

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you, hon. Dombo for allowing the information. 
The information I wanted to give the hon. Member and the House is that, the existing law takes care of what he is raising - how to be promoted or how to leave the army. So, there is already an existing law and it applies.

MR. DOMBO: Madam Speaker, I think you can hear from the Members of the House. Members of the Seventh Parliament should note that there was an attempt to bring a law to the Sixth Parliament but because it was inadequate, it was sent back, and the Minister gave us a deadline as to how soon he would bring it and it has never come to the Floor of the House again. We need this law so that the professionalisation process of the army should begin in the process of the President relinquishing power like he did promise in the National Conference.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, hon. Dombo, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the speaker holding the Floor is making a very important statement. It is on record that his Excellency, President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni recently said that this is his last term of office for the Presidency.  If this is his last term of office, isn’t the speaker holding the Floor implying that the President is probably coming up for the third term of office?

MR. DOMBO: Madam Speaker, that is his view.  I want also to make some reference to the recently concluded elections.  The unquestioned abuse of the use of the army in the civic activities of the nation if not controlled and checked will completely negate the few gains that we have achieved in the democratization process. The army has been deployed by anybody. You find a DISO deploying the army, you find a CAO deploying the army; and when you try to contact - for instance in Bunyole County there was military presence and when the DPC asked them, they said they had been sent by the Director of Military Intelligence.  Fortunately, I had the telephone contact of the Director and when I rang him in Kampala he said, “I do not know anything of the kind.”  Who is in charge of the Ugandan army, the UPDF and who deploys it when, where and how? If this is not checked, it will negate the democratization process.

THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr. Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank hon. Dombo for giving way.  The information I want to give is that the command and control structure of the army is very clear.  The Constitutional provision on the question of the control of the army, the command of the army is also very clear.  There is no doubt about it.  Secondly, in practice, if the army did not have one centre of command, you would not have this peace and stability we have in this country. If the command of the army was not clear; if the command of the army was not tight, hon. Awori, Madam Speaker, would not have had the freedom that he exercised when he stood for Presidency and he is back here in Parliament.  

So, I want to assure my brother, hon. Dombo, this House and this country that, there is no doubt about the command and control structure of the UPDF, and you should rest assured that there will not be any problem at all. Thank you.

MR. DOMBO: I would also want to know from the Minister, in future, whether Major Kakooza Mutale is part of the UPDF because time and again this Major Kakooza Mutale has come up. He is a Major by rank but some unofficial sources say that he does not have a UPDF number. We could want in future also to get confirmation from you, Mr. Minister, what Major Kakooza Mutale’s number is in the UPDF, and under what section he is because time and again he controls an army, which nobody seems to know about, and he deploys it at will. 

This is the process, which was reflected in the Presidential election but unfortunately, it was copied downwards to the various smaller elections.  If it is not checked, it will be worse when it comes to the local Government elections. If every sub-county tries to emulate or to have a Kakooza Mutale during the process of the elections, you can imagine what the election is likely to be -(Interruption). Madam Speaker, because the whole Minister had to explain the Government position I want that my few minutes be compensated and I want to cut off the interruptions so that I can be able to make my substantive contribution. 

Then on the issue of poverty in the country; Madam Speaker, one time I was reading the book Animal Farm and when they were giving the statistics to the doves about the amount of grain that was produced, the doves wished to have more grains in the stomach than the statistical reflections as were being put to them. Many people in Uganda have looked at the statistics and appreciated but they would want to see improved welfare; they would want to see improved health; they would want to see improved communication network.  If this one is done, it will be better reflected. 

I want to thank the Minister of Health because I read an interview in the Press and I imagine that he is going to live to what his commitment has been in that paper. The people of Uganda are going to appreciate it and you are most welcome, Brig. Jim Muhwezi. 

The thing that I want to end with is, when the President was talking about the contributions of various sectors, he talked about the livestock sector and the fish. Let me conclude with the livestock sector.  The President said that we have a population of about 5.6 million cattle. We want a distribution chart to see how this cattle is distributed in the country. You might find that the President is talking about 5.6 million cattle found in only one region in the country, and this will bias and will give unfavorable development for this country.  

When you look at the construction of the dams in this country, there is what they call a ‘cattle corridor’ and they always talk of Sembabule and that area, yet in the 1960s and 1970s even Bunyole and Bunya used to have dams.   But right now nobody is talking about those dams. We want equitable distribution of the national resources. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, allow me to talk about the recently formed Government. When the President was campaigning, he did mention specifically that he is going to reward the areas that give him the votes but when you look at the reflection of the Government has it been constituted by Government –(An hon member rose_)- provided, Madam Speaker, you give me my two minutes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up.
MR. DOMBO: Madam Speaker, I was saying that when the President was campaigning he specifically said that he is going to reward areas that gave him the votes.  When I was looking at the constitution of the Executive, Bugiri District, Busia District, Mayuge District, Pallisa District, Kapchorwa District, a whole region is conspicuously missing from the executive of His Excellency the President. 

When you look at the number of votes from these areas, they are over 300,000 but they have not been effectively represented. Madam Speaker, I want the Leader of Government Business to mention to the President that the constitution of this Government did not fulfill the democratic principles as stated in our Constitution that there shall be equitable presentation of all the regions. Madam Speaker, since the Minister of the Presidency is here, some of the things will come in as we discuss the Budget. I thank you very much and I support the motion.

MRS. BEATRICE BYENKYA (Woman Representative Hoima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank His Excellency for a speech well articulated, and for the first time I should say that he has been quite broad in scope because, in most of his past speeches, he has tended to be lopsided and concentrating more on Defence and the Economy. This time he had Economy, Defence, Elections, Health, Education and the rest.  

I want to talk about the election violence and whatever took place and I wish to point out that in order to eradicate the election violence, we should tackle it as partners and not leave it more to one side. 

Then, on page 5 the President did highlight something about the poverty in the northern region and he stated that it has increased. He stated his concern but I wish to point out that there has been a tendency of having lack of information of what takes place in the north. I am glad that the Minister in charge of Northern Uganda Rehabilitation Program is around because whatever is projected in the north in most instances is negative, such as Cholera outbreak, Kony abducts and now it is poverty, yet we hear that re-stocking is taking place. We do not know how far it has progressed. 
What are the positive attributes that the Government has contributed? 

We wish to hear more about the positives of what Government has done than the negatives because, I think that is a factor whereby the north tends to feel that it is neglected. It is only the negative things that come out. So, I wish that the Prime Minister’s Office takes a positive step of informing us of what the Government is doing in the north.

Then, the President did talk about the modernization of agriculture on page 6.  Well, modernization of agriculture is taking place, but the Government is rather a bit too slow in implementing most of these things. We have heard about them for quite a long time: to provide agriculture, advisory services, to promote agriculture skills and knowledge, formal and informal education, improving the infrastructure especially in rural areas where agricultural production takes place. There has been a tendency to re-cycle the information, more than putting it into practice; implementing it. So, the Government should try to implement what it says, instead of re-cycling the information. 

On the other hand, I would wish to commend Government for a conducive atmosphere, where we have the Uganda National Farmers Association having been decentralized and having a very positive impact on the population, as far as the modernization of agriculture is concerned.  We have the UPE program. Much has been said about the UPE. Schools have been constructed and more will be constructed, the classroom blocks and what have you and then staffing - having more teachers and all the rest but I wish to have more teachers who know what they are doing. If you tend to monitor and see the teachers that we have. Their quality is a bit low and then you tend to wonder what type of pupil or students or future Ugandans we shall have. The quality of the teachers leaves a lot to be desired. 

When we look at the performance, especially when it comes to mathematics in Primary 7, there is something that the teachers are lacking which they are not imparting. The teachers might not be having it and therefore, they cannot impart it into the student. 
And if at all they have it, then the approach of imparting the mathematical knowledge to the students is also lacking.  Therefore, we should look at the quality of the teachers that are coming into the UPE arena in order to impart the right knowledge into our students. 

Well, we should work together and forgive as the President said. We should put the sword back into the sheath so that we can work together. But we should also, as leaders, see that we begin as MPs because there has been a tendency whereby our Colleagues contest against others and then you sideline them when you go to the constituency, segregating them. We should not only point at the President himself, but we are also leaders in our respective areas. Therefore, we should also begin first of all, by putting the swords back into the sheaths, so that we have the first arm of showing the other people. I thank you.

MR. KIBANZANGA (Busongora South Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Well, the President gave a good speech and I would like to comment on some areas like violence and vote rigging because for us in Kasese, violence continued much longer; even after the elections. 

Very many speakers have talked about violence but they have not given solutions on what we should do about it. Even the President himself was simply lamenting. There was no serious proposal on how violence can be controlled. 

Madam Speaker, I want us to look at the pattern of electoral violence: Electoral violence was so much pronounced in areas where soldiers contested with civilians. Secondly, it was also where the Ministers were contesting with ordinary citizens. The third area was whereby some generals, some big shots in Government, and especially the Movement Directors were trying to impose candidates on the civilian population. Fourthly, was where the Kalagala Action Plan had an interest; that is the force commanded by Maj. Kakoza Mutale. We had violence in those areas, and I want us to address this, because should it continue, the population of Uganda is going to loose confidence in elections, and even Kakooza Mutale will not like it. So, I want us, as leaders, to find solutions to this electoral violence and vote rigging.  

The President informed us that there is a new system of computerizing the voters’ cards. Yes, it will solve some problems but what about the soldiers in the camps? I saw it in the recent elections. You could see a soldier who looks like an Okello from northern Uganda voting using a voter card of Bwambale in Kasese. What do you say about him; he has his gun and he is in military fatigues. You cannot even control him! So, even with the voter cards with photographs, I do not know whether Okello can at the same time be Bwambale - (Interruption).

MAJ. KAZOORA: I thank you for giving way. In view of what the hon. Minister of Defence has just clarified to hon. Dombo that the commander of the security forces is known, the Constitution is clear, and that there is control in the forces, don’t you think, therefore, that this known authority should be held accountable for the violence meted on the civilians by the security forces?

MR. KIBANZANGA: Certainly! Absolutely! -(Laughter). There is no other person to blame but the Commander in Chief!  How do you explain the violence in Rukungiri during the presidential and parliamentary elections, where PPU was deployed? Do you blame Members of Parliament down there?  You blame the Commander in Chief!

I am surprised at the way the President exhibited double standards in dealing with the electoral violence in some areas. In Nakaseke, a Major wanted to cause trouble for the population. President Museveni ordered his immediate arrest and detention, and even now he should be six feet under the ground. But Kakooza Mutale was busy beating people, some Majors and some Generals were busy beating people in Mbarara Municipality, Kashari, Rukungiri -(Interjections)- what are these double standards about? (Interruption)

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: Madam Speaker, I have listened with a lot of interest to the way the Members are speaking about the Army. I have listened to the references to Generals. I happen to be one, and as you may know, the rank of a General is not easily achieved. They are very few.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you rose on a point of order?

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: I am developing my point.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Raise your point of order, please.   

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you. The Member on the Floor is referring to Generals who were beating people. Is he in order or is anybody in order to say this without substantiating on which General? A General of Uganda is a General of Uganda, and he should not just be referred to anyhow. The UPDF as an Army is the Army of Uganda and it should not just be referred to anyhow. Who is it in particular? Can the Member mention which General? Is he or anybody in order to talk about a General without substantiating, and thus putting the credibility of Generals and the UPDF in question? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The hon. Member was talking about Generals. He did not say whether they belonged to UPDF or to any other fighting force. (Applause) So, he is quite in order. He has not named any General.

MR. KIBANZANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. It is a very good ruling. I am not a soldier, but I saw some people beating people and claiming to be Majors and Generals. 

All in all, I am calling for the demilitarization of the electoral process. Let the civilian be independent in the electoral process. We do not interfere with the army when they are electing their 10 Members; we do not go to Bombo to campaign for some of our Generals. They are out there and we would love them to be here, but we cannot go to Bombo. So, do not go and harass and intimidate, and turn the verdict of the people of Uganda up side down. You are supposed to be subject to the rule of the civilian. This is moral indiscipline. It is immorality!  

The forgiveness and reconciliation the President talked about is very good, and I support him but I would love the President to lead this crusade, since he also involved himself in sectarian and partisan politics in our constituencies. Let him lead the crusade to reconcile, forgive, and let us love one another so that we can build our country.

MR. BADDA  (Bujumba County, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My submission to the President’s speech is on poverty alleviation in relation to developing the fish industry.  

Indeed, we were very happy when the President stated, on page 11, that Ugandan fish has been approved for export to the European market under the first category or grade one. This implied that the demand for the fish is increasing, and therefore, the price. 

I would like our grassroots producers to benefit from this increasing demand and price. One way this can be achieved is by improving the rural infrastructure. You may know that fish handling needs speedy transport and cleanliness, therefore, we would need infrastructure that is speedy and clean.  

At this moment, I would like to thank the Government, on behalf of the people of Bujumba, for providing a new ferry for Kalangala District in the last few years. However, this ferry works only two times a day. It makes two rounds a day; one trip is made very early in the morning and another trip is made late in the evening. The rest of the day, this new ferry is lying there dormant. The workers are also dormant the whole day, and the passengers just sit there with their commodities and look at the ferry. Fish dealers also sit there with their refrigerators, waiting to cross, but there isn’t enough fuel for this ferry. When the evening trip comes, everybody will rush onto the ferry, the ferry gets overloaded, and many people will miss crossing.  They stay overnight on the pier, risking their lives because of misquotes and the consequent malaria, and also risking their commodities because of theft.  

I request Government to give some little more fuel for this ferry so that it makes one more trip at midday or even 4.00 O’clock. It should have at least one extra trip, and this will amount to at least 60 litres of diesel only - (Interruption).

CAPT. BABU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that actually, there is a new ferry that is going to be brought in the next few months. That will solve the problem you are talking about. The frequency will improve. Thank you.  

MR. BADDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My problem is not the number of ferries. Even if we have two ferries, my problem will still remain the supply of fuel. The one ferry I am talking about is the ferry that commutes between Masaka and Kalangala. This ferry is new, it is computerized, but it does not have enough fuel. It only has fuel to make two trips. You get business between Kalangala and Masaka stunted the whole day because there isn’t enough fuel. So, my request to Government to supply some more fuel still stands.  

I am also informed that the new ferry, maybe this is the one they are talking about, is going to be operating mainly in Kyamuswa, hon. Tim’s constituency - (Laughter).  As a result of this slow and uncertain transport, fishermen in Kalangala resort to canoes. They load them with fish and transport them all the way to Entebbe, the nearest buying centre for the fish. 

There is another rampant problem that has developed as a result of this, and this is the problem of piracy. After our fishermen have finished selling the fish, when they are going back, these pirates wait for them in the waters. They take their engines, their money, the commodities they have bought, and these people are left to float on the water at God’s mercy. So, on this note, I would like to request the Government and the security agencies to be very vigilant about this piracy problem. Let them get these pirates, and even if they have to cane them, they should be caned.

In contributing to the same issue, the President told us that the target for fish production in the next five years is 300,000 metric tones per year. In order to achieve this, there is a need to stimulate production at the production grounds. One important issue is infrastructure, in terms of rural electrification. If power were brought over to Kalangala, this would stimulate investors. They would come to Kalangala -(Interruption)
 
MRS. BUMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that under our newly developed Rural Electrification Plan and Strategy, we are going to extend a marine cable to Kalangala to electrify the islands. We have already started negotiations with CDA, which is going to finance the programme. Thank you.

MR. BADDA: I am very happy to hear that, Madam Speaker.  Lastly, now that we have got a Minister for Water, I really expect this Ministry to develop a program to develop the ecosystem of our marine bodies, so that when there are cases of depletion, re-stocking is planned for, the water hyacinth is not seen again, and other problems are solved. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA  (Kibale County, Kamwege): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me join Members who have spoken before me to congratulate all Members for their success in the elections. I also congratulate those who have assumed responsibility at the Front Bench. 

I would like to support the motion moved by hon. Mwandha, to thank the President for the State of the Nation Address. Let me also echo the President’s concern about election violence. The main cause of this election violence has been the “monetisation” of politics. Because people invest in politics, no one would like to lose his investment. That is why some success is hijacked at gunpoint in some areas. Cabinet and the Government at large should address this issue of “monetisation” of politics and see how best we can stop it or control it.  

The issue of reconciliation should also be a major one in our areas. Definitely, all of us have people who were opposing us in our areas. You have your supporters, and you have the opponents. We can try, by all means, to see how to reconcile so that we lead a united Uganda.  

The President also talked about the co-operation of the three arms of Government, the Executive, the Judiciary and the Legislature. This co-operation is very important but in some instances, the Executive has tried to push their own programs without due consideration of the programs of the Legislature. So, much should be put in place. Much as you want the Government programs to go through, the problems of the Legislature have to be addressed. If that is not addressed, then there will be some collision.
On poverty, we have seen figures since 1986 on the growth of GDP. They have been steadily rising but this growth has not been transformed to the ground. There is need to institute real programs to transform this growth to the population. The population has attempted to produce; the peasants in Kamwenge have been told to diversify, to grow coffee instead of maize or to rear animals but the market is not there. The prices of coffee have gone down. In Kamwenge now, you have to sell two sacks of maize to buy a crate of soda. A litre of mineral water is 1,000 shillings and a litre of milk is a 100 shillings. Water is more expensive than milk in Kamwenge! This is the peasant we are telling to diversify and produce more milk. Milk to throw away!  

There should be some effort in marketing this produce. How can you sell two sacks of maize to buy a crate of soda for your family on Christmas day? These people should really be assisted. They contribute to this growth so they should also benefit from it. Once they continue hearing about growth, they may think it is only the Front Benches benefiting from it or Parliamentarians - (Interruption).

DR. KASIRIVU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you, hon. Byaruhanga for giving way. I want to ask my colleague, if milk is fairly cheap, why don’t the farmers drink milk instead of soda?

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I like that information. We have enough milk to drink in Kamwenge, some of which we can export to Bugangaizi. They do not have milk.  

We have seen the UPE program on the ground, but the problem of the peasant in the rural areas is that we have a few secondary schools that are Government sponsored. Even in those few secondary schools, you find one or two teachers on the payroll. So, the school leavers of UPE are on the streets, they do not have anywhere to go! Government has raised the quarters at the university, but whom are these quarters benefiting? They have increased the slots to 4,000, only one for Kamwenge. I need more district quarters if we are to do something on the ground.

On mobilization, and particularly on public health, our mobilization is still very low. Much as the President said that there were MPs and RDCs to mobilize, the Members of Parliament were not facilitated to do this mobilization. We have a Secretariat that is supposed to be a mobilization centre, but the Secretariat is now a bureaucracy. We have turned it into a bureaucracy and staffed it with some political rejects, and there is nothing done on the ground.  

The RDC of Kamwenge cannot mobilize on the ground. On Greater African Radio, Kaberonkuba is decampaigning immunization. The RDC of Kamwenge is on foot; he cannot mobilize the people. The RDC is on foot but the radio coverage goes far deeper. How do you expect him to mobilize? The Minister in charge of the Presidency should assist us. How can the RDC mobilize a district on foot? You cannot do it! There is need to address this. If we have to address mobilization, let the Secretariat be a mobilization centre and not a bureaucracy.

Lastly, the President talked about “professionalising” the army. Much as you are trying to “professionalise” the army, Article 210 requires the Minister of Defence to bring a comprehensive law on the UPDF. The laws that are here now are inadequate. I request Members for support; we should pass the budget of the Ministry of Defence this year on condition that a comprehensive law regarding the UPDF is going to be brought. 

It is surprising, when you walk along the streets, to meet a retired senior officer on foot. He is looking for money to survive just because he is not sure about his next day. This law should be put in place to give incentive to these people. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR. AMASI PATAKI  (Obongi County, Moyo) Madam Speaker, allow me to congratulate you and your colleague upon ascending to the highest office in this august House. I also congratulate my colleagues, the survivors, and those who made it to this House. I rise to support the motion. His Excellency the President gave a very good State of the Nation Address. I am going to dwell on security, elections and poverty if time allows. 

There has been a lot of improvement in the electoral process in this country under the Movement Government, as compared to the past regimes, especially the 1980 elections. The 1980 elections were not held in Moyo District, by then Adjumani was under Moyo. We did not vote.  I was going to vote for the first time, but we did not vote. We did not vote because of state rigging. Some of us were present. We did not go to Sudan. Aspirants who were supported by the state got it easy.  

We had two aspirants, one from UPC and the other one from DP. A roadblock was mounted to block one candidate who was not the favourite, and the other one was declared unopposed. Those whose candidate was blocked were very disappointed. Other aspirants were even abducted and they never succeeded to be nominated. This is a fact!  We should tell the truth and shame the devil. When you talk of rigging, that is what exactly happens.  It is true there was rampant malpractice in the recently concluded parliamentary and presidential elections.  When you take a look at the parliamentary elections, candidates participated in rigging in one way or another.

MR. MUSISI: Is the hon. Member in order to allege that Members of this House participated in rigging?  I want to inform members that in Busiro South, I beat the hon. Minister hands down on a genuine campaign.  I don’t think any other person was there to rig. He might have rigged in his area. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, if the hon. Member claims that Members who are here rigged the elections, certainly he is out of order. 

MR. PATAKI:  I happened to go to Teso.  When a person goes to address the public after the address, they say; “you take the mangoes”.  In other areas they say; “you do away with us”.  That is not rigging, I don’t know exactly what they meant. All of you who participated in these elections knew it.

Violence was in the western and eastern parts of this country and you know the reasons.  Some were personal issues, which should not be brought here.  In the northwest, it was minimal but the greatest was in the western and eastern parts of this country, and this is not new.  
Even in those days, the DP Youth Wingers moved with clubs to hit supporters of other sides.

MR. WERIKHE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my Colleague for giving way.  I have listened carefully to my hon. Colleague saying that violence was limited to the East and the West, and he is not substantiating.  Is he in order, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: My understanding is that he was talking about the 1980 elections.  Is that not what you are talking about? You were saying the East and West were kings in rigging?

MR. PATAKI:  No, it was 1980 elections -(Laughter).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up!

MR. PATAKI: Madam Speaker, when we talk of bribing, many people question the accountability of the last presidential election fund.  This House did budget and each presidential candidate got shs.8 million.  In the end, President Museveni was quoted having said he spent shs.13 billion, and many people were asking where he got the money.  Somebody like the President, do you expected him to lack money?  He has friends, he is an international man, and he has businesses. 

President Museveni says he is going to put up a Movement House.  I know some of us here are already pledging shs.300,000.  What about the business community? He might end up raising shs.50 billion without using his own money. Why don’t we ask ourselves how much we spent, and where we got the money?  You were a civil servant, a head of a department, NGO, or headmaster; where did you get that money if you are to be asked to account for it?

President Museveni said that ADF has been crushed out of the western part of this country.  I hope being the Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces, he will get those soldiers out of Congo, and take them to the Northern Uganda to crush Kony – (Interruptions).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Pataki, I think you have used up your time, wind up.

MR. PATAKI: Just one minute, Madam Speaker!  I request the President to negotiate with the remnants of the UNLF that are based between Sudan and Aringa district. Reliable sources indicate that President Museveni struck a deal with the former UNLF boss in Tripoli.

MS. JENIPHER NAMUYANGU (Woman Representative, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I join my Colleagues in supporting the motion.  I thank the President for coming up with this comprehensive speech, but I have a few comments to make.  The first one is about, Water Sanitation.  

You will realize that much as a lot has been done to drill bore-holes, in my constituency most of the bore-holes were partially done, in the sense that after one month, you find the bore-hole dried up. So, I still call upon government to complete that task because we have a parish where we don’t have a borehole at all.

The President mentioned that in every constituency they would be a health unit.   That is true, but we realize that with no cost sharing in hospitals, my district has made it worse. I have visited my hospital in Pallisa a number of times, but when you have a patient and he needs a drip, you have to buy a bottle at shs.4,000, and if you get it elsewhere, the Medical Staff will not accept to use it. So, the health section should do something to restock the hospitals with drugs, and ensure that most of these hospitals get enough staff to attend to the patients.

The President mentioned that the infection level of HIV/ AIDS has gone down.  It is true but I want to inform you that in the rural areas - because I have done some research before - you find that in the rural areas what people do is to observe the widow or widower for about two to three years. If they see no change, then they say “no, I think either the man or the woman was bewitched.” So, we still have to do a lot of sensitisation campaigns because the disease is moving from the urban areas to the rural areas.  So we should not relax.

The other issue is about the fisheries industry or the fisheries sector. We really want to appreciate that the fish has gained market, especially regarding export. 
But I note with concern that most of our water bodies have been depleted. 
An example is Lake Kyoga. We used to have these big Tilapia in Lake Kyoga, but they are no longer there.  So, I do not know if the Minister concerned has a deliberate plan to do some restocking in some of these water bodies because we are aware that in the Western world, most of the people are running away from red meat. So, I think we should do something in addition to increasing efforts in fish farming. 

On page 12, His Excellency mentioned something on fruits. Hon. Members I want to inform you that Pallisa District is known for producing oranges and mangoes but at the peak of the season, a bag is sold at just Shs.1000. So, I wish the Minister in charge of Investment could look for some investors and put them especially in Pallisa, to process the oranges and the mangoes.  It will earn us a good income.  

I also want to talk about information flow. It is good that His Excellency noted with concern that, very few Ugandans get access to the newspapers. This is very true, but we realise that, as many of my colleagues have mentioned, the section of mobilisation in the Secretariat has become dormant. Whether it is due to lack of facilitation, but you find that even some RDCs do not have fuel to do the mobilisation in the districts.  So, I wish Government could come up to facilitate these people so that the local people who do not have access to the newspapers, can really have people like RDCs, the MPs and the local councillors going in to do the mobilisation.

The other issue is about adult literacy. His Excellency expressed concern about the level of illiteracy in our country, but I want to call upon him to at least put more money in the Ministry of Gender, to make sure that this Government succeeds. What I have realised, especially in my district, is that many people are eager to have this programme, but they have not got a chance.

Lastly, about the clonal coffee. I was interacting with some people from Mbale and they say they welcome the idea, but right now they do not even have the grass to do the mulching under the trees. So, I do not know if the Ministry of Agriculture is going to encourage them to plant, both the local and the other coffee.  
Let me mention something about violence during elections. I especially want to talk about parliamentary elections where we had loss of lives. My observation is that, in most of the areas, it mainly involved our colleagues, the Ministers or the army because they were armed. Some of them could easily lose their temper and shoot. So, we ended up losing lives.  In short, I am suggesting that when we are going for an election, as people tender in leave letters, they should also hand in the arms so that at least when they come to campaign, since they are going to civilians, they are able to campaign freely. Even if somebody insults you, you only look on and walk away.  

Lastly, on bribing voters, unless Government is going to come up with a deliberate policy to empower our people economically, there is no way we are going to fight this.  People have termed it “mangoes” and they know it is for a season. So, normally when an election comes, that is the only chance for them to benefit. I thank you.

MR. KIWANDA (Mityana County North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Mityana North, I would like to congratulate you, and your senior, upon being elevated to that high office in this august House. I would also like to congratulate fellow Members of Parliament, for having gone through the dust of elections, and making it to this hon. House.

My first point is going to be on the issue of Graduated Tax. I represent people who are typically known as peasants, and this is the tax that is so direct on them. The people of Mityana North had a controversy upon the Graduated Tax issue. Honourable Members will note with me that, during the presidential and parliamentary elections, this was a hot issue and when the Minister of Local Government released a circular, the circular bypassed the Members of Parliament. The Members of Parliament never received that circular concerning the Graduated tax, but the question has been asked. 

When you go down, there is what we call the Local Development Tax being levied by the district. This tax is not uniform in all districts. If the President promised Shs.3000 to the low-income earners, and the district adds Shs.5000 or Shs.4000 on the Shs. 3000, then it becomes Shs.7000, which makes the President fail to fulfil his Manifesto.

When you talk about UPE, we do appreciate that the Government has done a lot concerning UPE.  The number has risen so much but the quality of education that is given is still alarming in some of our schools. Inspection of schools in most of the districts is not done. The Inspectorate Department has neglected some districts so much so that the headmasters become small permanent DEOs in their own schools – (Interjection). 

DR. BYARUHANGA PHILIP: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I want to thank my colleague for giving way.  I would not have interjected at this stage, but I thought the point he raised is very crucial regarding the local Government and the matter surrounding the new rates of the Graduated Tax structure. 

It is true, the Ministry of Local Government issued a circular and it generated a lot of debate. I wish also to inform this august House that, the Ministry of Local Government looked at that circular again and there were obvious areas of omission that we felt should be made clear to the population.  As I talk now, we have written to the districts to disregard that circular pending the issuance of another circular explaining the same tax structure.  

There was misinterpretation because, following the Amendment of the Local Governments Act here towards the end of the 6th Parliament, the Ministry of Local Government was given statutory powers to vary the tax structure. Now, in that new approach, there was an omission that was made.  Unfortunately, that was passed on to the population.  So, I wish to inform the Member that that circular has been withdrawn, and another one is being issued. Thank you very much.

MR.KIWANDA: Thank you very much, for the information.  Another one, Madam Speaker, is about the rural electrification programme. It is fortunate that the Minister concerned is around. If we were to modernize agriculture, I think there is a need for this programme to be emphasized very much. But I was surprised to see in the President’s speech that the Rural Electrification Programme was not talked about.

Some Members were contributing here that a litre of milk in their constituencies costs Shs. 50, but some other districts are buying milk at Shs. 500 per litre. They do not have the capacity and the ability to preserve that milk so that it is transported to the districts or to the constituencies where milk is demanded highly. So, this programme of rural electrification should be emphasized, especially in my constituency where I only see one line going to a tea factory.  

Lastl but not the least, something about the coffee trees.  The President talked about this in his address on the State of the Nation. I would like to say that the distribution of the coffee trees is not yet proper. You can go to a constituency, somebody is given ten trees, and another one five trees and another one three trees; something that cannot be sustained. If somebody is planting something like an acre, I do not think that can create an impact. So, if something is to be done, and if we are to create an impact in this industry, the coffee seedlings should be distributed in big numbers and the population has to be sensitized first about this.

Briefly something about the Universal Secondary Education, which His Excellency the President talked about. I think before this is effected, there is one big problem I have realized going through my constituency. That is registration of the senior four students and senior six students. Very many students are dropping out as they are reaching senior four and as they are reaching senior six. So, I urge Government that before they think about having the Universal Secondary Education, the sitting of exams for senior four and senior six should be set free to increase the numbers of people completing senior four and senior six. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MRS. BABA DIRI (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Northern Region): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate you and the Speaker upon your election as our Speaker and Deputy Speaker. I would also like to congratulate the hon. Members of Parliament who have made it through this strenuous election. It was not easy; that is always what I say, but when you succeed, you feel very happy that you are really a winner. 

I would like to take this opportunity to support the motion, on thanking the President on his address on the state of the nation. The President gave us a lot of information, which actually has tickled all of us to say something.  

I would like to comment on the election. I am very glad that the President noticed the problem and the lack of facilitation by the Electoral Commission that caused a lot of problems during the elections in terms of providing the right ballot papers as he planned, and also in terms of providing civic education, which is a right for all voters.  Madam Speaker, I would like to inform you that because of lack of civic education in general, and for persons with disability in particular, we had a problem during elections.  

What happened is that, especially for the deaf, there were no photographs on the ballot paper. So, those who never went to school, who do not know how to read and write, they found it very difficult to tick the right person of their choice.  So, we wasted really a lot of time trying to bring the posters to put them around, so that they should be able to match the names on the poster to the names on the ballot paper. Then, for the visually impaired, we tried our best to transcribe the ballot papers into Braille and that delayed our elections. As a result, the elections continued up to night and the counting was a problem because power was not there and many were worried that maybe there would rigging. But good enough our people were civilized and there was no rigging and we went on very well.  

My concern is that, for the registration to stand as a candidate for election, we have to pay the same amount of Shs. 200,000, but I was totally amazed when they could not provide photographs on our ballot papers.  The issue could be that there is no time because our nomination is one day then candidates’ meetings one day and election another day, but I am sure if it is well planned, we can locally make these ballot papers for the deaf and the blind in time.   

I would like to comment on the issue of poverty. Poverty has been increasing, and according to the statement of the President, the situation is worse in the northern region. It says that poverty has increased from 60 per cent to 66 per cent within these three years. 
I would like to know, throughout these 15 years, whether there was an incident or a year where people from the north have reduced their level of poverty. From what I have followed, we had been put aside and made a museum of poverty.  

Every year, the last people are those from the North and the excuse is that of the insurgency, and yet there are other factors that contribute. For example, the type of cash crops we have: We grow tobacco, which currently brings in an income of over Shs.48 billion for the nation but what happens is that farmers grow small bits of tobacco fields and in the end get very little money. Not only that, the little money they get is not given in time, and all of it is taken back as inputs.  

Secondly, we have cotton. There is a plan to improve on production of cotton. The National Organisation on Cotton was established five years back. What has it done to improve cotton production in the northern region so that we can supplement our income? 

The President also talked about industrialisation and processing our products into simpler materials which can be bought at a fair price. Look at the cotton and tobacco in West Nile. It is bought with the stalk; it cannot even be processed there. It therefore means that there is no goodwill to develop people from the north.  Then the other element is the road that they now claim is being constructed. It has taken 15 years to start working on that road. These are the major elements - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Baba Diri, you should be winding up. If you take that information, I will not extend your time. Please conclude your remarks.

MRS.BABA DIRI: Okay then, I will not take that information.  On the side of the persons with disabilities, who I represent, they are below the poverty line. We have good programmes of Government but I am sorry to say that these programmes do not reach people with disabilities because we lack information. All the information passed regarding agriculture and the revolving loans, people with disabilities are not aware of them because there is no interpretation on the UTV for the deaf, where they would be able to follow what is happening. 
For the blind, there is no information in Braille, which they can read. Therefore, we are not benefiting. 

Under the Poverty Alleviation Fund, there is also no deliberate allocation for people with disabilities. How do you expect people with disabilities to move away from poverty? I would like also to commend - (Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Baba Diri, thank you. 

MRS.BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for cutting me short. (Laughter).

MR.WAKIKONA DAVID (Manjiya County, Mbale): Madam Speaker, I thank the President for the speech he delivered, and I want to observe the following: Most of the things have been covered but I will pick those that I think are very relevant to my field and my constituency.  

I sympathise with the people of Katakwi for the problems they are facing, and I also sympathise with the Army Commander who comes from Katakwi itself. 

The President talked about the ways he would improve many traditional exports so as to increase the country’s earnings. He has talked about fish and fruits specifically, but I have to inform you that although the President has a very fantastic plan, he may be let down by some of the officials within the line Ministries in achieving what he has planned for. I am specifically talking about aviation. 

I have worked in aviation for 30 years. Most of the things he has planned to increase exporting, like fish from 220 to 300 tonnes, must be exported by air. The fruits must go by air, but there is no thought on how Entebbe airport will be expanded. There was a small study but that may not be beneficial to the President if we continue protecting what is already on the ground. I am specifically talking about the handling services at Entebbe. 

Some time back, Civil Aviation Authority advertised for other handling services in order to kill the monopoly enjoyed by ENHAS. Right now there is only one handling service at Entebbe Airport handling all aeroplanes. 
Most airlines shun Entebbe because of the high costs of operating there. To handle a large bodied aircraft at Entebbe costs about US$4000 each time a flight comes in, and yet in the neighbouring countries it is about US$1000. So, the cost -(Interjection)- I am not taking information since he will eat up my time.  I am particularly talking about a 747, not a Hercules C 130. I am talking about the biggest aeroplane  -(Interruption).

MS.NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, is the hon. Member holding the Floor in order to mislead this House and deliberately refuse to take information from the line Minister who wants to clarify on the confusion he is causing in the House? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If he is not factually correct in his statement, he is out of order. Can you substantiate the costs you are talking about?

MR.WAKIKONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. A 747 with a maximum landing weight of over 500,000 pounds is charged US$4000 to be handled by ENHAS at Entebbe Airport. I stand to be challenged.

CAPT.BABU: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the hon. Member for giving way. I know he is going to a very difficult area and he is not giving this House the full information. The handling charges depend on what type of aircraft is scheduled to come in, whether it is a passenger or cargo aircraft or it is taking cargo from this country. If you talk about a 747-passenger plane, the costs are the same in the whole of East Africa. If it is high value cargo from Europe, the costs are the same. If you are talking about agricultural cargo from this country going abroad, in Kenya there is a special rate for subsidising local exports. If the hon. Member could be kind enough to get those figures and you will see that they are not far different from Entebbe Airport. Thank you.

MR.WAKIKONA: Madam Speaker, I thank the hon. Member, but he has not told the House anything. He has talked about subsidisation in Kenya, I am talking about Uganda! A 747 in Uganda is handled at that amount of money and I stand again to be corrected by the hon. Minister. I have been in Aviation for over 30 years, and I have been carrying out that type of job –(Interruption).

MR.MADADA: Is it in order for the hon. Member to say that the Minister has told the House nothing when I heard something?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Wakikona, perhaps you could develop that matter further in the Committee on Works. You go into detail with the Ministry in the Committee of Works.  Move to something else.

MR.WAKIKONA: Madam Speaker, I will take it up with the Committee on Works, and I am on that Committee. Now, let us get back to the constituency proper. I come from Manjiya. We are talking about the health centres, the damage done during the rains and I have to say that Manjiya suffers more on this side of the health centres and there is no indication whatsoever that there is likely to be any improvement. 

The health centre at Bududa Hospital, for example, which is the only institution in that place, is collapsing. It is leaking, cracked and even when we talk about repairs, there has been no indication for the last four years. The road, which was constructed in 1943, is still the only road and there is no likelihood of improvement. Even the bridges which were washed away by El Nino, although US$29 million was received, there is no indication that any cent of that money went to that constituency. 

We are looking at all these things which will improve the welfare of the people of the area, and we are calling upon the line Ministries to follow this up and see what to do with what the President promised the people in his Manifesto. We particularly put high regard to the education system. Some areas in the mountainous places lack schools. You find that the only accessibility to the schools is on foot. You have to go on foot from Bududa to the mountains of Elgon; there are no roads; no immunisation because of the terrain. 

All these would be improved if there were a special study. I think Manjiya should be put in a special region like, maybe, those of Rwenzori and other places so that they benefit from the Government programmes. Otherwise, many programmes do not go up to the roots of the mountain of the constituency I represent. There is more to be done but for the moment I thank you, Madam Speaker; we will continue from there. Thank you.
MR.KUBEKETERYA JAMES (Bunya East, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in congratulating you, and the Speaker, for the elections to your positions. I would like to make a few comments on the President’s State of the Nation Address, particularly on page six. 

The President was talking about ways in which Government will actively follow priority areas. He said that he would improve infrastructure, especially in rural areas where agricultural production takes place. Now, I would like to inform Members that the district and constituency I come from is endowed with fertile soils; there is a lot of fishing and agriculture going on but there are some places that for the last 40 years have never had their roads worked on. I clearly remember that the road I used to use going to school is now impassable. 

In my constituency, especially, in the sub-county where I come from, there are places that you cannot pass. You have to fold your trousers and actually wade through water because of the bad bridges. Being near a lake, you find swamps after every two kilometres. I would like to mention that, maybe these people have really not seen much from Government although they are very active at voting.  

So, for the new districts, Mayuge inclusive, I would like to appeal to the Minister of Works, Transport and communication to avail us road equipment units. I think this is going to be in line with the President’s pledge of developing rural places, especially, where agriculture takes place. If these road equipment units are within the Ministry of Transport and Communication, I will be the first person to pick them because you cannot talk of modernising agriculture without having passage of the agricultural expertise. It is a pathetic situation.   

I would like to inform the House that I almost missed nomination because it rained heavily, so the following morning I got stuck and I had to go on foot. That is the situation in places like Bunya East constituency. So, my humble request, especially to the Minister of Works and Communication, is that the newly created districts should be given their road equipment units and this is going to be very effective to enable them modernize agriculture.  
The second issue is about education.  I would like to note with concern that Bunya East Constituency is the least developed in terms of education. The whole district called Mayuge has only one senior secondary school, which is government aided, and the whole constituency like Bunya East Constituency does not have any Government aided school whereas government is ensuring that every sub-county has to benefit from the universal senior secondary education in the future.  

So, along those lines, I would like to suggest that the Minister of Education slightly relax the modalities of registering schools to be government aided. Otherwise, Bunya East constituency may not benefit from the universal senior secondary education. So, if MPs are given that opportunity of registering these schools in time, we should not miss out on the universal senior secondary education.  I think that would be in line with absorbing the growing number of UPE in 2003.  I am always very brief, I don’t want to take much of your time, I would like to end by again appealing to the Ministry of education to stop registration parents-funded schools. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR. NSUBUGA WILLIAM (Buvuma County, Mukono): Madam Speaker, allow me also to congratulate you and hon. Ssekandi for having been unanimously elected to lead this august House.  I congratulate Members of the FrontBench for your respective appointments, and the Backbenchers for having made it to this 7th Parliament. Allow me also to thank the President of the Republic of Uganda for his wise and developmental speech on the State of the Nation.  

In line with the President’s address, the people of Buvuma Island have requested me to make the following observation to appreciate the relevant steps this government has taken to modernise agriculture. In Buvuma we have one serious problem of monkeys.  These monkeys have destroyed the crops of the farmers. Most of our women wake up by 5.00 a.m to guard the gardens and come back by 8.00 p.m. Imagine if it is maize, for a period of four months, the women are supposed to be in the gardens. This problem has affected the UPE programme because the pupils instead of going to school, their parents advise them to look after the gardens -(Interruption).
MR. AKAKI AYUMU: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  On the issue of the troublesome apes or monkeys, we actually have two ways of handling them. All the districts have been given the guideline. One, when they are of big sizes, like elephants, what we try to do is to chase them back to their places.  In the event that they become troublesome, we actually recommend that they are killed and this has been done in several circumstances. 

In the case of the rodents and the small ones that are categorised as vermin, we recommend them to be killed. In the event that you cannot kill them, you report to authorities in Uganda Wildlife Authority who advise you on how to handle them. We need them but sometimes we have got to prioritise what the government requires. Thank you.

MR. NSUBUGA:  Thank you hon. Minister, however I would like to inform this House that in Mukono district, the elders have already contacted the authorities, but they don’t have facilities. The Minister should note that as much as the district is supposed to handle them, our parents spend most of their variable time looking after crops they have planted.  

Madam speaker, the people of Buvuma appreciate the role UPE has played in fighting illiteracy, and the need for government to recruit another 40,000 teachers.  However, the number of teacher’s for primary schools in Buvuma is still low.  Most civil servants, teacher’s inclusive, regard being posted to Buvuma Islands a demotion.  People don’t like to be transferred to Buvuma Islands. 

I would request this august House to recommend some hardship allowance to teachers and other civil servants such that they can be induced to stay on these Islands. In the whole of Buvuma Islands, we have one government-aided secondary school with only four teachers on the payroll and thirty-five students. The problem is that if the schools don’t have teachers, even the parents cannot risk taking their children to those schools.  So, I am just appealing to government to establish a secondary school per every sub-county. Our appeal to the people of Buvuma is to upgrade that secondary school into a boarding school. 
I think it can cater for the students within Buvuma Islands for the next five years.
The major form of transport that connects Buvuma to the mainland is a ferry but as I talk now, the ferry we have is in a dangerous mechanical condition. Since 1986, that ferry has - (Interruption)

MR. WERIKHE: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my Colleague for giving way. As we actually informed the House earlier on, we have acquired new ferries for Kalangala and Buvuma islands.  So, I would like to allay your fears honorable colleague, that it is going to be history. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up hon. Nsubuga.

MR. NSUBUGA: I would like to inform the hon. Minister that, as much as we are going to get the ferry, we don’t have the ferry landing. Since 1986, this ferry has been landing on land improvised by the people and loading a truck on that ferry is dangerous. When it is the rainy season, the road is impassable and we sympathize with the ferry operators. Do you know what the district tells us, that for them they are willing to give us the machine, but the ferry landing is in a dangerous mechanical condition it cannot to carry those trucks. So, the hon. Minister, since you are making arrangements to bring the ferry, even the ferry landing must be put under consideration.  Thank you.

DR. ARAPKISSA (Kween County, Kapchorwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will first thank all the Members for having made it to this House.  While supporting this motion, my contribution will be mainly on three areas.  That is insecurity, health and sharing of the national cake.  

On insecurity, I will join my other colleagues who have spoken earlier, those coming from Karamoja and the areas surrounding it.  When I refer to the President’s Speech about insecurity, he seems to have dealt mainly on insecurity caused by rebels, the LRA and ADF.  In the regions that are surrounding Karamoja, we have insecurity caused by the Karamojong who are armed with guns.  

Well, in Kapchorwa, in particular my county of Kween, we have a sub-county known as Ngegei that borders with the district of Nakapiripirit which was originally part of Moroto District.  This sub-county has been deserted for over 30 years due to intensified raids by people originating from the then Moroto district.  They are involved in cattle rustling, murdering people and destruction of property.  While information has it that in the 60s, this sub-county used to have the biggest cattle market in the Eastern Region, now it has degenerated to a bush.  All the people who used to live there migrated to Kenya, Masindi, Busia and Bugiri. This was caused, as I said, by intensified raids from Moroto District. 

The Sabiny uniquely have a culture of being on the defensive. We don’t do counter raids in Moroto district.  So in the 60s, when the Karamojong were using spears, the Sabiny were using bows and arrows. At that time the balance of terror was in favour of the Sabiny but then when the Karamojong acquired automatic guns, the terror shifted in favour of the Karamojong, and people have now deserted the area. I have said the people of Kapchorwa don’t counter raid, we never cross into Karamoja, but they cross into our area. I really urge Government to speed up the disarmament of the Karamojong so that we can get peace and development this area.  In fact, some of you who have not been to Ngegei sub-county, it is like Nyabushozi but without cattle. 

The second issue is about health.  While it is sad to note that the national coverage dropped from 70 percent to 38 percent, I think there are issues here that should be addressed.  One is the low morale of the health workers, because when they go to immunize, they are paid very little allowances.  It varies from district to district, but you find it is about 3,000 or 2,000 shillings per day when they go out.  Then we have people known as vaccinators who are only paid 10,000 shillings per month.  So you cannot expect much output from these people when you are giving them very little allowances.  

The second issue that should be addressed is the low level of supervision from the district health team and the sub-district health team.  The sub-district health team has a low capacity to supervise, mainly because it is newly created.  It is just about four or five years since it was created, and it has no manpower. 

They also have transport problems and the supervision of the district health team (DHT) at times is low because they are over stretched.  The District Health Team concentrates more on training workshops, attending seminars and workshops where they earn incentives.  So the DH team should reduce on attending training workshops and do supervision.  Many chiefs’ concentrate on collecting taxes because there is low mobilization.  They avoid dealing in other programs like mobilizing for immunization. The reason being that they are fatigued, and have no incentives. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If you could wind up.

DR. ARAPKISSA: Okay.  Then, the other issue on health is stopping cost sharing. This has demoralized the health workers because some of them used to get allowances from this system. So, eventually, it has actually led to increased fees for services or increased cost sharing. The patient or attendant has to meet the cost or to supplement the drug or sundries, which are not there. It has also increased the cost sharing, which is now done under the table. So Government should find a way of increasing the funding to the Health Sector instead of just stopping cost sharing, maybe by introducing health insurance schemes. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Members, I have received an invitation for you to participate in some activities on Tuesday. But let me ask the Minister of State for Housing to give us the details very briefly.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HOUSING (Capt. Babu Francis): Thank you Madam Speaker. The Ministry of Works, Housing and Communication in conjunction with Habitat for Humanity, Uganda, an NGO, requests all Members of Parliament to attend the launching of the Global World Leaders Build by His Excellency, the President. He will be launching it by taking part in building a house. 

The World Leaders Build is a global event that was organised by former US President, Jimmy Carter. This event is going to take place in several countries. In Uganda, it will take place on 7th August 2001 in Katikamu county, Luwero. 

The programme helps the poor to construct houses. This NGO has now built 2500 houses in Uganda for the poor so as to improve their standards of living. These houses are very cheap to build. They are then given to our people who eventually pay for them. 

Therefore, hon. Members, you are invited to be there on that occasion. The function will be in Kasenene village, Katikamu County. Immediately after Wobulenzi, you will turn on the right hand side. There will be a banner. It is about two and half kilometres. Those who are able to attend are requested to come and join us. 

Habitat for Humanity will be expanding this programme to all districts in Uganda to put up houses for the poor, and we are supporting them very strongly. We think this can help in alleviating poverty. 

Invitation cards will be put in your pigeonholes. I stood up to inform you because today is Thursday and, as you know, when we close today, we will not be able to talk to you until Tuesday. So, we are putting these cards in your pigeonholes and it is Wobulenzi, Katikamu, Tuesday, 7th August 2001 at 10.00 O’Clock. The programme is on the reverse side. Arrival time is between 9.00a.m. to 10.00a.m. The President will arrive after 10.00. Thank you Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I am aware that many of you still want to contribute, so I have taken note of those who have indicated that they would like to speak. The debate will continue on Tuesday and Wednesday, so there is still an opportunity for you to make your contributions. We shall be here again on Tuesday in the afternoon. 

On that note, hon. Members, I thank you for your participation today. The proceedings are adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00p.m, and please, keep time so that we can have as many contributors as possible. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 5.35p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 7th August 2001 at 2.00p.m.)

