Tuesday, 9 August 1994

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliamentary House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice-Chairman, Mr Joseph Ekemu, in the Chair.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, it is with profound regret that I have to announce to you, the untimely death of hon. Mzee Balaki Kirya, who passed away this morning in Mulago Hospital.  The burial programme will be announced in due course.  Let us stand and observe one-minute silence in memory of him.

MOTION

For presentation, consideration and option of the report on the Sectoral Standing Committee on Legal and Security Affairs on the ‘Police Bill, 1994’.

MR BUTAGIRA (Rwampara County, Mbarara): Mr Chairman, permit me before I table my Motion and report to congratulate the Government on having re-established diplomatic relation with the State of Israel.  I had an occasion, last year to visit that country twice with His Excellency the Vice President, and I think there is a lot that this country can benefit from our relationship with that State of Israel.  Israel in terms of agricultural improvement and technological.

Having said that, let me now turn to the Police Bill. You recall that last year, when the hon. Minister of State for Internal Affairs, presented his Bill to this House there was heated exchange, heated Debate during the Second Reading of that Bill, and this House in its wisdom, decided to refer the matter to the Sectoral Committee on Legal and Security Affairs to discuss the Bill thoroughly and come out with appropriate amendments.  This talk was done, and the committee due embarked on its work.  The Committee decided to have wide scale consultation on the issue.  We decided to consult relevant institutions that have a bearing on law and order.  

We felt this necessary, because if the Bill has to be meaningful, it should satisfy the consumers.  We accordingly consulted the following organisations, which are in appendix to this report.  That is FIDA Law Development Centre, Uganda Magistrate Association, Uganda Prisons, Uganda Law Society, Ministry of Local Government, the Faculty of Law Makerere, Child Care Agency, Department of Probation Welfare, Ministry of Labour and Social Welfare.  The Uganda Police, Human Rights Organisations, that is Human Right Activities, Human Rights Initiative, and lastly, one Member of this House, hon. Dr Tiberondwa, also appeared before the Committee.

Accordingly, under rule 66, sub-rule 1 of our Rules of Procedure, I have the honour to present this report for consideration and adoption. In order to understand this report, we have to look at the Police Bill as presented last year, and the new version as presented this year incorporated in this Police Bill, 1994.  You also have to look at any other Amendments to the Police Act, which is in force. 

We looked at all these amendments, and at these laws in order to arrive at what I am going to present.  In short, the Committee after a thorough examination of the Police Bill, 1993, and after the wide consultations I have mentioned arrived at appropriate Amendments.  We then forwarded a copy of these Amendments to the hon. Minister of State for Internal Affairs.  He studied them he had his own comment, and we met together, him and the committee, we had a very useful discussion, and I am happy to report at the end of the day, we reached a consensus.  

I think, in view of the dust that was raised here, this was an important achievement for the Committee and for the Minister.  So, what I am about to present, therefore, is as a result of that consensus.  I will not go through the amendments, they are many, and they were about 82 all together to the old Bill.  So, we thought it was necessary to have it in neat form, in other words, to redo Bill, so that the Amendments are incorporated and all this is now reflected in the Police Bill, 1994.  

Our amendments plus those old provision which we did not touch, they are all in this particular book but I will highlight just a few of these amendments.  A new sub-clause 3, has been inserted at clause 5, if you look at clause 5, of the Bill that is 1994, it contains the new amendments, I am, I am talking about.  But there is some omission in that sub-clause, it reads as follows, that is clause 5, sub-clause 3, ‘No person shall arrest, detain or institute criminal proceedings save as is provided for under this Statute or the Constitution.’  Now, there is some omission, the Clause should read as follows, I repeat: ‘No person shall arrest, detain or institute criminal proceedings save as is provided for under this statute or any other law, empowering such a course of action or the Constitution.’  

We felt that there has been a tendency, especially, by some other security organs to arrest people, and detain them.  Now, the law now, or according to our proposal is that this duty if first the duty of the Police, plus any other person who is authorised by specific law, like the Immigration Act, authorising some arrest and some prosecution.  So, in other words, unless there is a specific provisions of the law, on empowering you to detain, to arrest or to prosecute, no other person has that power. To ensure the independence of the Inspector General of Police, in performance of his professional duties, Clause 6, (2) has been amended to read as follows: ‘In the performance of his functions, the Inspector General of Police, shall be subject to, and act in accordance with the laws of Uganda, provided that on matters of Police.’

If you look at the old provision, it said, ‘In the performance of his functions the Inspector General shall subject to the directions of the Minister.’ Now, there as opposition to this that the Minister may be tempted to interfere, in his Inspector General of Police in his professional duties.  So, we have now made it clear, that the Minister can only intervene on matters of policy. Otherwise, the Inspector General of Police should be free to perform his duties according to his profession. Sub-clauses 3 and 4 of clause 6, have been deleted, as being infringement of human rights of an individual and has been unconstitutional.  

You will remember clauses 6, 3 and 4 of the old Act, that is 1993, reads as follows:  ‘The President or such other Minister as may be authorised for his purpose by President, may give to the Inspect General such directions with respect to the maintenance and securing of public safety, and public order as the person giving the direction may consider necessary, and Inspector General shall comply with those directions or cause them to be complied with.  Sub-Clause 4, reads: ‘The question whether any and if so, why directions have been given under sub-section 3, shall not be inquired in a court of law.  

Now, we thought are infringement of the fundamental rights of an individual.  The Police Service Commission, according to the proposal is abolished.  You know there were three bodies, Pre-service Commission, The Police Council, the Police Authority, and there was confusion, and some of the functions are supposed to be performed by the Police Service Commission, were also being proposed to be performed by the Police Council and Police Authority.  

So, we have streamlined and remain with two bodies; The Police Council and the Police Authority.  To ensure tenure of job, the Police Officer may be retired in public interest, only on the grounds listed down in sub-clause 2 which gives Police Authority, power to retire a Police Officer for reasonable course, apart from those outlined about, has been deleted.  

This is really to have been the objective, so that these follows are not retired at the whim whoever is concerned under the excuse of reasonable cause, it is to protect the Police.  A new provision is being made to give a Police Officer a right to be heard before being retired in public interest. This is a new provision, in line with principles of natural justice, that before you are fired, at least you should be given a hearing not a hearing necessarily that takes place in court, but a hearing can be in form of writing, you give your views in writing before you retired; we think this is a welcome provision.  

As regards, arrest as preventive action, that is clause 30, to avoid indefinite detention of a person so arrested, a new sub-clause 5, is being added. It reads as follows: ‘Any person so arrested, or any other person so arrested, or any other person on his behalf who has reason to believe, that any person is being unlawfully detained under this section, may apply to a magistrate, to have such a person released with a without surety!’  Now, if you look at the old provision, it was open ended, you could be detained under that provision almost limitless; so, now we are saying that, either you, who is affected or your relative may intervene and apply to the magistrate for your release.  Similarly, a new safeguard is being provided for persons arrested without a warrant that is clause 29 and 31.  

A person so arrested, must be produced before a magistrate’s court within 48 hours, unless earlier on released on bond.  Failure to comply with this requirement, will entitle the person or any other person on his behalf, to apply to court within 24 hours for his release, and shall be released unless charged.  This provision will prevent, the abuse of powers whereby somebody is arrested dumped into a Police Station, and he is forgotten, rots there.  We are not saying that are under obligation within 48 hours to bring that person to court; and if you do not do so, he can now complain or his relative, or somebody in his behalf, because if you are locked up, you may not physically have a chance of applying to court, but your relative, or somebody on his behalf can do so. 

In other words, we are trying now to make sure that, before somebody is arrested, there should have been really thoroughly investigation, evidence gathered, but not arrest and then start investigating. A new sub-clause 4 is added at clause 31, to deal with a case of suspect who is tortured in Police custody or any other custody.  Such a person is given a right to complain to order for his examination and treatment of the suspect at the expense of the state, and any other person responsible for the torture, shall torture in policies, or torture of people arrested, there has not been any remedy apart from the long one of trying to see the Government through Attorney General and so forth.  Now, we are providing for expeditious remedy here, and the person responsible for the torture should be charged.  We are now trying to really improved human rights record. 

Regarding the seizure and retention of poverty by Police, that is a clause 36, new provision is being made, to the effect that during the research and seizure of property the search shall be carried out in a human manner and damage or destruction to property shall be avoided.  This is a new provision.  to avoid a situation whereby somebody or the Policeman goes to search your house and reign of torture is unleashed properties destroyed, things thrown around, and so forth, and the wife is kicked and so forth, now all these inhuman treatment were saying no, if you are - it should be done in a human manner, in a civilized manner as far as the circumstance is allowed.  Do not go on rampage, that is what we are saying, and do not destroy property.  

Now, as far power to regulate assembles and processions, we have recommended that, the present provisions of the Act, be maintained as providing more adequate safeguards.  If you look at the present Police Act, and look at the powers to regulate assembles, we felt that the provisions there are very elaborate and deal with a situation adequately rather than those which were introduced in the Police Bill 1993.  So, we are saying those should stay.  

The Committee also recommended that the Disciplinary Code of Conduct, be part of the Bill as a Schedule, instead of leaving the rules to be provided in a Statutory Instrument, this ensures transparency, you know, this was done when we were dealing with the Act dealing with the Army.  The Code of Conduct was made, part of Act.  So, here we are saying, this Code of Conduct should be part of the Bill, and be contained in a schedule, it is already in fact a schedule in this Police Bill.  

On Police Tender Board, the Committee has recommended that, it be independent, instead of being advisory to the Minister. The old Police Bill, 1993, made the Tender Board to the Minister, we are now saying it should be independent in its functions.  It is also provided, that the Police Authority rather than the Minister appoints the six member of the Board.  The members of the Board in, otherwise, shall be appointed by the Police Authority rather than the Minister, that the Minister really over-all to supervise but do not engage in appointing members of the Board and so on. Now, regarding the Local Administration Police, it is being recommended, that remains with Local Government, but matters concerning, training and standardization shall be the responsibility of the Inspector General of police and for this purpose, the liaison officer shall be appointed by the Inspector General.  

There were strong presentations from the Ministry of Local Government, that they should retain the Local Administration Police under then, rather than amalgamating it with the Police Force; and we listened patiently and we agreed their reasoning and so the two are separate but they shall be coordinated in the manner as provided under this Bill.  As I have said, all our recommendations are in this Police Bill, 1994; neatly done, and it reflects all those recommendations, I have highlighted.

Finally, the Committee would like to thank the organisations that sent in memorandum and also appeared in person.  We would like also to thank hon. Dr Tiberondwa, NRC Member for Igara who appeared before the Committee to give his views.  The Committee has found this interaction valuable and strongly recommend that in future, public hearings be carried out and any controversial Bill, before it is enacted by the House.  It is also recommended, that a committee on legislation be established and for this purpose, the present Committee on Legal and Security Affairs, maybe designated ass such -(Interruption) 

MR KARUHANGA:  Point of clarification. Mr Chairman, I would like the Chairman of the Committee to clarify to me something, which has been made very clear, on the Local Administration Police. It is not clear to me with the decentralization policy, whether he is saying, that districts now, will set up their own Police; for example, Kampala District will have now its own Police Administration, rule and managed by the District Resistance Councils, and that the training is only done by the Inspector General.  Is that the implication?  I would like to know whether the idea is towards the Metropolitan Police - you know everybody having his own Police. 

MR BUTAGIRA: Mr Chairman, what we are recommending is that the Local Police Administration as presently administered should remain where it is, in other words, it should be the responsibility of the local Government.  Now, remember the Bill was meant to incorporate them, in the Police Force, and abolish the Local Administration Police.  Now, we felt that there are tasks, which the Local Administration can now do in the field, which the Police Force as presently constituted which is a small force cannot reach.  So, with decentralization, I do not think the situation really will be altered; it still remains the law that those administrations will still cater for the Police. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member, please finish to report your report first.

MR BUTAGIRA: Mr Chairman, I was about to conclude.  I was saying that the Committee proposed that there should be a committee on legislation, which should look at the Bills, thoroughly before they are presented to the House.  This would ensure orderly amendments to amendments to the Bill at the appropriate stage.  Mr chairman, I beg to report.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now call upon Member to make a few contributions.

MR OBWANGOR (Soroti Municipality): Mr Chairman, whilst welcoming this Report, it is very important. It begins with one of the major organs, in running the country more particularly in matters of security, law and order and to ensure that in our county the philosophy and practice of the rule of law obtains.  Together with my colleagues who served on this Committee, not that they were men and women who did not know any law, they know thoroughly the Act on Chapter 312 of the Act Government; the Administration of the Principles.  I think you will be in such a position to enjoy life. The Police also want proper machinery and mechanism, with which they can administer Uganda correctly.  There were too many lawyers indeed, and it is because the lawyers are more conservative. 
 
Therefore, those of us who are involved with Police, work particularly because we are now making the National Constitution. We should see to it that proper legislation in the relation to enabling law - that is an administrative law for the police - that we connect what is now being talked in the CA particularly when you read Article 240 of the new Constitution being discussed in the CA. You will see that, as I was one of those who participated the drafting of that report, you will see that in Article 240, you may see in the black book - the Draft Constitution of Uganda -(Laughter)- we recommended entirely a national Police course to run the security arrangement through the strength and length of Uganda.  

We are aware of this slogan ‘Omwami ayogedde’ those type of the Police - omwami ayogedde, why?  A revolution must be total.  It cannot be half way. We must discard this type of policemen at the Kidaala rural area.  We must have one national system of policemen and women throughout the country because it encourages unity.  A policeman can be transferred any where across the floor of Uganda.  

There is a good deal of meat and equally, if you read the report of the recent 1989/90 - on the public service information respecting the police particularly when you read, I want you the youngsters here, because you blame us, I want you correctly to read duly curiously Chapter 312 of the Police Act and what we are proposing in the Constitution. The Police or the Inspector General of Police and this recruiting staff should know what person makes him able to become a policeman so that Uganda loves security throughout the country and the Police who are responsible put our matters right now. I am against passing Bill now.  There is nothing we are going to get.  Thank you.

MR BAKABULINDI CHARGES (Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I have been listening so attentively from the Report of the Sectorial Standing Committee on Legal and Security Affairs red by hon. Butagira.  I do really commend the work, which was done by that Committee.  It really ironed out the problems I had with this Bill.  However, I have got one simple query, which is on page 46 in the schedules.  It states: ‘A member of the Force shall treat all Diplomats and foreign nations with courtesy.’ 

My query is, we are gong back to the colonial days.  If you visit outside you find that citizens of that place do respect their fellow citizens and the country at large and indeed for us when the foreigners come here we do respect them.  I have no query with that.  But what I am trying to read is that as much as you are giving provisions to the foreigners to be treated in such a manner, also provision should be given to these high ranking officers of this nations say NRC member and other bodies.  They should also be respected.  Why should we respect the foreigners and leave our indigenous Ugandans without that sort provision.  That is my query, which I want the Chairman to clarify.  Thank you very much.

MR ATWAI:  Mr Chairman, I rise to support the Bill and I rise also to thank the Member who contributed to the making of this Report. However, I have some two areas, which I would like to see some further amendment or improvement on.  These are: Clause 9, subsection 2 (b) - the membership or composition of the police council.  

I welcome the idea that the Minister be the chairman and membership should comprise the people so mentioned but I would like to add that it will not be a good Council if it only constitutes those within the high ranking. There are those Police Judges, Police Corporal, Police Constables who are at all the time not allowed to interrupt with this particular composition and these are the people going to represent them without knowing that these are the lower cadres sharing uniports, which is a bit inhuman.  I think that is why I am only making a plea that if the President is going to appoint thee members, either he appoints from the lower cadres or police or the membership being wide enough. Otherwise, as I see, it is not worthy calling it a council, or rather a committee.

Secondly, this takes me to Clause 60, which has some preferences in Clause 40 and 43.  The welfare of the Police.  I think this report has come or was written much earlier then what we have heard from the Judiciary where salary increments have effected for the Chief Justice and all the other Judges down to the Magistrates.  What do I mean here? Police Officer is the first person who gets in touch with the suspect.  I think as we talk about their welfare and we have seen that it may note the sources of fund may not even be enough to raise and make them live without corruption and if we have not checked on the Police welfare well, we are transferring corruption from Judiciary to this very particular people.  

That brings me to Clause 40 where it is talking about some of these disposable sort of thing which if not found, they try to pull the owner to which this property should be ended.  It is here suggested in Clause - sub-section 3 and 4 that this be transferred and sold by public may be auctioned and the crusade go to the Police Fund.  I see a danger here, because sometimes the Police may work out things mechanically such that the projection becomes a problem.  Because they would like also their pan to swell.  So, I would like this particular area to be visited so that the Police is also provided for along side the people who see that Law and Order is maintained.  I beg to support.  Thank you very much. (Applause)

MR MORO:  Thank you, Mr Chairman. Before I contribute anything about the Police Bill, I would like through you to tell you and the House that I am bit disturbed and very sorry that the Members of this House may, very soon, be finished by death when today I heard from you that one of our hon. Members died in the hospital.  Recently, we lost one of our hon. Members, by the name Lapila and I think the number of hon. Members here who have died have reached more than 15.  So, I am worried. I do not know whether by the end of January 1995, all the Members will have not died.  Then I pray that Ben should be the last Member to die in our lifetime.

I would like to request through you, to know from the chairman of the Sectoral Committee, there are certain issues, which arose from this Bill.  According to their recommendations when somebody is arrested, he should be detained not more than 48 hours then after which if there was no case against him, he should be released.  Again, they are proposing that if nothing is done, within 24 hours, his relatives should go the Magistrate to plead.  I would like to clarify from him if the period given is two days and why should a relative of such a person go to Magistrate when the 48 hours have not expired? I would have suggested that there - it should have been after the 48 hours when they have expired, then the relatives of the victim should take action.

Secondly, I would like to know from the Committee which did a very good job how they arrived about these detention of when Police has set somebody, to arrest him, detain him, and they want to get information from this person.  In most cases when somebody has done something wrong, you arrest him, find out the truth from him, he will always deny.  We would give the Police some decree  - they should not kill.  They should, I think torture a little. (Laughter) I think we should allow the Police to torture a little so that we can at least find out the truth.

I would like to thank the Committee for the good wonderful job they have done.  But, I think there are still areas where we need the Police to do a lot more for the people.  The Police is supposed to keep order.

When I was small during the time of the British, the Police used to be alert 24 hours from morning and then up to sunset and then from dawn until daybreak.  But today it appears to me the police work only for either half of day or less.  Today what I know is that people are almost left free you find that people can do whatever they want. Therefore, I am appealing that the Police should be properly organised and should keep Law and order. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Your time is over hon. Member.

MR MORO:  The last one is that, this question of vehicles particularly these taxes, there are certain organisations which are under schedule originate from Geneva they call themselves from Geneva.  These men have no vehicles; they do not have cash, and they do not have pick-ups, but they come to you the owner. You have got your driver and your clerk who knows to write, and they say they are the owners of the vehicle; they are not the ones, they write the list of these people and collect the money and they want you to give them money.  I do not know who has allowed this.  So these kind of people, I would like the Police to make sure  -(Interruption)

MRS RWABYOMERE (Woman Representative Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Chairman, for allowing me to make a few remarks in support of this Bill. I support this Bill both in form and substance.  I therefore, would like to congratulate the Minister and the Sectoral Committee who have done an excellent job.  Before I make my general remarks, I would like to point out two errors.  I will point out this to both the Minister and a chairman of the Committee.  On page 3 of the report, in second paragraph, if you count 1,2,3, the forth line which starts with ‘to ensure tenure of job’, I am sure the Committee here meant to ensure security of tenure, not tenure of job.  To ensure security of tenure, which makes really better reading; the chairman seems to be in agreement with me, thank you.   

Also, in the Bill section the Committee has proposed an amendment to the effect that section 10 sub-section (b) be amended.  This is on page two number 21 of the amendment.  The committee has recommended that from 10 (1) (b), (2) (b), amended as point out there in, but then that implies that we delete sub-section (c) of section 10, unless you want to retain it, but then, sub-section (b) to me Inspector General of Police would be covered by the rank that you are proposing, that is above the rank of Assistant Superintendent of Police. So, sub-section (c), I think should be deleted which the committee did not recommend, those are the two corrections.

Now the few general remarks that I wanted to make, are to the effect that there is noticeable improvement in the police force, because the police force we had in 1987 is not the police force that we have today, both in terms of dress, that is appearance, form and performance. I would, therefore, would like to congratulate the Ministry for efforts made so far, to improve both appearance and performance of our police force.  (Applause) I would like to thank through the Ministry, that is the Ministry of Internal Affairs to thank the British Government who have given us a lot of assistance both in terms of training and equipments.  I have at least watched the hon. Minister of State on Television receiving equipments, vehicles and there have been mentioned that - there has been assistance in terms of training for our Police Force.  I have extended that gratitude through the Ministry.  

Also, there has been a deliberate effort to improve our police force so as to move from our police being a reactive to a pro-active force, because they are two types of Police.  The reactive Force is like the Fire Brigade, where he waits for the crime to happen and then he goes to stop that crime from happening.  Then the pro-active Force - type of Force is where you make arrangements to combat the Commission of Crime, that is community police, yes, I was going to say that there is a law that ought to be done in that area because so far people are still scared of police, for example, you will not have a child, if a policeman is walking down the road, you will not have a child run towards that police man to report what he has seen or if you are lost you might not - instead you might branch off ask where you are, instead of going to the police to report yourself.  Then also when you see the traffic, you do not imagine that they are just stopping you to ask for details but you will be scared that may be they are going to arrest you or as for something.   

However, there is a deliberate effort to create a pro-active police because even on television they are programmes, police programmes, for example, of traffic, I would suggest that there is more effort towards establishing community police to have good relations between the community and the police.  If you work towards that, you will have people voluntarily coming to report crimes or people voluntarily - being very co-operative in stopping crime.  So, I would like to encourage the ministry to commit their efforts towards establishing community crime community police and also not only to wait for a police seminar, but even when you are just addressing civilians, you just address civilians or even school children on the positive role that police can play in protecting the public and maintaining law and order.  That is all I had to say by way of general remarks, and those corrections I have made, I would like to thank you very much for indulgence.

MR SSEBAANA KIZITO (Makindye Division, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I also would like to congratulate the Committee, the Sectoral Committee for the report and also for the improvement on this Bill.  At the same time I would like to thank the Minister of State for Internal Affairs for thinking about to modernizing our police force.  This Bill intends to make our policemen and women more professional more secure at their jobs, more approachable. This is very good, and as we are building a new Uganda, we had better have a Police Force which has all those things.  

However, I represent an area in this Parliament where the police training school is located, and therefore, an area where we have a concentration of policemen, Presidential, but as we modernise their professions, we should also modernize their living accommodation. (Applause) 

I have on occasions visited Nsambya Police Barracks, but the state of affairs there is very worrying, it is even surprising to see that some of our policemen are still helpless, living under those conditions.  You find one small house accommodating three or four families and each family containing five or six or even ten members of that family.  Most of the accommodation, which is available, was built during the British Colonial administration.  We have not done much ever since independence to improve or even to increase on the accommodation whereas as a matter of fact, a number of policemen who are here today are far in excess of a number of policemen who were there during colonial days. 

Therefore, I want to appeal to the minister that, while we are trying to modernize the police force, we should also modernize their accommodation.  It is very important because policemen are human beings who should be properly accommodated, and in any case, it is duty of the State to find accommodation for Police.  

At Nsambya, there are also other Police units, which are very appalling; some of them are not even fit for human occupation. I am talking about Police of course. Many of you hon. members know what I am talking about. We find grass-thatched houses, which accommodate our policemen; those are the policemen whom we expect to administer law and order in the country.  

About the administration of law and order, I have just read in the newspapers that our Judges have had their salaries increased -(Interruption)

MR T. BUTIME: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I wanted to give a point of information to hon. Ssebaana Kizito, especially, on the question of grass-thatched houses, which are also called ‘mama ingiya pole.’ There are mainly because of the demand by government to have police post at every sub-county in the country.  And this is a demand which came up as a directive in fact by the President that between 1988, and today we should have established police posts in every sub-county.  And, therefore, it was almost impossible for us to get enough money or even to construct enough accommodation in working places for the police at every sub-county, and that is why we had devise means of at least putting in place the police in grass thatched houses.  Waiting for one good day when the budget would be favourable to us and we can then construct reasonable accommodation and reasonable offices for the police to work in.  Thank you.

MR SSEBAANA KIZITO: I thank the Minister of State for Internal Affairs for the information, but as you know, in economics demand creates supply, if there is demand for accommodation, therefore, we should supply that accommodation.  It is not enough to say that we need policemen and then leave policemen to stay in grass thatched houses, which are not only dangerous -(Interruption)

MISS NAMUGENYI: Point of information. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I want to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that the message you are giving us is very important. It is very necessary to give good accommodation to the police.  In my district, Kalangala District, the headquarters is where you find grass-thatched houses, and last year one person was burnt terribly in those grass-thatched houses. Unfortunately, when I went there to get more information, they had those serious instructions that they should not reveal what happened to that man who was burnt is grass thatched house.  Thank you very much.

MR SSEBAANA KIZITO:  Thank you very much.  I was going to move to another -(Interruption)

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Further information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that, building construction of the police is the responsibility of every citizen in the country.  The demand for police posts at every place originates mainly from the wanainchi, and in response, the first thing if you are to make a police station, you need personnel. Now, the government has gone a long way to train personnel, by the time we came to power, there were only 3,000 policemen of all ranks.  

As of now, we have more 17,000 policemen, and now when you look at a policeman, you see really that it is worthy calling a policeman properly dressed.  What is left is accommodation; things have to go on phase. In Luwero Triangle at least for that, we shall release iron sheets, in a station that hon. Members and the community will help us to mobilize themselves and supplement these efforts to erect buildings for Police posts in the area.  I have released 2,400 iron sheets, for Mpigi District for different place, 1,200 iron sheets for Mubende District 2,000 for Kiboga, 800 for Mukono District, and 400 for Kibale District, including 2,800 for Luwero District.  At least, that is an attempt. (Laughter) 

MR SSEBAANA KIZITO: I am grateful for the information.  At least my appeal on behalf of the people whom I represent in Makindye Division has been heard.  And therefore, all I am asking for is that, the example given by the Minister of State responsible for Luwero should be emulated throughout the country of Uganda.  I was talking about the salaries.  We have heard and we have read that magistrates and justices – the Chief Justice and others have had their salaries increased tremendously, these are law enforcement officers, and I think that policemen are also Law enforcement officers, therefore, if he increased salary of the Chief Justice and of the others, in that category, he should also look t these salaries of the policemen, because they are very low indeed.

I move to drug trafficking in Uganda.  Uganda is quickly becoming the centre for drug trafficking, and most people who travel abroad now can see that they are being - their documents if they find that you are from Uganda, are scrutinized more solely that they were in the past.  This is because of the reputation, which we are getting as a drug trafficking area.  I also know that in the country itself, there is a lot of smoking of bangi, especially, around Nakasero market, and all those areas, you find a lot of young kids smoking bangi.  And I want to appeal to the Police to take steps to see that we prevent this menu.  In some countries, smoking bangi or even dealing in bangi is punishable by death.  We should avoid this by asking our police to be very vigorous and very vigilant about this issue.  Superior to that -(Interruption)

MR T. BUTIME:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I want to inform hon. Ssebaana Kizito that there is a section in the Police Force, which specialized on drugs and narcotics.  And this section has been doing very good work and it has apprehended arrested both at the Air Port and inside the country all people involved in drug trafficking and smoking bangi etc.  But the law in Uganda, the law on the Statute books now governing drug trafficking etc. is a very, very old law and not deferent at all.  If a person now is caught - is arrested, taking bangi, or trafficking at the Air Port and he is taken to court, I am not very sure, but I think he is fined about 1,500 shillings, or something like that.  In other words, the law is so outdated, in that, it is not deferent, and therefore, whatever however vigilant, the police is going to be and unless the law changes and this is not the law in the Police Act or the law in the Ministry of Internal Affairs but this is a law I think from the - some where in the Attorney General Chamber, the Ministry of Justice.  Unless that law is looked at and revised, I do not think the work of the police will be satisfactory to hon. Ssebaana Kizito.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR SSEBAANA KIZITO:  I am speaking in the Parliament where laws are made. Therefore, please, take note; because this is a growing menu, also a growing menu is that of mairungi.  I do not know whether it is illegal to consume mairungi in this country, because I have found that they are specific places where mairungi is sold.  Mairungi is bought and mairungi is consumed in front of the policemen, and nothing is done.  We must be very careful; we are trying to build a Uganda, which must be strong in mind and in body, but all these drugs deviate from this kind of situation. (Interruption)

MR KALULE SSENGO: Mr Chairman, I want to request the Minister of Internal Affairs to clarify whether this Mairungi is there illegally; because in the county, which borders mine, that is Butambala County, mairungi has become a source of income.  There are real shambas of mairungi and everyday pick ups go and pick it from this area to bring to which is becoming a source of income.  Now, unless the Minister can clarify whether it is illegal, I am afraid if steps are not taken, the whole of Butambala County might turn over to growing mairungi, which is actually destroying our people.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR T. BUTIME:  Mr Chairman, I do not think, I would like to tell lies to the House.  I will make enough research, I will come here with the paper and I will explain to the House whether mairungi is legal or not.  Because the impression, some district police commanders have managed to destroy mairungi, and they have also arrested some of these people caught selling, consuming, eating and smoking at the same time mairungi and these people, some of them have not been convicted in court.  Others have - I think it is not really very clear, I think it is in order for me to go back and carry out consultation and come and explain to the House the law governing and relating to mairungi in Uganda.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR MWANDHA:  Point of clarification.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  In view of the very serious concern that has been expressed by the hon. Member from Makindye regarding the trafficking drugs, and in the view of the fact that, the Minister has admitted that actually there is no deferent law against drug trafficking in this country and the view of the fact that, drug is a very serious international matter, and we as part of international community, should be seen to doing something about drugs.  Can the Minister inform this House what action government intends to take in order to put in place a law that will be different enough against drug trafficking?

MR T. BUTIME:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, government intends to work together with the Police. This law when passed that will not, I think, be the case any more.  There will, therefore, a way of expediting that kind of gratuity, pension, etc., when this law is passed but for the time, since the last thirty years, all these matters has to be dealt with by a completely different Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Public Service as you has quite a lot.  It has to cover almost each and every Ministry, but this law when passed I think the matter you are raising will be handled expeditiously.

MR OKWERA:  Further information. Mr Chairman, the hon. Member holding the Floor now raises a very important point especially regarding the treatment of the family of the officers who die on duty.  It is very true that some of this treatment is so discriminatory that certain people even when they are in the forces, in the active services of police, the families are not catered for at all.  I have got an example.  My own brother died last year from Mbale, he was already a gazetted officer.  We never got even transport and up to now the property of my late brother is still in Mbale.  I have been in touch with the Police two or three times, and I got fed up.  So, what the Member is saying is very true, the government should do something about it to make this kind of treatment uniform.

MR RWABITA: Mr Chairman, let me go to Article 69.  Here, I beg the Minister concerned to explain to us how this is going to be enforced because harbouring a Police Officer on duty especially when he is going for a good drink, it is very difficult for a beer seller.  Wherever you go in the peripheral of the police stations, even to the wives of the policemen who have these bars and they prepare either malwa, enguli or tonto, and it will be difficult for that old lady to stop the policeman from drinking during working hours.  Now, how do you terrorise that innocent person when the big officer says; ‘mimi nataka malwa.’ Now, what does she do? I need an explanation on that Article.  It will be very difficult to implement really unless the discipline of the Police is so high these days or in future that they do the right thing at the right time otherwise, in every police station you go, the peripheral area is nothing but mwenge bigere and waragi and what have you.

MR T. BUTIME:  Point of information.  I am trying to answer Mr Chairman, because I do not know whether, according to the regulations, there is an opportunity for the Minister to reply.  I think it is not there that is why I am trying to take every opportunity to answer because I may not have the opportunity to answer the issues and points raised by the hon. Members.  

What hon. Rwabita is raising is indeed a very valid and very correct point.  We have a problem where police barracks have been themselves involved in the brewing of liquor and other drinks and the police have also found themselves there consuming the liquor which has been prepared by their own wives, etc.  We shall have to really enforce this law when it is passed.  

We have carried out raids in the police barracks, Nsambya and others where people have been apprehended by police officers who have been involved in the brewing and selling of liquor etc.  And when this law is passed we are going to be more strict so that if you are a police officer and you want to have a drink, please do not drink in the barracks.  Drink somewhere else and come home.  

In fact -(Interjection)- yes, you can drink somewhere else and come home.  In fact, in this law you will also find that a policeman is not allowed to drink and become useless because he is going to be on duty twenty four hours and if duty calls, even if he is off duty, he is not allowed to drink to a certain level where if he is looked for and he is found drunk it is an offence.  You will find this one. 

MR RWABITA:  I have got two last points.  One is on under Schedule No.30. There is also a law that is a bit difficult  ‘No pay shall accrue to any police officer in respect of any day during which he is absent from duty without leave or is undergoing any sentence of imprisonment.’ I want to be clarified here.  Does the word ‘leave’ mean also ‘permission?’ because there are cases where a policeman has lost somebody and he has to go home and see his family.  Is that ‘leave’ or is that ‘permission’ because I want to seek a distinction between leave and permission. It could be one day, it could be a few hours but when you say that any day that he is not on duty he loses his pay, I think it is a bit too harsh and unfair, Sir.

CAPT. GASATURA:  Point of information.   Mr Chairman, I will assist the hon. Member having been a former member of the Police Force. This is what is called AWOL, (Away Without Official Leave) and I believe this is what they are referring to that surely we can not pay any police officer who is away without official leave.

MR RWABITA:  Lastly, Mr Chairman, I want to request the Police Administration that when they create a police station especially which covers big area, the Officer in Charge should be facilitated with means of transport because in my own area, Ibanda covers a radius of more than 40 miles actually.  It goes as far as Kitagwenda to down there on Lake Masyoro then Buhweju, Kashari, Kazo and even Kibale but when the crime, they have a DMC which goes at 10 m.p.h. Now, when can they do the efficient job? First of all the killer will have run away or the people will have hidden the property.  So, such big areas where officers are given big responsibility, they should be facilitated with means of transport so that they can do their work efficiently.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR OPIO (Samia Bugwe County, Tororo):  thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like to start by making one or two general observations.  One is that, I would like to commend the Ministry of Internal Affairs for the work they are doing with respect to rehabilitating some of the barracks but I would like to request that when time comes to making some expenditure, Busia Police Unit should be put in mind for rehabilitation.  It is near the border and when you see people coming from our brothers on the other side and they emerge on our side, they find a very dilapidated Police unit, it gives a wrong impression that we are just giving statements which we are not implementing with regard to rehabilitation of the places really in bad shape.

I would also like to really commend the work of the Police for employing people of various regions. You find that at least when you go there you will find someone from either Eastern, Western, Central, so other organisations should take leaf on what is happening in the police so that we stop giving them different names just because of the people they have employed. 

Also, on the other side, I would like to give some commendation to the Police for the rehabilitation and for the provision of vehicles to policemen.  When you travel on the road now you see new pick ups being driven by policemen and we would encourage the policemen to also be efficient and do their jobs effectively so that the tax payers will also feel happy that the vehicles being bought using the tax payers money are being used properly.  I think we are very happy that the Police also have new vehicles on the road and I hope that will encourage them to take more of other ramshackle vehicles into proper areas where they should be for the time being.

I would like to comment on the Riot Police.  I am happy that we have a riot police but I think when it is given missions, they should study properly the mission they are going to accomplish.  I would like to refer to the incident in the National College of Business Studies, which took place during the time of some demonstrations.  I think the Police used excessive force. First of all, there was no direction by the Ministry to the fact that they were going to close the College so there was no reason for the Police to go in and begin throwing out, thrashing out the students because if there was a decision to close the College then it was true that the police would go in and flash us but there was no such a decision to close the College but then they went in, threw in canisters, threw out the students, some students lost their property.  I think they should study properly the situation before the Police goes in to carry out such acts. (Interruption)

MR DRANI DRADRIGA: Point of information. Mr Chairman, I wish to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that Section 34 in the Bill talks about the powers of police in dispersing assemblies, which are illegal etc.  But what disturbs me is that it is now very common in the educational institutions, especially in secondary schools, TTCs etc., where some headmasters and chairmen, Board of Governors have taken advantage and instead of trying to assess the situation first and deal with it administratively they always run to the police and when the police are called in, they use the Fire Brigade approach to disturb students who - because of this training, the political education training we have now, they also try to defend themselves in the hope of disarming a few police and in the end we have a lot of casualties.  I think the police should use a lot of discretion, they should use a lot of reasonableness and with the most important person, actually the officer deployed on duty who must use his wisdom to the best of the situation.

MR BAKABULINDI:  Further information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. What hon. Opio is contributing is a very important issue.  I happened to visit that National College of Business Studies after that incident.  What the Police did really gave us a very bad picture.  They went to the extent of reaching even into their dormitories and spoiling their cassettes.  We were wondering, I do not know what mission they had gone there to do.  Apart from stopping the students from the gate you go as far as reaching the dormitories and even tampering with the students cassettes it was very uncalled for and I hope, in future, the police should take this issue very seriously.  Thank you very much. 

MR KAJUBI:  Further information. Mr Chairman, I think in this respect we should blame the police sparingly.  I am an educationist by profession although I am a farmer anyway, I am not a trained farmer but I am an educationist.  But since we have been fighting here for about twenty years, students have adopted very reactionary ways of behaviour.  Some times anyway they resort to force and many of them are trained in this muchaka muchaka, sometimes when the police come, some of them anyway, especially the boys, the guys, will try to take away the guns from the police and so on.  Therefore, I think they should be blamed very sparingly because at times even the Board of Governors are in danger and students have been known to overturn headmasters cars, to burn up things and so on.  Of course, I do not encourage the police anyway, to resort to shooting and so on but we should really even leave it to the headmasters and so on but sometimes the situation is such that the police has no alternative but really to use some little force.   Thank you very much.

MR TOM BUTIME:  Mr Chairman, I want to inform hon. Opio that in the case of Nakawa, the National College of Business Studies, they set up a road block, they stopped vehicles and traffic from moving from Jinja to Kampala and from moving from Lugogo to Industrial Area, they hijacked two vehicles one of them belonging to a foreign mission and one, a pick up of a businessman.  They drove these vehicles to their place at the College and it was the duty of the police, first of all, to dismantle the roadblock and to recover those vehicles, which the students, after muchacka muchaka, had captured and taken to their places.  Unfortunately, during the flash teargas was used and unfortunately in one of the dormitories one room somewhere caught fire.  The police had to go into investigations as to what happened, why did the fire break out.  

So, you can see how wonderful your police is, they went to find out why did the fire break out.  At the end of the day they found out that one of the canisters, which had been shot from the tear gas, is the one, which caused fire in the dormitory, and the Police has recommended to itself and to the government that the students who lost their property should be compensated by the government.  So you can imagine the kind of Police, which you have which, after discovering that they were the cause of the problem, they can even go ahead and recommend that compensation to take place.

MR OPIO: I would like to be very thankful to the Minister and the Ministry for compensating for those assets which were lost not because the students burnt them but because the canister which was shot into the room which was very far from where the vehicles which had been commanded were.  So, Mr Chairman, thank you very much for that but I would like to say that whenever a situation arises where students will get out of the compass, there should be information so that we know why the policemen go there not to go there when they are supposed to be there and then they are forced to come out. I would like to end on that by thanking the IGG, he was very helpful when this issue came and he took very good action which restored the situation.  That we have noted and even in the Board of Directors minutes, we have been very grateful.

On the Bill, I only want to look at Clause 41. I am not a lawyer but when I look at this Clause I am not very comfortable and I hope the Committee looked at this Clause and found it worthwhile but when I read it, it says; ‘Except with the written permission of an officer in charge of police, no person shall, in a public place or so as to be a public nuisance use any megaphone, loud speaker, loud hailer, public address apparatus or any other menus, whether artificial or not, for amplifying, broadcasting or reproducing any music or speech or any other sound.’  I do not know whether the Committee looked at this one but for my layman’s understanding I want to say that I do not approve of this Clause because when you have your funnel rites, you need it and who else should really give permission to a person to be a nuisance?  If you look at it, it says that; to be a nuisance you must get permission but I would not worry about someone who is a nuisance but someone who is not a nuisance and he wants to use these apparatus and it requires him to get permission. I think, I would like the lawyers to look at this one but my knowledge of a non-lawyer is that this should be removed otherwise we are going to be prevented from having our own things which we think are enriching our culture. (Interruption)

MR ARUNA ADAM: Point of information.

MR DRANI DRADRIGA: Mr Chairman, what will happen today where the RCs who exercise a lot of authority and there is no police station nearby, I think the RCs will have a right to be consulted and they will be able to monitor and secondly, I think what is important is for the police wherever such situations occur, to go and monitor.  Really security agencies should restrain themselves in most cases to controlling the harmful effects of some of these activities of the public. Apart from granting permission where it is possible, I think sometimes the RCs should be consulted and they can make decisions.  Thank you.

MR OPIO:  Mr Chairman, if you look at Clause (2) of 42, it defines what a public place is.  It includes any highway, public park, or garden, public bridge.  You have all these but definitely we are making laws, which are going to make life difficult. Although I am not a lawyer I am trying to say that this clause must be looked into.  With those remarks, I would like to support the Bill in general.

MR LATIGO OLAL (Kyoga County, Lira) Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to thank the hon. Minister and the government for strengthening the police since we last talked about that by (1) continuing to provide the trained manpower -(Interruption) I think we can continue now.  Recently, I have seen series of new vehicles being used by police personnel, I think, this is encouraging and indeed without the manpower and also the strengthening and giving them materials to support them, their work would be difficult.  I would like to asset here that the hon. Minister that I have always held in my personal opinion and through my experience that the peace of a nation actually, eventually rests on the Police.  

So, the action of a Police officer, a Police personnel says a lot as to how I will stay today, how I will travel today or how I will even sleep.  I would like to contend that if you have a Police state, it is probably the worst kind of government ever you can have rather even worse than the military.  This is because the action of a police officer or a Police personnel is individualistic.  He travels alone, he arrests alone, sometimes he can inquire alone and it is taken for granted that the police is doing a good job and indeed in the good days of the police in Uganda and elsewhere this is the case.  The police ought to be able to tell you even the direction, where you want to go when you are lost and we want that one instituted here.  That is still absent.  As I have stated, the military state may not be as worse as the Police state because the military, immediately you see an army man walking alone, he is automatically suspected for having AWOL as some people have said.  So, if you see them in groups then that  -(Interruption)

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of clarification. Mr Chairman, I seek clarification from you, Sir, since we are discussing Motion (2), directing the attention of the House to this question in relation to the Sectoral Committee which made a report on the Police Bill, 1994, are we right in discussing into details the Bill itself?

THE CHAIRMAN:  What is Motion No. (2)?

MR OBWANGOR:  Mr Chairman, the point is to adopt the report in consideration of what the Sectoral Committee did on the Police Bill, 1994.  So we should not discuss into details or debate in details the substance of Motion No. (3).

THE CHAIRMAN: We are perfectly in order.  The House has given members chance to air their views and we are going to limit that.

MR LATIGO OLAL:  Thank you Mr Chairman. Hon. Obwangor should not really be unkind to me to stop me.  I will continue. 

I have made the following remarks because I would like to see peace by putting these two examples, I would like the hon. Minister to note here that in our law here I wonder whether - is put here or it is administrative the traffic Police. I would like to feel comfortable whenever, I see a Police on the road even stopping me by his white arm, but I like him to inspect the vehicle, which is carrying me, and find defaults in the vehicles and get the proper action on the vehicle so that he does not stop that vehicle again next day.  Because, if the default is with the vehicle it will be repaired or it will - but here is a case on Nakasongola coming from Kyoga/Nakasongola to Kampala here you see very many Police Traffic officers on the road or personnel stopping the same vehicle every day and the same faults continue everyday but money being given.

MISS NAMUYANGU:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, the information I want to give to the hon. Member is that the point he is raising is really very crucial.  What happens in most area I will quote Mbale as an example where I was over the weekend, what these traffic men do; they stop a vehicle when it is almost passing them and the vehicle stops in front then he stands still to wait for the driver to come out and meet him and then they start discussing even asking for money.  So, when this particular driver goes away after coming to the compromise the following day again or that very day he has to stop that particular vehicle.  So, it is really important that the traffic or the Minister concerned should come up and educate these traffic men who are still not doing what they are expected to do.

MR MARWAS:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, allow me to inform a Member on the Floor that, you see, where there is market there is always something to be given.  We have complained in this House about the traffic, police but I have yet - I do not know whether we are all good drivers but I have yet to hear somebody saying that I was asked for the money by the traffic police officer and I refused may be I was taken to court the police was - because at the end of the day we all give and yet we are not supposed to give.  But, I think some how there is always somebody who gives and that is why the Police insist on taking.

MR MWANDHA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I wish to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor and the House that I have seen it in another countries, I think the traffic police are doing a good job. But, Mr Chairman, they are getting a bad name for just one reason, they tend to stop commercial vehicles any commercial there pass-by is stopped automatically, if it is a pick up, if it is a lorry, if it is a bus, if it is a kamunye automatically it is topped by the traffic police.  You see a passenger car really in bad shape but that one for some reason only known to the police passes them cleanly and goes.  I have seen it in other countries that the traffic police mounts road blocks and not permanent road blocks and every vehicle whether it is being driven with somebody with a tie or somebody badly dressed or whatever, it is stopped, they check the light the check the breaks, they check whatever within two or three minutes the person is released or if his vehicle is faulty then they deal with him away from the road and either charge him on the spot a small amount of money or gives him a permit to go and repair his vehicle otherwise, he would be arrested again within 48 hours or something of that kind.  But our Traffic Police for some reasons sometimes they hide and when they see a lorry coming uphill they stop it.  So, I think the Minister should do something about the traffic Police.

MR BUTIME: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  We shall only educate or politicise the Police especially Traffic Police, but we shall also arrest them, charge them and dismiss them.  So, we are not going to just educate them but those we catch we shall try and possibly dismiss and we were - yet to see.  For roadblocks which hon. Mwandha is talking about, those are snap roadblocks, which the Police is authorised to put up, some of them do, and others do not.  Why they are interested in PSV vehicle is because those vehicles carry many people and therefore, you should have more interest in lives of vehicles which is being driven by a Member of RC on his way to Jinja really not that if that one got an accident would not mind but if a vehicle carrying 25 people got an accident would not mind but if a vehicle carrying 25 people got an accident that is more -(Interjection)- Yes, something like that and - so, we intend especially after the report of just sporter he has made very constructive recommendations as far as the Police is concerned and when that report is published we shall have a solution it is not my duty to have to say what the report says here, but I have looked at it and when time comes we will use that report to carry out some structural changes in the police.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, hon. Latigo, please wind up.

MR LATIGO:  Thank you, Mr Chairman, I would like to take this opportunity to thank my hon. Colleagues who have contributed because I would not have exhausted my example but they have helped me to exhaust them somehow, but I would like to tell my hon. colleague, Marwas that let us not condemn the wrong when we see it. 

One day I would like to invite you, we travel we cross the lake where we bring fish, chicken, millet, pigs, all along here and you will see how many we are dropping on the road as we go along.  But hon. Minister mentioned the road-blocks but police who are checking the car robbers these are excellent on these road, but the white armed people are the ones who are terrible to traffic, and it gives a feeling that, that department should be wiped out do not put it on the road let the inspection of vehicles be taken by a group on a board once or twice in a year and let no police traffic office be on the road, after all the vehicle is going to be inspected tomorrow it will have an accident he has not meant to be correct and these Police officers now, men do they wear numbers so that we can pip and see who they are?  If they do not now then there is a danger, let the number and we can talk about it.  Because, eventually this is going to lead to revenge I met certain boys saying, okay, if I get a police officer again taking my - and if he comes home for the holiday he will see me and this is not good and yet I mentioned earlier on that the peace of a nation depends on the police force and nobody else, politician can do their work, or military can do their work civilians and the rest can do their work but the peace at the end is in the hands of the police and the way he hands the civilian that is the way the nation says we are peaceful.

The last point I would like to go to is to take the hon. Minister to Kyoga because the Inspector General knows Kyoga very well, he knows Mulotari himself, he knows Namasare it is one hundred miles away from Lira and the beginning of my Parliamentary work here I was kicked by police because they were quarrelling over money and I reported here in this House.  Since, that time things have improved but they are robbers, last time when we had our RC IV council the Officer in Charge, Police of Molotari sub-station or something like that reported 11 cases of robbers by arms and police could not reach them quickly because Kyoga is also wide it was actually a sub-district.  

So, on asking this Officer in Charge, Police what is really wrong to such that you do not get a vehicle here at least one, he said we have not been gazetted, we have made the place so beautiful and we like the Inspector General to go and see it for himself, we like Amoratala Police sub-station or police post to be a police station we have got about 16 houses for policemen and women to be there good office, a good trading centre - no, no, permanent since long time ago.  

So, I like this one to be taken into account because finally, he is also my neighbour; you know Kyoga is the centre of this country we have all sorts of people fishing is there, trading is going on and people cross the like with arms and they do robbery but when we have quick means of combating or even following them I think we shall discourage them at the end we can even apprehend some because without this one then you do not have peace either in Nakasongola or in Kamuli or even Kaberamaido later on Dokolo towards Lira.  

I do not have much to say, but with these few remarks, I am saying that the peace of this nation will rest on the police, if the police is not disciplined and does not respect a citizen and does not become less or even none corrupt then we are all wasting time as legislature here.  What we do we simply fall on the rock and will not germinate, I would like to support the report and I hope the hon. Minister will put the few points I have made into action.  Thank you very much.

MR TIBANYENDERA KAFURA  (Buhweji County, Bushenyi):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I want also to thank the committee for the good work they did on this Bill.  However, I wish to refer the chairman of the Committee to Clause 9 along with Clause 10. When I read through those clauses, the Police Authority formed in Clause 9 and its duties below in Clause 10; I find that Clause 10 sub-section (b) the Authority that included the Inspector General of Government and the Deputy will advise the President on the appointment of the two officers. So, I do not know whether the Committee really cannot see this as a contradiction all - of rules perhaps the Chairman would advise us bout this anomaly.

On Clause 42 of the Bill a lot is done in the Police stations whereby suspected criminals have their property taken away from them when they are in the Police Station.  But we are here regretting that when cases are handled whether by the Police or by the courts these property is never returned to the real owners.  Everywhere you go, up country especially where you know cases are settled locally by the police posts, people come to us as leaders and say, I won the case but when they took me there they took my money from me but when I was discharged they said you go away after all, you have won the case.  So, these are serious matter sometimes it involves a lot of money, some one may come to your home and he arrests you, we say, 100,000 shillings and in the end the person loses that money. (Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I also know of a case this involved a bank I will not name, the bank money was stolen from that bank one Sunday the thieves panicked they divided the money themselves, some people went to the East, others went to the West, others went where - (Interjection) Now, one carried a suitcase full of money, another one a bad, somebody else a bag somebody went immediately and bought two old  ‘kamunyes’ eventually the police did a very good job all these people were netted and when it came to collecting the money they had actually collected from these people it was amazing, because in total they brought us exhibits less than 2 million shillings and the money which was actually stolen delivered reported by the bankers having stolen was over 30 million shillings.  

Now, this is a very serious matter because it lets to the economy of the country if banks and other financial institutions cannot be protected by the Police, our request of inviting investors here is really doomed because obviously if people see things like this they will be very careful as to whether they should invest here.  So, I think this is a very importance of the question and the Minister must take note.

MR MAYENGO: Point of information. Mr Chairman, I find it difficult to go along with hon. Mwandha’s request that the Police does something or the Government does something about a case like the one he has related. We have got such a corrupt society at the moment that is not unthinkable for a bank officer who has just witnessed a robbery in his bank saying they have taken 30 million when in actually fact they have taken five and he had hidden away 25 million.  Mr Chairman, I think we should be careful. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MR TIBANYENDERA KAFURA: Mr Chairman, I wish to thank my Colleague who have informed me it is a serious matter, a situation for our local people in the villages when an old women or a man comes to a police station for several times demanding his or her property she really give up with all the curses on the government and on the leaders. I wish to comment and defend what hon. Rwabita talked about going with guns to arrest tax defaulters.  A tax defaulter to me I - him to a murder first of all it is a national duty to pay tax such he can get a service a public utility like a road being made, a medical service be provided so that when he falls sick or his child he gets some treatment, and normally, these defaulters are young men and men who go drinking everyday.  

So, I think it is really right and I defend it that a chief should use a policeman and moreover at night when you can even find him drunk in the bed and arrest him so that he can also be committed to his nation. I also wish to thank the committee; hon. Butagira for having thought it fit to leave the local administration into Local Government hands.  We have experience in the field of Local Government, Central Government Police is not so respective to an function of a Gombolola chief for that matter is indeed an officer who did also some enforcement of some kind and he can only do his work effectively if he has got a person whom he can commend and that is the Local Administration Police.  So, I did commend the work of the committee for having agreed with the Ministry both of the Internal Affairs and Local Government to maintain the two forces separately. (Interruption)

MR BUTIME:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I just wanted to inform the hon. Kafura that it is actually the Public Service review and re-organisation commission and the White Paper it was placed here before this House and in that White Paper was recommended and passed that the Local Administration Police and the Local Prison be merged together with Uganda Police and Uganda Prisons Service.  While we are not contesting the report of the hon. Butagira and the amendment, therefore, our earlier Bill had been followed the recommendation of the Public Service Review and re-organisation, it is actually the Minister for Local Government which recovered and thought after the White Paper and thought that they had lost a contest and therefore, when they appeared before hon. Butagira they decided to change their mind and the committee of hon. Butagira obliged.  Therefore, for us we are prepared to go long with the report but we included it in the earlier proposal because that was a recommendation of the commission.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR TIBANDYENDERA KAFURA: Thank you, Mr Chairman, for that information from the Minister.  I also wish to express my thanks to the report on (b) whereby the Local Administration have been as usual incorporated on the councils and committees at different levels with the Central Police since they do complement the work.  I have the last question to ask, we have a big list of amendments by the Minister I thought he had worked along with the committee such that we do not get such a tiresome exercise to go through the amendments.  I thank you very much for allowing me to contribute.

MR MUTEBI MULWANIRA (Bujjumba County, Kalangala): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I am coming up here to support this Bill will few observations.  First of all, I would like to thank my brother and my colleagues hon. Ssebaana Kizito for having raised the issue of the accommodation of the Police and hon. Kisamba Mugerwa talked of a people’s contribution and as much as the people are willing and have contributed in self-help there should some little funds availed to the Police station to be able to cater for things like doors, like locks because I have seen this in my own district where people have built even the Policemen contributing their own efforts to put up ‘mama ingiya pole’ houses and you see a man sleeping in a hut for a good 6 months without a door.  I think these are some of the tools Government should provide when with the ‘wanainchi’ have provided the basics.  I would like to comment on Article number 5, which talks of functions of the Force. 

In Uganda today and basically in the urban centres we have got a dilemma in this Article 5(d) we have got one of the police forces functions is to ensure public safety and order and (e) to prevent and detect crime in the society. Most of you Members move around Kampala we have got a problem of the street children. You see, these people - and you re ally get ashamed and I think the beggars as the hon. Member says; I think the Police has got to be assisted and in this Bill it seems to be very - because at one time I asked my bodyguard that how can the police fail to arrest these people next to the Central Police Station and my bodyguard answered, you see honourable whenever we go to arrest them they will give us one reason that we have got relatives arrested he is at Central Police Station or we are waiting for a Law Court going on somebody is in the High Court and I think the Police should have the machinery to identify these people.  

Today, if you go to the taxi park, where we have got so much pick pocketing there are so many people in Kampala who are vagrants and I am sure there is a vagrant Act and the Police should use these machineries to arrest the situation.  I would also like to comment on this Bill as far as the - and I hope the Chairman of the Committee will have put in an extra article, he is talking about what we should do to the Police, how to punish them, how to deal with them, how the public can accuse them in case there is a problem.  

But we have had history in Uganda, the Police has had problems in these operations, and they are interfered with by higher authorities, they are interfered with by other forces, sometimes policemen arrest by accident he arrested a captain he put him in on a capital offence the next item that will come who arrested you, corporal so and so, corporal so and so is fetched whichever barracks he is in and if he gets a beat or a punishment it gives a warning to other policemen that you know as much as you are free to do what you are supposed to do there are certain people you cannot arrest or you cannot touch and I have not seen an article in this Bill which protect the Policeman from this type of activities because, as I said, history is teaching philosophy by example and I am sure the Policemen have had a lot of examples which they would have given to the Minister to protect them from this menace.

MR BUTIME:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I just want to inform the hon. Minister that the National Security Committee sat down and discussed arrests that the police carries out when it is arresting for example an army personnel or an army officer it had brought some kind of friction and we sat down and worked out the modalities now that may be followed for a Policeman to arrest an army officer and an army personnel. If he fines him for apprehendism in the Act when that army man is committing a crime he may arrest if it is an arrestable offence.  But if an officer has committed a crime, it is important for reasons of good relationship between the Army and the Police, so that, history does not repeat itself again.  For that officer to be arrested, to be first of all, reported to the area commanding officer, so that the area commanding officer can authorise, or carry out the arrest and hand over that officer to the police.

That is for the good of relations because hon. Mutebi Mulwanira talked of history repeating itself, and we do not want history to repeat itself.  Whereby the army and Police are going to be involved in fighting in the streets simply because somebody has been arrested.  And we have streamlined this, and ever since these regulations were given out, we have not had a problem and those regulations are about two months old.

ADJOURNMENT


THE CHAIRMAN: Order, hon. Members.  I would like to inform you that, the body of the late hon. Mzee Kirya, will be brought in the National Assembly tomorrow, at about 12.00 afternoon; and will lay in State here up to about 5.00 o’clock.  I now adjourn the House up to Thursday, at 2.30 p.m. in the afternoon. Thank you.

(The Council rose at 5.06 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, August 11 1994 at 2.30 p.m.)

 




